CITY CODE
of
TAYLORVILLE, ILLINOIS
1993
Code current through:
Ord. 4327, passed September 18, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CAVEAT
In this compilation of this City Code, Sterling Codifiers, Inc., was given the
authority by the City of Taylorville to use a supplemented copy of the City's
1979 Code which contained various ordinance amendments. Sterling Codifiers is
not responsible for the accuracy of those amendments as they appeared in the
supplemented 1979 Code copy. Therefore, this City Code contains those
provisions from said supplemented 1979 Code, which provisions are cited as
(1979 Code Ch.    , Art.    , §    ), and appropriate ordinances passed prior
and subsequent thereto.
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Taylorville, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 4327, passed 9-18-2025. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2492
   ORDINANCE ADOPTING TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE OF 1993
   WHEREAS, the CITY OF TAYLORVILLE is desirous of adopting a new Taylorville
City Code, and
   WHEREAS, the CITY OF TAYLORVILLE has compiled a new codification of
ordinances to be published in book form, published by authority of the City
Council of the City of Taylorville, Illinois, now therefore,
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TAYLORVILLE, ILLINOIS:
   SECTION 1. The City of Taylorville does hereby approve and adopt the
TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE OF 1993.
   SECTION 2. Said TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE OF 1993 shall be published in book
form, published by authority of the City Council of the City of Taylorville.
   SECTION 3. This Ordinance adopting the TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE OF 1993 shall
take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication in book
form as provided by statute.
   SECTION 4. The TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE OF 1993, printed in book form, and
published by authority of the corporate authorities of the City of Taylorville,
shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and legal publication
of such ordinances, as of the date mentioned in such book, in all courts and
administrative tribunals.
   SECTION 5. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval according to law.
   PASSED AND APPROVED this 15th day of March, A.D. 1993 by a roll call vote of
8  in favor and  0  opposed.
Voting in favor: Aldermen Barding, Brown, Mathon, Passoni, Scott, Servi,
Wright, and Zeitler
Voting against: None
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2389.png]
 
Filed in the office of the City Clerk, City of Taylorville, on the 16th day of
March, 1993.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Copies of Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the TAYLORVILLE CITY CODE, and it is
hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1993 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set
forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be
amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of
this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall
be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted
in each individual copy of the City Code. (1993 Code)
   B.   Penalty Clauses: In case of amendment of any section of this Code
containing the provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section,
the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the
amended section or the amending section, whether re-enacted in the amendatory
ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. (1979
Code Ch. 25, Art. II, §2)
   C.   Recording Amendments: It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep at
least one copy of the Municipal Code which shall be marked in the following
manner: Whenever any ordinance which amends or makes an addition to the Code is
passed and approved, the City Clerk shall note on the margin of the section or
sections amended that such amendment has been made, where the amendment may be
found and, in the case of an addition, shall mark in the appropriate place a
notation that such addition has been made, with a similar reference to the
aforementioned amendment book.
The City Clerk shall also keep a separate book containing every amendment or
addition passed to this Code, with a reference on each copy of such amendment
or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the original
reference may be found. (1979 Code Ch. 25, Art. II, §3)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. 1  Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council.
(1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-1-3C of this Chapter.
1-1-5: COPIES OF CODE:
   A.   Distribution of Copies: All of the printed copies of this Code
belonging to the City shall be deposited with the Clerk, and he shall deliver
one copy thereof to the Mayor and each Alderman and copies to such other
persons as the City Council may direct. (1979 Code Ch. 25, Art. III, §2)
   B.   Presentation of Copies: The Mayor or Council shall have the power to
extend or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting them
with a copy of this Code, bound at the expense of this City, as to them shall
seem suitable, and they shall also have the power to present two (2) copies of
this Code to the Illinois Municipal League. (1979 Code Ch. 25, Art. III, §3)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the lease, transfer or acceptance of real
estate by or from the City; ordinances relating to the City Airport; ordinances
relating to personnel policies; ordinances relating to sewer tapping charge in
certain areas; ordinances relating to water connections in certain areas and
all other special ordinances. (1979 Code Ch. 25, Art. IV, §1; 1993 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1993 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1993 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, part or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. (1993 Code)
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent of the Mayor and
Council may be fully carried out. (1979 Code Ch. 25, Art. I, §6)
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed
in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
express or implied, to do so.
   CITY: The City of Taylorville, County of Christian, State of Illinois.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Taylorville.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Taylorville".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. (1993 Code)
   FISCAL YEAR; MUNICIPAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City shall begin on May
1 of each year; the Municipal year shall coincide with the fiscal year. (1979
Code Ch. 25, Art. VI, §2)
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of another
person or persons within the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Taylorville".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidences of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right of interest therein.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1993 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: City Jail
1-4-5: Prosecutor's Fee/Attorney Fees And Costs
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise specifically stated
elsewhere in this code, any person found to have been in violation of any of
the terms and provisions of this code shall be assessed a fine or penalty in an
amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day upon which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A
violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of the evidence. A
penalty imposed for each violation may include, or consist of, a requirement
that the defendant perform some reasonable public community service work such
as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or along
public highways or the maintenance of public facilities or performing services
for a not for profit charitable corporation or entity approved by the court.
   B.   Misdemeanor: If, by the terms of the ordinance or city code section, an
act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of Illinois is declared in
this code to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of
incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed
six (6) months. Such matters may be prosecuted as criminal offenses by the city
attorney in the circuit court by an information, or complaint sworn to,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to Illinois
rules of criminal procedure. In such matters, conviction shall require the city
to establish guilt of the defendant beyond reasonable doubt.
   C.   Failure To Pay Fine: No imprisonment authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2-9 for failure to pay any fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six
(6) months for each offense.
   D.   Municipal Ordinance Violation Complaint And Notice To Appear:
Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, and pursuant to Illinois
supreme court rule 574, a defendant or offender concerning any nontraffic/
nonconservation ordinance violation that is listed or identified on a form from
time to time entitled "municipal ordinance violation complaint and notice to
appear" may be afforded the opportunity to settle such ordinance violation and
thereby avoid a court appearance by admitting guilt and completing and signing
the "plea of guilty and waiver" included within and set forth on said municipal
ordinance violation complaint and notice to appear and paying in full the
applicable fine in cash or by money order, certified or cashier's check, or
traveler's check to the city clerk, all within fourteen (14) calendar days of
the date said municipal ordinance violation complaint and notice to appear was
issued.
The aforesaid "municipal ordinance violation complaint and notice to appear"
form and the applicable listed or identified ordinance violations thereon may
be amended or revised, in whole or in part, from time to time by approval of
the mayor. (Ord. 3622, 6-17-2013)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for each such breach, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply. (1993 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1993
Code)
1-4-4: CITY JAIL:
   A.   City Jail Established: The place in the city heretofore established and
used as the jail, or any other place which may be hereafter established by the
city council for that purpose, is hereby declared to be the city jail. (1979
Code § 9-2-1)
   B.   Keeper Of The Jail 1 : The chief of police shall be the keeper of the
jail and shall have custody over all persons confined therein and of all
property pertaining thereto. (1979 Code § 9-2-2)
   C.   Prisoners:
      1.   Incarceration: The jail shall be used for incarceration of all
persons arrested for violating any laws of the state, the United States or for
violating any city ordinances until such person shall be lawfully brought
before the court for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully
transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise lawfully
released. (1979 Code § 9-2-3)
      2.   Escape And Aid In Escape Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to escape, attempt to escape or to assist any prisoner to escape or
attempt to escape from the city jail. (1979 Code § 9-2-4)
      3.   Communications With Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person
to communicate with any prisoner held in the jail without the permission of the
chief of police. (1979 Code § 9-2-5)
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this chapter. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-1-2B1 of this code.
1-4-5: PROSECUTOR'S FEE/ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS:
   A.   Pursuant to 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-2002(b), the city shall
be entitled to a twenty five dollar ($25.00) prosecution fee for each
conviction for a violation of a city vehicle ordinance or nontraffic ordinance
which results in a finding of guilt before a circuit or associate judge or in
which a defendant has stipulated to the facts supporting the charge or finding
of guilt and the court has entered an order of supervision. Such prosecutor's
fee shall be taxed as costs to be collected from the defendant upon disposition
of the case. The city shall have a lien for such prosecution fees on all
judgments or fines procured by the city attorney from prosecutions for
violations of the Illinois vehicle code and city vehicle ordinances or
nontraffic ordinances.
   B.   A default in the payment of any fine or penalty or any installment of a
fine or penalty may be collected by any means authorized for the collection of
monetary judgments. The city attorney may retain attorneys and private
collection agents for the purposes of collecting any default in payment of any
fine or penalty or installment of that fine or penalty. Any fees or costs
incurred by the city with respect to attorneys or private collection agents
retained by the city attorney shall be charged to and paid by the offender 1
(i.e., the person who owed such fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or
penalty). (Ord. 3622, 6-17-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Elected Official; Term Of Office; Hours
1-5-2: Bond
1-5-3: Powers And Duties
1-5-4: Absence Or Vacancy From Office
1-5-1: ELECTED OFFICIAL; TERM OF OFFICE; HOURS:
   A.   The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve
until his successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute 1 . The
mayor's term of office shall commence as of and from the date of the first
regular or special meeting of the city council held in the month next following
the mayor's election. (1979 Code Ch. 1, § 1; amd. Ord. 2000, 3-16-1981; Ord.
2945, 2-22-2000)
   B.   The office of mayor of the city of Taylorville, Illinois, is hereby
established as and shall be a full-time position. The mayor shall perform the
duties of his office and actually work for the city on a full-time basis, and
shall keep and maintain regular daytime office hours (i.e., 8:30 A.M. to 4:30
P.M.), and in any case, not less than forty (40) hours per week, except
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, in addition to attendance at city
council meetings, committee of the whole meetings, and any committee meetings
the mayor attends, and except during vacation time periods, and except during
times in which the mayor is sick or ill. The mayor shall have his or her office
at the city hall. The mayor shall not have any other outside noncity employment
or business requiring more than an average of five (5) hours per week of his or
her time, and otherwise the mayor shall devote the whole of his or her time to
the management of city affairs. (Ord. 2945, 2-22-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-10.
1-5-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall execute a bond
in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, provided
the amount of such bond shall not be less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). (1979 Code Ch. 1, § 8)
1-5-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city.
He shall preside over the meetings of the council and perform such duties as
may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall have supervision over
all of the executive officers and employees of the city and shall have the
power and authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs
which are kept by any officer or employee of the city at any reasonable time.
(1979 Code Ch. 1, § 2)
   B.   Appoint Officers: The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the city council, all officers of the city for whom election or
appointment is not otherwise provided. Any vacancies occurring in any
appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. (1979 Code Ch. 1, § 3;
amd. 1993 Code)
   C.   Designate Duties Of Officers 1 : Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city, this dispute
shall be settled by the mayor, and the mayor shall have the power to delegate
to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific
officer has been directed to perform that duty. (1979 Code Ch. 1, § 4)
   D.   Represent The City: The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city
on formal occasions and receptions, but in his absence or inability to attend
any such function, the mayor may select any other city officer to so act. (1979
Code Ch. 1, § 7)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-9-5 of this title.
1-5-4: ABSENCE OR VACANCY FROM OFFICE:
   A.   Mayor Pro Tem: During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor,
the city council shall elect one of its number to act as mayor pro tem who,
during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of mayor, as is
provided by statute 1 . (1979 Code Ch. 1, § 5)
   B.   Acting Mayor: In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the
council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the
vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law 2 . (1979
Code Ch. 1, § 6)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35.
2 3. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election; Term Of Office; Functions
1-6-2: Meetings Of The Council
1-6-3: Presiding Officer
1-6-4: Quorum
1-6-5: Committees
1-6-5-1: City Negotiating Team
1-6-6: Rules Of Order
1-6-7: Remote Meetings Rules
1-6-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE; FUNCTIONS:
The members of the city council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year
term. The term of office of each council member shall commence as of and from
the date of the first regular or special meeting of the city council held in
the month next following the council member's election. (1979 Code Ch. 2, Art.
I, § 1; amd. Ord. 2000, 3-16-1981)
The council shall be the legislative division of the city government and shall
perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute 1 .
(1979 Code Ch. 2, Art. I, § 1)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-5 et seq.
1-6-2: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the council shall be held at
the city hall on the first and third Mondays of every month at the hour of
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, that if the regular meeting falls on a
legal holiday, the meeting shall take place on the next secular day at the same
hour.
   B.   Adjourned Meetings: Adjourned meetings may be held at such time as the
council may determine. (Ord. 2138, 5-31-1984)
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the council may be called by the
mayor or three (3) aldermen; provided, that a written notice of such meeting
shall be given to each member of the council at least twenty four (24) hours
before the time set for the meeting; provided further, that in case all of the
elected members of the council are present at any special meeting, then the
requirement of notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived. (1979
Code Ch. 2, Art. I, § 3)
   D.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the
city council or of any committee thereof or to behave in a disorderly manner at
any such meeting. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall,
for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1979 Code Ch. 2, Art. I, § 10; amd. 1993 Code)
1-6-3: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council at all regular or
special meetings and when the council meets as a committee of the whole. (1979
Code Ch. 2, Art. I, § 4)
1-6-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the elected members of the council shall constitute a quorum
thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of money shall be
passed except upon the favorable vote of the majority of the elected members as
provided by statute 1 . (1979 Code Ch. 2, Art. I, § 5)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20.
1-6-5: COMMITTEES:
   A.   Standing Committees: The following shall be the standing committees of
the city council:
Emergency services committee (fire, police, and emergency service and disaster
agency)
Finance committee
Lake/airport committee
Ordinance committee
Personnel committee
Public facilities committee
Street and sewer committee
Water/environmental committee
(Ord. 3125, 5-19-2003)
   B.   Special Committees: The mayor shall appoint such special committees as
he may deem necessary or as may be directed by the city council. (1979 Code Ch.
2, Art. I, § 7)
   C.   Membership Of Committees:
      1.   Generally: The mayor shall appoint the members of all standing and
special committees and shall designate the chairmen thereof. Every standing
committee of the city council shall consist of four (4) aldermen, including the
chairman, with one alderman from each ward being selected, unless the city
council shall provide otherwise.
      2.   Personnel Committee: The personnel committee shall also:
         a.   Compile information and make recommendations on all city employee
positions and compile job descriptions with the mayor's, city clerk's and city
treasurer's advice.
         b.   Screen all potential hirees.
         c.   Evaluate all department heads in relation to job performance and
pay raises.
         d.   Review the retention, addition or elimination of employee
positions in each department.
   D.   Committee Divisions: Such standing committees of the city council shall
be divided into the following four (4) divisions:
      1.   Public Safety: Public safety shall consist of the emergency services
committee.
      2.   Public Utility: Public utility shall consist of the lake/airport
committee and the water/environmental committee.
      3.   Finance: Finance shall consist of the finance committee, the
ordinance committee and the personnel committee.
      4.   Public Works: Public works shall consist of the public facilities
committee and the street and sewer committee. (Ord. 2790, 5-19-1997)
   E.   Meetings Of Standing Committees:
      1.   Unless otherwise scheduled by the city council or by the chairman of
the particular standing committee, each standing committee should schedule,
when possible, any necessary meetings on the following dates:
         a.   First Thursday of each month: emergency services and personnel.
         b.   Second Thursday of each month: lake/airport and water/
environmental.
         c.   Third Thursday of each month: finance and ordinance.
         d.   Fourth Thursday of each month: street and sewer and public
facilities. (Ord. 3335, 5-7-2007, eff. 5-7-2007)
      2.   For each standing committee meeting, the respective Chairman of such
standing committee, together with the appropriate Superintendent, shall
coordinate an agenda for their standing committee; and such standing committee
Chairman shall present same to the City Clerk's Office the Friday before such
standing committee meeting date.
      3.   The City Clerk shall coordinate the specific priority such standing
committees will meet on each of the aforesaid meeting dates. (Ord. 3125, 5-19-
2003)
1-6-5-1: CITY NEGOTIATING TEAM:
   A.   The City's negotiating team shall include the Mayor, the Human Resource
Manager, the appropriate Superintendent, the Chairman of the Finance Committee
(or in such Chairman's absence or unavailability, an Alderman designated by the
Mayor from time to time), and any necessary legal counsel. (Ord. 3809, 6-19-
2017)
   B.   The negotiating team shall negotiate on behalf of the City with any
unions representing the City employees.
   C.   The negotiating team shall make recommendations to the City Council
from time to time concerning labor negotiations with any unions representing
City employees.
   D.   The City Council shall make all necessary decisions concerning labor
negotiations. (Ord. 3043, 8-20-2001)
1-6-6: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Agenda For Meetings: An agenda of the meeting shall be prepared by the
City Clerk and delivered to the members of the City Council in advance of the
meeting. (1979 Code §2-2-1)
   B.   Order Of Business: The order of business at meetings of the City
Council shall be as follows:
      1.   Invocation and Pledge of Allegiance.
      2.   Roll call.
      3.   Omnibus vote designation regarding approval of minutes of previous
Council and committee meetings and any amendments, additions, revisions or
corrections thereto.
      4.   Communications to the Council, presentations, swearing in of
officials or employees or appointees, announcements.
      5.   Ordinances, resolutions and motions to be considered for adoption.
      6.   City Attorney updates.
      7.   Mayor updates.
      8.   Committee reports and any committee motions to be considered for
adoption.
      9.   Consideration of and motion to approve and/or ratify payment of
bills.
      10.   Public's right to speak.
      11.   Adjournment.
      12.   Any additional or other order of business may be made by order of
the Mayor from time to time to accommodate other City business matters of any
kind, nature or extent whatsoever, including, but not limited to, public
hearings, Plan Commission hearings and reports, Zoning Board of Appeals
hearings and reports, closed session matters, etc. (Ord. 3637, 10-21-2013)
   C.   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the City Council shall be
rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the Council as were present at the meeting when such
vote or action was taken, as provided by statute 1 . (1979 Code §2-2-3)
   D.   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the City Council shall be
reduced to writing before being voted upon, at the request of the Mayor or any
two (2) members of the City Council. (1979 Code §2-2-4)
   E.   Additional Procedural Rules:
      1.   This following notice shall appear at the end of the respective
agendas for all City Council and committee meetings:
Per subparagraph (g) of 5 ILCS 120/2.06, this portion of the City Council (or
Committee) meeting is reserved for any person wishing to address the Council
(or Committee) on any relevant subject matters concerning the City. The
Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) mandates NO action shall be
taken on subject matters not listed on the agenda, but the Council (or
Committee) may direct staff to address the topic or refer the subject matter to
a future Council and/or Committee meeting. If anyone wishes to address the
Council (or Committee) please provide your name and address, limit your
comments or presentation to three (3) minutes, and avoid repetitious comments.
Thank you.
      2.   At committee meetings when members of the public are present, the
Chairman in his discretion may open the floor to the public or to any
particular persons for discussion; or alternatively, a motion can be made and
seconded by committee members to allow the public present or such persons to
address the committee during the discussion of a pending subject matter agenda
item. If such motion is made, the Chairman shall recognize such motion and call
for a second to such motion and if made such motion shall be voted upon and if
approved by a majority vote of committee members present, the committee
Chairman is obligated to comply with such motion.
      3.   At city council meetings when members of the public are present the
mayor in his discretion may open the floor to the public or to any particular
persons for discussion; or alternatively a motion can and be made and seconded
by aldermen to allow the public present or such persons to address the city
council during the discussion of a pending subject matter agenda item. If such
motion is made, the mayor shall recognize such motion and call for a second to
such motion and if made such motion shall be voted upon and if approved by a
majority vote of aldermen present, the mayor is obligated to comply with such
motion.
      4.   Notwithstanding the above rules, persons attending public hearings
or persons specifically invited to attend a city council or committee meeting
or persons put on the agenda to speak about a particular subject matter agenda
items (e.g., insurance personnel, accountants or auditors, persons doing or
wanting to do business with the city, etc.) may address the city council or
committee as the mayor directs without any motion to allow such matters.
      5.   In any event, the mayor or any aldermen or city official can ask at
any time during any city council or committee meeting that the city attorney,
city engineer, city officials, employees, officers or superintendents address
the city council or committee concerning any subject matter relevant to the
city or to the discussion at hand. In those events, no motion need be made to
allow such matters. (Ord. 3637, 10-21-2013)
   F.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by consent of a majority of the members
present at any meeting. (1979 Code § 2-2-6)
   G.   Robert's Rules Of Order: Except when in conflict with the foregoing
provisions, the latest version of "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the
deliberation of the city council and committee meetings. (Ord. 3637, 10-21-
2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55.
1-6-7: REMOTE MEETINGS RULES:
   A.   If a majority of a quorum of the members of the City Council or a
majority of a quorum of the members of any City committee, as the case may be,
is physically present, they any member of the City Council may attend such
regular or special City Council meeting or City Committee of the Whole meeting,
or any City committee meeting by other means (i.e. by video or audio
conference) if such member is prevented from physically attending such meeting
because of:
      1.   Personal illness or disability; or
      2.   Employment purposes or the business of the City; or
      3.   A family or other emergency; or
      4.   Unexpected childcare obligations.
   B.   If a member wishes to attend such a meeting by such other means, the
member must notify the City Clerk before such meeting unless advanced notice is
impractical.
   C.   Subject to the requirements of Section 2.06 of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/2.06), but notwithstanding any other provision of law,
an open or closed meeting subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act may be
conducted by audio or video conference, without the physical presence of a
quorum of the members, so long as the conditions as set forth in 5 ILCS 120/?
(e) are met. (Ord. 4218, 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Term of Office
1-7-2: Bond
1-7-3: Duties
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until a
successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. 1  The Clerk's term
of office shall commence as of and from the date of the first regular or
special meeting of the City Council held in the month next following the
Clerk's election. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §1; Ord. 2000, 3-16-81)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶3-5-9.
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the City Clerk shall execute a
bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the Council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of duty. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §2)
1-7-3: DUTIES:
The City Clerk shall:
   A.   Signatures: Seal and attest all contracts of the City and all licenses
and other such documents as shall require this formality. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §3)
   B.   Money Collected: Turn over all monies received by him on behalf of the
City to the City Treasurer, promptly on receipt of the same, and with the
money, he shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (1979 Code Ch. 3,
§4)
   C.   Accounts: Keep accounts showing all monies received and the source and
disposition thereof and such other accounts as may be required by statute or
ordinance. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §5)
   D.   Records Kept:
      1.   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
Clerk is required by statute to keep, keep a register of all licenses and
permits issued and the payment thereon, a record showing all of the officers
and regular employees of the City and such other records as may be required by
the Council. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §6)
      2.   Keep the minutes and records of the Council proceedings. (1979 Code
Ch. 2, Art. I, §9)
   E.   Collect License and Permit Fees: Collect all license and permit fees
which are paid to the City. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §7)
   F.   Custodian of City Seal: 1  Be the custodian of the City Seal and shall
affix its impression on documents whenever this is required. (1979 Code Ch. 3,
§8)
   G.   Custodian of Documents: Be the custodian of all documents belonging to
the City which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer of the
City by the Mayor or Council. (1979 Code Ch. 3, §9)
   H.   Indices: Keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records
kept by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (1979 Code
Ch. 3, §10)
   I.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, perform
such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.
(1979 Code Ch. 3, §11)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-12-1 of this Title for description.
CHAPTER 8
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8-1: Election; Term Of Office
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: Duties
1-8-4: Policy Concerning Borrowing And Transferring City Funds
1-8-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The city treasurer shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and
until a successor is qualified, as provided by statute. The treasurer's term of
office shall commence as of and from the date of the first regular or special
meeting of the city council held in the month next following the treasurer's
election. (1979 Code §4-1; amd. Ord. 2000, 3-16-1981)
1-8-2: BOND:
The treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of duty
and to indemnify the city for any loss due to neglect of duty or wrongful act,
and the amount of such bond shall be such amount as prescribed by the council
or the state. Such bond shall be filed with the clerk as required by statute.
(1979 Code §4-2)
1-8-3: DUTIES:
The treasurer shall:
   A.   Generally: Perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute
or by ordinance; he shall receive all monies paid in to the city, either
directly from the person paying it or from the hands of such other officer as
may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly
signed by the city clerk or the mayor. (1979 Code §4-3)
   B.   Deposit Funds: Deposit the city funds in such depositories as may be
selected from time to time as is provided by law, and he shall keep the city
money separate and distinct from his own and shall not intermingle his own
money with it or make private or personal use of the city funds. (1979 Code §4-
4)
   C.   Records Kept: Keep records showing all monies received by him, the
source from which it was received and the purpose for which it was paid out,
and he shall keep a record showing at all times the financial status of the
city. (1979 Code §4-5)
   D.   Books And Accounts: Keep such books and accounts as may be required by
the city council and shall keep them in the manner required by the city
council. (1979 Code §4-6)
   E.   Reports Required: Make monthly reports to the council showing the state
of finances of the city and the amounts received and spent during the month,
which reports shall be filed, and he shall make an annual report between May 1
and May 10 with the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the city
and his transactions as treasurer during the preceding year. (1979 Code §4-7)
   F.   Register Of Warrants: Keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders
filed with him or paid by him and all vouchers, as is required by statute.
(1979 Code §4-8)
   G.   Ex Officio Collector: Be ex officio collector of special assessments.
He shall see to it that same are properly recorded and credited to the
particular account entitled thereto, and he shall receive, on behalf of the
city, all fees and charges, the collection of which is not delegated to some
other officer or employee 1 . (1979 Code §4-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-7-3E of this title.
1-8-4: POLICY CONCERNING BORROWING AND TRANSFERRING CITY FUNDS:
Any requests from the city treasurer to borrow funds from the city's water fund
or from any other city fund from time to time for transfer to another city fund
shall be decided each time by the city council upon each finance committee
motion recommending approval for such requested borrowed funds; and any such
approved borrowed and transferred funds shall be repaid to the water fund or to
any other city fund that provided the borrowed funds as the case may be, within
the same fiscal year that such funds are borrowed. (Ord. 3703, 4-6-2015)
CHAPTER 9
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointments; Terms Of Office
1-9-2: Qualifications
1-9-3: Oath; Bonds; Salaries
1-9-4: Powers And Duties
1-9-5: Assignment Of Duties; Disputes
1-9-6: Inspection Of Records
1-9-7: Vacations; Sick Leave
1-9-8: Employment Restrictions
1-9-9: CPR Required For Members Of Police And Fire Departments
1-9-10: Payment Of Litigation Costs
1-9-11: Employee Recognition
1-9-12: Impersonating City Officials Prohibited
1-9-13: Personal Use Of City Owned Vehicles And Equipment
1-9-14: Evaluations
1-9-15: Safe Passage Coordinators
1-9-1: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The mayor, with the consent of the council, shall make appointments of all city
officers provided by ordinance; all other employees hired by the mayor, city
clerk or city treasurer, after screening by the personnel committee, shall be
selected from the list submitted by the personnel committee; provided, that
full time members of the police and fire departments, other than the chief of
police and deputy police chief, and fire chief, shall be appointed by the board
of fire and police commissioners 1 . (Ord. 3218, 1-18-2005)
Every appointive officer of the city shall hold office until May 1 next
following or until his successor is appointed and qualified unless it is
otherwise provided by law or ordinance. Employees selected shall serve so long
as their services are desired. (1979 Code § 9-1-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
1-9-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Residence Requirements:
      1.   Elective City Office: No person shall be eligible to any elective
City office unless such person is a qualified elector of the City and has
resided within the City for a period of one year next preceding the election.
      2.   Appointive City Office:
         a.   No person shall be eligible for an appointive office unless such
person becomes a qualified elector of the City of Taylorville and becomes a
resident within the corporate limits of the City of Taylorville within ninety
(90) consecutive days following employment and remains a qualified elector and
resident within the corporate limits of the City of Taylorville during the term
of the appointive office.
         b.   Provided, however, the foregoing requirements shall not apply to
the City Engineer, Health and Building Officer, City Attorney, attorneys, or
other City officers who require technical training or knowledge, but the
foregoing requirements do apply to the Fire Chief, Chief of Police, Deputy
Police Chief, and police Lieutenants.
      3.   City Employment:
         a.   Fire Department:
            (1)   Employees: Except for the Fire Chief which appointive
position is governed by subsection A.2.a. of this Section, and except for
volunteer firemen which are governed by subsection A.3.a.(2) of this Section,
no person shall be eligible to be or remain a full time firefighter or
assistant Fire Chief or Captain or employee within the City's Fire Department
until and unless such person becomes a City resident or establishes residency
within a twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse within
ninety (90) days after the completion of their probationary period. Failure to
become and remain a resident of the City or to establish residency within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall result in an
immediate termination. Employees who are City residents or establish residency
within a twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall
maintain said residency or continue to reside within a twenty (20) mile radius
of the Christian County Courthouse during the term of employment or be subject
to immediate termination. Employees who do not live within the City limits are
not allowed to take City owned vehicles to their residence.
            (2)   Volunteer Firemen: No person shall be eligible for or remain
eligible for appointment or services as a City volunteer fireman unless such
person is a qualified elector and resident of the City at the time of such
appointment and during all times while a volunteer fireman for the City;
provided, however, at any one time, a total of ten (10) City volunteer firemen
need not be qualified electors or residents of the City.
         b.   Police Department: Except for the Police Chief, Deputy Police
Chief, and police Lieutenants, which appointive positions are governed by
subsection A.2.a. of this section, no person shall be eligible to be or remain
a police officer or employed within the City's police department until and
unless such person becomes a City resident or establishes residency within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse within ninety (90)
days after the completion of their probationary period. Failure to become and
remain a resident of the City or to establish residency within a twenty (20)
mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall result in an immediate
termination. Employees who are City residents or establish residency within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall maintain said
residency or continue to reside within a twenty (20) mile radius of the
Christian County Courthouse during the term of employment or be subject to
immediate termination. Employees who do not live within the City limits are not
allowed to take City owned vehicles to their residence.
         c.   High School Students: The mayor is hereby authorized to hire
Taylorville Senior High School (Unit District 3) students as are enrolled in
said school's cooperative education program. Such students need not be
residents of the City as a prerequisite to such employment;
         d.   Seasonal Employees: A "seasonal employee" shall mean a person who
is either:
            (1)   Over sixteen (16) years old and who is considered a full time
Taylorville High School student; or
            (2)   A full time student attending a college or university who had
a full time Taylorville residence for at least twelve (12) consecutive months
immediately prior to acceptance into such college or university.
         Upon approval of the City Council, "seasonal employees" may only be
hired for all or part of the "seasonal employment period" by the Lake
Department, the Street and Sewer Department, the Water Department, the
municipal department at city hall, or the Cemetery Department For purposes
hereof, the "seasonal employment period" is defined as the period of time from
April 1 to October 31 of each year. A "seasonal employee" job shall be
considered a manual routine work position performing such manual routine job
duties and operation of small power tools, small vehicles, and power mowers as
may be determined by the Lake Superintendent, the Street and Sewer
Superintendent, the Water Superintendent, the Mayor, or Cemetery Sexton, as the
case may be. A "seasonal employee" shall not be considered a "permanent part
time employee".
         e.   All Other City Employees, Including Full Time Or Permanent Part
Time Employees: No other person shall be or remain eligible for City employment
until and unless such person becomes a City resident or establishes residency
within a twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse within
ninety (90) days after the completion of their probationary period. Failure to
become and remain a resident of the City or to establish residency within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall result in an
immediate termination. Employees who are City residents or establish residency
within a twenty (20) mile radius of the Christian County Courthouse shall
maintain said residency or continue to reside within a twenty (20) mile radius
of the Christian County Courthouse during the term of employment or be subject
to immediate termination. Employees who do not live within the City limits are
not allowed to take City owned vehicles to their residence.
      4.   City Librarian: The city qualified elector and residency
requirements in subsection A.2. of this section shall not apply to the City
Librarian.
      5.   Defaulter: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary stated in
this subsection A, no person shall be eligible to any City office who is a
defaulter to the City.
   B.   Physical Requirements:
      1.   No person shall be employed by the city unless he is in satisfactory
physical condition and physically able to perform the duties of the position of
employment. (1979 Code § 9-1-14)
      2.   All persons to be employed by the city shall submit themselves to
such licensed physician or surgeon as may be selected by the city for physical
examination. A written report of the physical examination shall be filed with
the city clerk.
(1979 Code § 9-1-13) (amd. Ord. 3046, 9-17-2001; Ord. 3103, 11-18-2002; Ord.
3244, 9-6-2005; Ord. 3590, 11-5-2012; Ord. 3615, 3-18-2013; Ord. 3766, 9-19-
2016; Ord. 4054, 7-19-2021; Ord. 4055, 7-19-2021; Ord. 4327, 9-15-2025)
1-9-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Money Received: Every officer of the city shall, at least once every
week, turn over all monies received by him in his official capacity to the city
treasurer with a statement which shows the source from which the same was
received. (1979 Code §9-1-5)
   B.   Books And Records To Successor: Every officer of the city, upon the
termination of his office for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his
successor all books and records which may be the property of the city, and if
no successor has been appointed within one week after the termination of
office, such property shall be delivered either to the clerk or to the
treasurer. (1979 Code §9-1-10)
   C.   Conservators Of The Peace: The mayor, members of the city council,
members of the fire department 1 , health and building officer, electrical
inspector and plumbing inspector, as well as members of the police department 2
, are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace with such powers to make
arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by statute. (1979 Code
§§5-5-1, 9-1-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-1-9 of this code.
2 2. See also section
  4-1-9 of this code.
1-9-5: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES; DISPUTES 3 :
The mayor shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any duty
which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer and shall
determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or duties of
officers. (1979 Code § 9-1-3)
 
Notes
3 3. See also subsection
  1-5-3C of this title.
1-9-6: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection by the
mayor or any member of the council at all reasonable times, whether or not such
records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (1979 Code § 9-1-4)
1-9-7: VACATIONS; SICK LEAVE:
The rules and regulations governing vacations and sick leave for city employees
shall be such as are set, from time to time, by the mayor and council. (1979
Code § 9-1-12)
1-9-8: EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Nepotism: No two (2) or more members of the same "immediate family"
shall henceforth be or remain as full time or part time employees anywhere
within the municipal government of the city. The term "immediate family" as
used herein shall mean all persons who are included within any person's
natural, step, foster, or adopted relationship with the following persons:
husband, wife, mother, father, brother, sister, child, grandchild, grandfather,
grandmother, and the spouse of any and all of said persons and all other
persons living in the said household of any of said persons. This section shall
not apply to any person of the same "immediate family" who is employed with the
city on the effective date hereof; provided, however, this section shall apply
to each and every subsequent application for city employment by anyone within
such applicant's same "immediate family". This section shall further not apply
to those police officers and/or firefighters hired through testing procedures
and recommendations of the city police and fire commissioner. This section
shall further not apply to those hired as seasonal employees, provided that
such seasonal employees not work in the same city department with any
"immediate family". This section shall not apply to those hired as a "seasonal
employee" (as defined in subsection
1-9-2A3d of this chapter), provided that such "seasonal employee" not work in
the same city department with any member(s) of the same "immediate family".
(Ord. 2906, 4-5-1999)
1-9-9: CPR REQUIRED FOR MEMBERS OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS:
All members of the city fire department and sworn officers of the city police
department shall enroll and train in and become certified to administer
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Such persons who are now members of either
department shall achieve certification within six (6) months following the
effective date hereof. New members shall achieve certification within six (6)
months following the date of entry into employment with such department.
The chief of each of said departments shall notify each of his respective
members, in writing, of the requirement hereinabove set forth. A member's
failure to promptly enroll and train in courses and/or instruction leading to
certification shall constitute grounds for such member's suspension for periods
not less than three (3) days nor more than five (5) days from the department.
Members may not be suspended more than three (3) times. A member's failure to
become certified within the applicable six (6) month period so provided shall
constitute grounds for dismissal from the department or for such other
disciplinary action as the city board of fire and police commissioners 1  shall
decide and determine. (Ord. 2707, 7-3-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
1-9-10: PAYMENT OF LITIGATION COSTS:
The city is authorized and directed to pay all costs incurred by, for or on
behalf of all city officers and employees to the extent such costs are not
otherwise subject to insurance reimbursement and provided they are reasonable
and were incurred in the legitimate defense of claims, suits or other
litigation resulting from or arising out of such person's actions, errors or
omissions occurring within the scope of such officer's and employee's
employment with, for or on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2060, 8-2-1982)
1-9-11: EMPLOYEE RECOGNITION:
The city clerk shall prepare and maintain a roster setting forth the names and
lengths of service of all full time city employees, officers, council members
and other elected officials. Based thereon, full time employees, as they mark
five (5) years' service with the city and as they mark each fifth year
anniversary thereafter, will be recognized in a manner deemed appropriate and
shall, in particular, include the award of a recognition pin to mark each fifth
year anniversary and gold watch, appropriately engraved, to mark twenty five
(25) years of service with the city. These provisions shall be implemented
retroactively. (Ord. 2110, 9-6-1983)
1-9-12: IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate, without lawful authority,
any city officer or employee. Any person violating this section shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in section
 1-4-1 of this title. (1979 Code § 9-1-11; amd. 1993 Code)
1-9-13: PERSONAL USE OF CITY OWNED VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
It is the policy of the city that the personal use of city owned vehicles and
equipment is not permitted except for de minimus use and except for bona fide
noncompensatory reasons. Any private use, except in an emergency situation,
must receive the prior approval of the department superintendent which has
charge of the vehicle or equipment and the mayor. A record shall be kept by any
employee who is authorized the personal use of city vehicles or equipment,
including, but not limited to, commuting, and such record shall be submitted to
the city treasurer on a quarterly basis by each department head or
superintendent. An appropriate amount shall be included in the employee's W-
2 form for the year for such usage based upon federal and state law. The city
shall not withhold income taxes on the value of the personal use, but the
employee may adjust form W-4 to increase withholding from regular wages to
compensate. (Ord. 2232, 12-15-1986)
1-9-14: EVALUATIONS:
   A.   The job performance of the following officers and employees shall be
annually evaluated in October of each year and rated by the Mayor, Personnel
Committee Chairman, and Human Resource Manager, to-wit: Superintendent of
Streets and Sewers, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Water Superintendent, Cemetery
Superintendent, Airport Manager, Health and Building Officer, Lake
Superintendent, and Mayor's Administrative Assistant.
   B.   The job performance of the Human Resource Manager shall be annually
evaluated and completed in October of each year and rated by the Mayor and
Personnel Committee Chairman.
The job performance of the Deputy Police Chief and each Police Lieutenant shall
be annually evaluated and rated by the Chief of Police at such times as the
Chief of Police may determine.
The job performance of the Assistant Fire Chief shall be annually evaluated and
rated by the Fire Chief at such times as the Fire Chief may determine.
   C.   All such completed evaluations shall be subject to approval by the
Personnel Committee, at such times as the Personnel Committee may determine.
The Personnel Committee shall forward any such approvals to the City Council
for consideration and final approval.
   D.   Each of the aforesaid evaluations shall be recorded on such performance
evaluation forms as the Personnel Committee may adopt from time to time.
   E.   The following rating guidelines shall be used with such performance
evaluation forms and each of the aforesaid officers and employees shall be
annually rated accordingly:
 
Ratings                               Percentage Range of Potential Salary
                                      Increase
Category #1 Superior                  0-6%
Category #2 Exceeds expectations      0-4.5%
Category #3 Meets expectations        0-3%
Category #4 Needs improvement - to be 0-1%
reevaluated in 6 months
Category #5 Unacceptable - put on     0%
probation for 1 year
 
   F.   Such ratings shall be used by the City Council to determine the
percentage increase, if any, in the annual salaries for the aforesaid officers
and employees.
   G.   For each rating category, the City Council may hereafter annually by
motion approved by a majority affirmative vote, establish the specific
percentage salary increase, if any, within the ranges set forth in subsection E
of this section. Such percentage increase, if any, shall apply and become
effective on January 1 for the period of January 1 to the following December 31
of each salary year; commencing with the annual period starting January 1,
2021. If an increase is approved in any rating category, then the annual
salaries of such officers and employees who are rated in such category shall be
adjusted accordingly.
   H.   The aforesaid job performance evaluations and salary reviews of any one
or more of the aforesaid officers and employees may also occur, at the sole
discretion of the City Council, during any year at any other times than the
time designated for the aforesaid designated annual evaluations; and such
percentage salary increase and salary shall apply for whatever period the City
Council, in its sole discretion, may determine from time to time. (Ord. 2682,
1-17-1995; amd. Ord. 2973, 7-3-2000; Ord. 3218, 1-18-2005; Ord. 4066, 9-20-
2021)
1-9-15: SAFE PASSAGE COORDINATORS:
   A.   Office of Safe Passage Coordinator/Appointment:
      1.   There is hereby created the temporary (non-permanent) part-time
office of Safe Passage Coordinator.
      2.   Subject to the City's receipt of a State of Illinois grant
sufficient to fund two Safe Passage Coordinators, the Mayor may appoint two
temporary (non-permanent) part-time Safe Passage Coordinators, with the advice
and consent of the Aldermen, for the purpose of providing services for the
City's Safe Passage Program operated through the City's police department.
      3.   The salary or hourly rate of pay for each such Safe Passage
Coordinator shall be determined by the City Council.
      4.   A Part-Time Safe Passage Coordinator shall be considered an "at
will" employee of the City and shall receive no employment benefits of any
kind, nature or extent whatsoever, including, but not limited to, pay or other
benefits related to vacation days, holidays, sick days, bereavement days,
personal days, personal time off ("PTO") days, maternity leave, or health,
accident, dental, vision, life insurance, or retirement benefits; provided,
however, a Safe Passage Coordinator who works for the City in excess of 599
hours shall be included as a IMRF participant subject to IMRF's terms,
provisions, conditions, laws and regulations.
      5.   Subject to earlier termination by the City Council for any or no
reason whatsoever, a Safe Passage Coordinator's employment shall not exceed 28
hours per week and shall expire on July 1, 2022.
      6.   Because of the technical training and knowledge required for this
office, the qualified elector and residency requirements as set forth in
Section
1-9-2 A.2.a. shall not apply. (Ord. 4079, 11-1-2021)
ARTICLE A. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-9A-1: Appointment
1-9A-2: Powers and Duties
1-9A-3: Other Counsel
1-9A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, may retain an attorney
to act as legal advisor to the City. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. I, §1)
1-9A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Attorney shall:
   A.   Suits and Actions: Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at
law or equity to which the City may be a party or in which it may be interested
or which may be brought against or by any officer of the City on behalf of the
City or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the City. (1979 Code
Ch. 5, Art. I, §2)
   B.   Advice: Be the legal advisor of the City and shall render advice on all
legal questions affecting the City whenever requested to do so by any City
official. Upon request by the Mayor or Council, he shall reduce such opinion to
writing. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. I, §3)
   C.   Draft Ordinances and Contracts: Draft or supervise the phraseology of
any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments to which the City may
be a party and to draft ordinances and resolutions covering any subjects within
the powers of the Municipality. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. I, §4)
1-9A-3: OTHER COUNSEL:
The Mayor, with consent of the Council, may retain or authorize the employment
of other legal counsel to give advice or render service to the City. (1979 Code
Ch. 5, Art. I, §5)
ARTICLE B. HEALTH AND BUILDING OFFICER
SECTION:
1-9B-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9B-2: Powers and Duties
1-9B-3: Stop Work Orders
1-9B-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of Health and Building Officer who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5,
Art. II, §1; Ch. 5, Art. V, §1)
1-9B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Health and Building Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Health Provisions:
      1.   To be the enforcing officer for all ordinances concerning the health
of the City, including growth of plants and weeds, dangerous buildings, 1
garbage, 2  refuse,2 wrecked or abandoned vehicles, 3  scavengers 4  and other
duties assigned by the Mayor or Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. V, §2)
      2.   Make or cause to be made analysis of any food or drink alleged to be
tainted or unwholesome and to analyze the drinking water of the City whenever
requested to do so by the Mayor or City Council. The Health and Building
Officer shall assist in the enforcement of all ordinances relating to the sale
or storage of food and drink intended for human consumption and shall make or
cause to be made such tests and analyses and inspections as may be necessary
for this purpose. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. V, §3)
   B.   Building Regulations:
      1.   To issue building permits to see to the enforcement of all ordinance
provisions relating to signs, 5  to buildings 6  or to zoning 1  and to inspect
all signs and buildings or structures being erected or altered as may be
necessary to insure compliance with the ordinances of the City. (1979 Code Ch.
5, Art. II, §2)
      2.   To act as ex officio Plumbing Inspector and shall have all the
powers and perform all the duties connected with that office unless a separate
Plumbing Inspector is appointed. 8  (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. II, §3)
      3.   To act as ex officio Electrical Inspector and shall have all the
powers and perform all the duties of that office unless a separate Electrical
Inspector is appointed. 3  (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. II, §4)
      4.   To make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises
where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure
is going on, for the purpose of making inspections, at any reasonable hour.
(1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. II, §6)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9, Chapter 4 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 4, Chapter 3 of this Code.
3 3. See Title 6, Chapter 5 of this Code.
4 4. See Title 3, Chapter 11 of this Code.
5 5. See Title 9, Chapter 8 of this Code.
6 6. See Title 9 of this Code.
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code, particularly Section
  10-9-1.
8 2. See Article D of this Chapter.
3 3. See Article C of this Chapter and Section
   9-3-3 of this Code.
1-9B-3: STOP WORK ORDERS:
The Health and Building Officer shall have the power to order all work stopped
on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City when such work
is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance relating thereto
or in violation of the Zoning Ordinance. 1  Work shall not be resumed after the
issuance of such order except on the written permission of the Health and
Building Officer; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be
followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such order may be served by
the Health and Building Officer or any policeman. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. II,
§5)
Any person violating any stop order by continuing to work in violation of such
stop order of the Health and Building Officer shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation of a stop work order occurs or continues.
(1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. II, §7; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 4. See Title 10 of this Code.
ARTICLE C. ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-9C-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9C-2: Powers and Duties
1-9C-3: Stop Work Orders
1-9C-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of Electrical Inspector, an executive
position of the City. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the consent of the Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. III, §1)
1-9C-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Electrical Inspector shall:
   A.   Entry and Enforcement: Have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose
of making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein, and he
shall have the authority and be charged with the duty to enforce all ordinance
provisions relating to electrical wiring and equipment. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art.
III, §2)
   B.   Electrical Turn Off During Emergencies: Have the power to cause the
current in any wire or conduit to be turned off whenever this is necessary in
an emergency for the protection of life and property. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art.
III, §3)
   C.   Inspections: Make all inspections necessary to see to the enforcement
of the City ordinances, and no electrical wiring shall be covered until it has
been inspected. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. III, §4)
1-9C-3: STOP WORK ORDERS:
When ever the Electrical Inspector shall find electrical work being done in
violation of the City ordinances, he shall have the power to order the work
stopped until the ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to
continue any such work after a stop order has been issued, except upon written
order of the Mayor or of the Electrical Inspector; provided, that when such a
stop order is an oral order, it shall be followed by a written stop order
within an hour. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. III, §5)
Any person who shall continue to work in violation of a stop order shall, for
each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation of a stop order occurs or continues. (1979 Code
Ch. 5, Art. III, §6; 1993 Code)
ARTICLE D. PLUMBING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-9D-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9D-2: Powers and Duties
1-9D-3: Stop Work Orders
1-9D-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector, an executive office
of the City. The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. IV, §1)
1-9D-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector and he is
hereby empowered to enforce all City ordinances relating to the installation,
care and standards of plumbing. He shall make all necessary inspections and
tests which may be needed in the performance of his duties. (1979 Code Ch. 5,
Art. IV, §2)
   B.   Entry Powers: The Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to enter any
building or premises on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being
installed, altered or repaired at all reasonable hours, to make inspections to
insure compliance with the ordinances of the City relative thereto. (1979 Code
Ch. 5, Art. IV, §4)
1-9D-3: STOP WORK ORDERS:
When ever the Plumbing Inspector shall find plumbing work being done in
violation of the City ordinances, he shall have the power to order the work
stopped until the ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to
continue any such work after a stop order has been issued, except upon written
order of the Mayor or of the Plumbing Inspector; provided, that when such a
stop order is an oral order, it shall be followed by a written stop order
within an hour. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. IV, §3)
Any person who shall continue to work in violation of a stop order shall, for
each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation of a stop order occurs or continues. (1979
Code Ch. 5, Art. IV, §5; 1993 Code)
ARTICLE E. SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND SEWERS
SECTION:
1-9E-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9E-2: Duties
1-9E-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Streets and Sewers who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. (1979
Code Ch. 5, Art. VI, §1)
1-9E-2: DUTIES:
The Superintendent of Streets shall:
   A.   Keep the streets and alleys clean, free from obstructions and in good
repair.
   B.   See that all street drains are free and unobstructed.
   C.   Be responsible for the maintenance of all storm and sanitary sewers.
(1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. VI, §2)
   D.   Construct, inspect, maintain and repair City sewers. (1979 Code Ch. 5,
Art. VI, §4)
   E.   Report any ordinance violation with relation to the care or use of
streets, alleys or sidewalks in the City, of which he may become cognizant.
(1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. VI, §3)
   F.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and City
Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. VI, §2)
ARTICLE F. WATER SUPERINTENDENT AND
SPECIAL WATER PROJECTS COORDINATOR
SECTION:
1-9F-1: Water Superintendent Office Created; Appointment
1-9F-2: Water Superintendent Duties
1-9F-3: Special Water Projects Coordinator Office Created; Appointment
1-9F-4: Special Water Projects Coordinator Duties
1-9F-1: WATER SUPERINTENDENT OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of water superintendent, a full-time
executive office of the city. Such superintendent shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. Such superintendent
shall not have any other employment outside the city. (Ord. 3017, 5-21-2001)
1-9F-2: WATER SUPERINTENDENT DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The water superintendent shall have charge of the
maintenance, repair and operation of the water distribution system of the city
and of all intakes, wells, reservoirs, mains, hydrants and other appurtenances
thereto, and in addition, he shall perform such other duties as may be assigned
to him.
   B.   Supervise Employees: All employees assigned to the maintenance or
operation of the water plant shall be under the supervision and direction of
the water superintendent. (Ord. 3017, 5-21-2001)
1-9F-3: SPECIAL WATER PROJECTS COORDINATOR OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
Effective from May 21, 2001, and until May 2, 2002, there is hereby created the
temporary office of special water projects coordinator, being a full-time
temporary executive office of the city. Such special water projects coordinator
shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council. Such office shall automatically and immediately cease and shall be
deemed terminated on May 2, 2002, without any further action of city council
being required. The salary for such special water projects coordinator during
such limited term of office shall be based on an annual city municipal year
salary of thirty five thousand seventy five dollars four cents ($35,075.04);
and such salary shall not be increased during such limited term of office.
(Ord. 3017, 5-21-2001)
1-9F-4: SPECIAL WATER PROJECTS COORDINATOR DUTIES:
The special water projects coordinator shall be subordinate to and shall
provide water coordination and assistance to the water superintendent, as the
water superintendent shall determine from time to time, in the maintenance,
repair, and operation of the water distribution system of the city and of all
intakes, wells, reservoirs, mains, hydrants, and other appurtenances thereto,
and with special water projects; and in addition, he shall perform such other
duties as may be assigned to him by the water superintendent or the mayor from
time to time. (Ord. 3017, 5-21-2001)
ARTICLE F1. WATER OFFICE MANAGER
SECTION:
1-9F1-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9F1-2: Duties And Responsibilities
1-9F1-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Water Office Manager, being a full-time
"at will" executive office of the City. Such Water Office Manager shall be
appointed by the Water Superintendent, with the advice and consent of the City
Council. Such Water Office Manager shall not have any other employment outside
the City. (Ord. 3842, 4-16-2018)
1-9F1-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The Water Office Manager shall be subordinate to and shall provide
coordination and assistance to the Water Superintendent, as the Water
Superintendent shall determine from time to time in the billing and collection
of water and sewer customer accounts. Additionally, the Water Office Manager
shall also perform the duties and responsibilities as set forth in the written
job description for the Water Office Manager that is approved by the Mayor and
City Council from time to time and such other duties and responsibilities as
may be assigned by the Mayor or City Council or Water Superintendent from time
to time. (Ord. 3842, 4-16-2018)
ARTICLE G. CITY ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-9G-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9G-2: Duties
1-9G-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of City Engineer who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 5,
Art. VIII, §1)
1-9G-2: DUTIES:
The City Engineer shall advise the City on all engineering matters referred to
him and shall perform such duties as are provided by law or ordinance and, in
addition thereto, such other duties as, from time to time, may be imposed upon
him. He shall, from time to time, as required by the Council, make reports
regarding public improvements, repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks or
such other work as may be requested and shall make such suggestions regarding
the same as shall, in his judgment, seem best and proper. All maps and surveys
made and correspondence received by the City Engineer shall become and remain
the property of the City. (1979 Code Ch. 5, Art. VIII, §2)
ARTICLE H. LAKE SUPERINTENDENT
SECTION:
1-9H-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9H-2: Duties
1-9H-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Lake Superintendent who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2430, 4-15-
91)
1-9H-2: DUTIES:
The Lake Superintendent shall be charged with the duty of maintaining,
overseeing and supervising the activities of Lake Taylorville 1  and shall
enforce the lake lot leases, shall suggest to the City Council any reasonable
rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the Lake facilities,
shall report periodically to the City Council his acts and doings and shall
perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 2430, 4-15-91)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 7 of this Code.
ARTICLE I. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-9I-1: Declaration Of Policy
1-9I-2: Nondiscriminatory Employment Practices
1-9I-3: City Contract Guidelines
1-9I-4: Outreach, Selection And Service
1-9I-5: Minority Employment
1-9I-6: Accommodations For Employees With Disabilities
1-9I-7: Policy For All City Employees
1-9I-8: EEO/AA Plan
1-9I-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   The city of Taylorville hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce, and
advocate for all laws related to equal employment opportunity including, but
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Title VI of the civil rights act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or national
origin.
      2.   Title VII of the civil rights act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment.
      3.   Title IX of the education amendments of 1972, which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.
      4.   The equal pay act of 1963, which covers all employees who are
covered by the fair labor standards act. The act forbids pay differentials on
the basis of sex.
      5.   The age discrimination act of 1967, which prohibits discrimination
because of age against anyone between the ages of forty (40) and sixty five
(65).
      6.   Federal executive order 11246, which requires every contract with
federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
      7.   Section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 and DOL implementing
regulations at 29 CFR 32, which prohibits any discrimination based on
disability.
      8.   Section 167 of JTPA and the U.S. DOL regulations at 29 CFR parts 31
and 32, which provides that no person in the United States shall be excluded
from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin, under any
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the department
of labor.
      9.   Chapter 68, article I, section 17-19 of the Illinois constitution,
which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer.
      10.   The Americans with disabilities act of 1990, which prohibits any
discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of
their disability.
   B.   For the purpose of this article, the term "minority" will refer to
American Indians, Asians, Blacks, or Hispanics, or to such protected classes as
youth, elderly, women, or persons with disabilities. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-2: NONDISCRIMINATORY EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
The city of Taylorville will assure nondiscriminatory employment practices in
recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or termination,
promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of compensation and
use of facilities. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-3: CITY CONTRACT GUIDELINES:
The city of Taylorville will not contract with other agencies, banks,
businesses, vendors, etc., who practice or establish a pattern of
discrimination based on sex, color, race, religion, age, national origin,
political affiliation or belief.
   A.   The city of Taylorville will incorporate into any contract for
construction work, or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules,
regulations, and orders of the secretary of labor or of any prior authority
that remain in effect, which is paid for in whole or in part with the aid of
such financial assistance, the following "equal opportunity clause":
      1. The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, disability or national
origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants
are employed, and the employees are treated during employment, without regard
to their race, color, religion, sex, national origin or disability. Such action
shall include, but not be limited, to the following: employment, upgrading,
demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or
termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for
training, including apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post in
conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment,
notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.
      2. The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisement for
employee's places by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, or disability.
      3. In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the Equal
Opportunity Clause or with any of the said rules, regulations, and orders, this
contract may be canceled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part and the
contractor may be declared ineligible for further government contracts or
Federally assisted construction contracts.
      4. The contractor will include the provisions of this Equal Opportunity
clause in every subcontract or purchase order, unless exempted by the rules,
regulations, or orders of the Secretary of Labor so that such provisions will
be binding upon each such subcontractor or vendor.
(Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-4: OUTREACH, SELECTION AND SERVICE:
The city of Taylorville assures that it will actively provide nondiscriminatory
outreach, selection, and service to all individuals. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-5: MINORITY EMPLOYMENT:
Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job categories so
that minority employment in all categories of the work force will represent a
proportionate share of minority populations in the city of Taylorville as well
as the surrounding areas. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-6: ACCOMMODATIONS FOR EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES:
The city of Taylorville will provide accommodations to the best of its ability
for employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural
limitations. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-7: POLICY FOR ALL CITY EMPLOYEES:
All the city of Taylorville employees are expected to adhere to the above
policy and to work actively for its implementation both internally and in
carrying out city activities. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
1-9I-8: EEO/AA PLAN:
The city of Taylorville designates the mayor and the city clerk to carry out
the EEO/AA plan. (Ord. 3363, 12-17-2007)
ARTICLE J. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER
SECTION:
1-9J-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9J-2: Duties
1-9J-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of human resource manager, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. (Ord. 2999, 11-20-
2000)
1-9J-2: DUTIES:
The human resource manager shall:
   A.   Manage the human resource division for the city.
   B.   Coordinate and oversee all human resource functions of the city.
   C.   Work with all city departments to ensure compliance with federal, state
and local laws.
   D.   Act as liaison with the personnel committee and the safety committee.
   E.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 2999, 11-20-2000)
ARTICLE K. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
(LAKE, STREET, AND SEWER)
SECTION:
1-9K-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9K-2: Duties
1-9K-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of superintendent of public works (lake,
street, and sewer) who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the
city council. (Ord. 3382, 5-5-2008)
1-9K-2: DUTIES:
The superintendent of public works (lake, street, and sewer) shall be
responsible for the administration and management in organizing, directing and
coordinating the day to day operations including personnel of the lake
department and the street and sewer departments including, but not limited to:
   A.   Enforce the lake lot leases and shall suggest to the city council any
reasonable rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the lake
facilities.
   B.   Keep the streets and alleys clean, free from obstructions and in good
repair.
   C.   See that all street drains are free and unobstructed.
   D.   Be responsible for the maintenance of all storm and sanitary sewers.
   E.   Construct, inspect, maintain and repair city sewers.
   F.   Report any ordinance violation with relation to the care or use of
streets, alleys or sidewalks in the city, of which he/she may become cognizant.
   G.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 3382, 5-5-2008)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Surety Bonds
1-10-1-1: Public Works Construction Contracts
1-10-2: Wage Rates For Public Works Employees
1-10-3: Benefits To New Businesses And Industries
1-10-4: Finance Charge On Accounts Receivable
1-10-1: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the city is required as a prerequisite to
exercising the duties of any office or position or to the issuance of a license
or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such bond
shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this state as
a surety company, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary by
ordinance. Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional
surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the city against loss or
liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for
any other reason, the council may order a new surety or sureties to be secured
for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10)
days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond or
his assignee, the council shall declare the bond to be void and, thereupon,
surrender the privilege or position as condition for which the bond was
required. (1979 Code § 9-6-5)
1-10-1-1: PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS:
   A.   The following requirements shall apply to all public works contracts
between the city and contractors involving construction work on public
improvements for the city:
      1.   Bid bonds shall be required in all cases and in the form as the city
council may determine from time to time. The amount of the bid security shall
equal ten percent (10%) of the amount of the contractor's bid proposal. The bid
security shall take the form of a cash deposit with the city, a certified check
payable to the city, or a bid bond guaranteed by a reputable surety insurance
company.
      2.   Performance and payment bonds shall be required in all public work
contracts of any kind costing over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The
city council, by majority vote, may from time to time require performance and
payment bonds for any public work contract or contracts of any kind costing
under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). In all cases the performance and
payment bond shall be in the form as the city council by majority vote may
determine from time to time.
         a.   For contracts under one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
and not involving the expenditure of motor fuel tax funds, federal aid funds,
or other funds received from the state, the contractor may provide a
nondiminishing irrevocable bank letter of credit from a reputable financial
institution in lieu of such bond provided such letter of credit complies with
all provisions required for bonds under 30 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 and
under this section. The amount of such letter of credit shall be in an amount
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the contractor's contract amount.
         b.   In all other cases, the performance and payment bond shall be in
an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the contractor's contract
amount and shall be secured (guaranteed) by a reputable surety insurance
company or by a cash deposit equal to the bond amount. In lieu of a cash
deposit, a contractor may use as security a nondiminishing irrevocable letter
of credit issued by a bank, savings and loan association, surety, or insurance
company in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the amount of
the contractor's contract amount. (Ord. 3658, 1-21-2014)
1-10-2: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Rates Established: To the extent and as required by "an act regulating
wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by
state, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any
one under contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended 1 ,
the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics
and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the city of Taylorville, Taylorville, Illinois, is hereby
ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction
work in Christian County area as determined by the department of labor of the
state of Illinois as of June of the current year, a copy of that determination
being filed with the city clerk at the city clerk's office and available for
public inspection during normal office hours, and incorporated herein by
reference. As required by said act, any and all revisions of the prevailing
rate of wages by the department of labor of the state of Illinois shall
supersede the department's June determination and apply to any and all public
works construction undertaken by the city of Taylorville, Illinois. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in
aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
   B.   Application To Public Works Employees: Nothing herein contained shall
be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein
ascertained to any work or employment except public works construction of the
city of Taylorville, Illinois, to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
   C.   Rates Posted And Attached To Contracts: The city of Taylorville clerk
shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in
the main office of the city of Taylorville, Illinois, this determination or any
revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of
the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   D.   Copies Of Rates To Employees: The City of Taylorville Clerk shall mail
a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of
employers and to any person or association of employees who have filed their
names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the
particular rates and the particular class of workers whose wages will be
affected by such rates. (Ord. 3126, 6-2-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.
1-10-3: BENEFITS TO NEW BUSINESSES AND INDUSTRIES:
The City, in order to promote and foster a stronger economic climate in its
community, is authorized to grant those Municipal services, benefits and
advantages set forth below to qualified industrial and other business
enterprises located in Taylorville. Each newly established enterprise must
employ not less than fifteen (15) persons. Presently existing enterprises must,
within a twelve (12) month period immediately preceding authorization of such
grant, employ not less than fifteen (15) additional persons. The City is
authorized to grant such qualified enterprises those Municipal services
benefits and advantages set forth as follows: (Ord. 2163, 1-7-1985)
   A.   Free water not to exceed seventy five thousand (75,000) gallons per
month for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 3872, 10-15-2018)
   B.   Free fire protection for a period of two (2) years.
   C.   Real Estate Tax abatement for two (2) years.
   D.   Free building permits for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2163, 1-7-
1985)
The word "person", as used herein, is intended to refer to, mean and be limited
to those persons who are employed full time, working not less than thirty seven
(37) hours per week. (Ord. 2174, 3-4-1985)
1-10-4: FINANCE CHARGE ON ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE:
A ten percent (10%) finance charge shall be imposed by the City of Taylorville
on accounts receivable accounts that are more than thirty (30) days delinquent.
The imposition of the finance charge shall become effective April 1, 2011.
(Ord. 3509, 4-4-2011)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: State Law to Govern
1-11-2: Election Wards
1-11-1: STATE LAW TO GOVERN:
Elections for Municipal offices shall be held as is provided by statute and at
the time prescribed by statute. 1  (1979 Code Ch. 9, Art. VI, §4)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶3-2-2 et seq.
1-11-2: ELECTION WARDS:
The corporate limits of the City are hereby divided into the following wards:
(1979 Code Ch. 2, Art. III, §1)
   WARD 1 shall include all territory east of Webster Street north of Market
Street from the intersection of Webster Street to the intersection of Cherokee
Street and all that territory north of East Main Cross which is east of
Cherokee Street, and all territory north of Lincoln Trail, which territory is
also known as Taylorville Precincts 1, 9, 16, and 2, which descriptions are
also displayed on the map, marked Exhibit A, which Exhibit shows the wards by
number and by precincts, which Exhibit A is made a part of this Section by
reference. 1
   WARD 2 shall consist of all territory west of Webster Street from the
intersection of Spresser Street and all territory north of Spresser Street,
which includes Taylorville Precincts 6, 10, 11, and 15, which descriptions are
also displayed on the map, marked Exhibit A, which Exhibit shows the wards by
number and by precincts, which Exhibit A is made a part of this Section by
reference.2
   WARD 3 shall consist of all territory south and east of Spresser Street and
all territory north of Sangamon Road to the point it intersects with Cheney
Street and all territory west of Cheney Street to England Street and all
territory north of England Street from Cheney Street to Shumway Street, and the
territory north of Maple Street to Webster Street, which territory includes
Taylorville Precincts 5, 7, 12, 13, and 14, which descriptions are also
displayed on the map, marked Exhibit A, which Exhibit shows the wards by number
and by precincts, which Exhibit A is made a part of this Section by reference.2
   WARD 4 shall consist of all territory south of Lincoln Trail and all
property south of East Main Cross and the territory east of Cherokee Street
from East Main Cross to Market Street, and all territory south of Market Street
from Cherokee Street to Webster Street and all territory east of Webster Street
from the intersection of Market Street to Maple Street, all territory south of
Maple Street to Shumway Street, and the territory east of Shumway Street to
Maple Street, all territory south of England Street to the intersection of
Cheney Street, and all territory east of Cheney Street to the intersection of
Sangamon Road and all territory south of Sangamon Road, which territory is
Taylorville Precincts 8, 3, and 4, and Taylorville residents that live in the
City limits of May 2, Locust and Johnson Townships, and which area includes the
residents of Lake Taylorville area, which descriptions are also displayed on
the map, marked Exhibit A, which Exhibit shows the wards by number and by
precincts, which Exhibit A is made part of this Section by reference. 2  (Ord.
2480, 10-19-92)
 
Notes
1 2. The map, marked Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 2480 shall be and remain
  on file in the office of the City Clerk.
2 1. The map, marked Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 2480 shall be and remain
  on file in the office of the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 12
CITY SEAL
SECTION:
1-12-1: Description
1-12-1: DESCRIPTION:
The City Seal shall be circular in form, so constructed as to impress upon
paper the words "Seal, City of Taylorville, Illinois, Inc. 1882". 1  (1979 Code
Ch. 9, Art. VI, §1)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-7-3F of this Title, Clerk as custodian of City Seal.
CHAPTER 13
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-13-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-13-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   A.   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city of
Taylorville, Illinois to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
430/70-5.
   B.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city of
Taylorville, Illinois, is hereby prohibited.
   C.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city of Taylorville, Illinois under the act, is
hereby prohibited.
   D.   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the city of Taylorville, Illinois, is hereby
prohibited.
   E.   For the purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee"
shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   F.   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   G.   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city of Taylorville,
Illinois officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing
ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the
provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
   H.   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   I.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city of Taylorville, Illinois if the act is
found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
   J.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city of
Taylorville, Illinois. (Ord. 3171, 5-3-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 14
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-14-1: Title
1-14-2: Scope
1-14-3: Definitions
1-14-4: Notices
1-14-5: Late Payment
1-14-6: Payment
1-14-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-14-8: Audit Procedure
1-14-9: Appeal
1-14-10: Hearing
1-14-11: Interest And Penalties
1-14-12: Abatement
1-14-13: Installment Contracts
1-14-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-14-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-14-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-14-17: Lien
1-14-18: Application
1-14-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in
connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city's mayor and city council.
   HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the corporate authorities to conduct hearings and to
issue final determinations regarding the collection of all locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city's treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on
or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage
prepaid. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the city.
      2.   Within fourteen (14) days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum, based
on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund
check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   C.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   D.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   E.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the city's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   G.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-9: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-10: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-14-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct
the hearing rather than the local tax administrator.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator/hearing
officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
twelve percent (12%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five
(365) days and the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer
fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to
demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in
a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing.
The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
city, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city
clerk's office. (Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-17: LIEN:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
3020, 5-21-2001)
1-14-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 3020, 5-21-2001)
CHAPTER 15
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-15-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-15-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-15-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-15-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-15-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-15-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-15-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Taylorville, Illinois, a Municipal
corporation (herein "City") to prohibit harassment of any person by any City
official, agent, employee, agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All
City officials, agents, employees, agencies or offices are prohibited from
sexually harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or
lack thereof. (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017, eff. 12-18-2017)
1-15-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
This Chapter adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   A.   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment,
      2. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
      3. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2.   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
"reasonable person". (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017, eff. 12-18-2017)
1-15-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
A City employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending City employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not
necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
Any City employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment,
including the following:
   A.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing behavior
in the workplace, the harassed City employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
   B.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the City employee feels threatened
or intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, the
Human Resources Manager, or the Mayor.
   C.   Notification: The City employee experiencing what he or she believes to
be sexual harassment must not assume that the City is aware of the conduct. If
there are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the City will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
   D.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this Chapter is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
City. However, all City employees have the right to contact the Illinois
Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said
or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the City. However,
because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and the
difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component
of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017,
eff. 12-18-2017)
1-15-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No City official, employee, agency or office shall take any retaliatory
action against any City employee due to a City employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
Chapter; or
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this Chapter; or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   For the purposes of this Chapter, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any City employee that is
taken in retaliation for a City employee's involvement in protected activity
pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for a City employee
who does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any City officer, appointee, agent, or
employee that the City employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law,
rule, or regulation; or
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any City officer, appointee, agent, or employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate
against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other
proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation 3 .
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4 , it is a civil rights
violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate
against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in
good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three
hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017,
eff. 12-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a).
3 3. 740 ILCS 174/15(b).
4 4. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
1-15-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
City policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this Chapter or the
Prohibition On Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the City and any other
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the City shall be separate and distinct from any penalty
imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court
of law or a State or Federal agency. (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017, eff. 12-18-2017)
1-15-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this Chapter shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
City policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 3825, 12-18-2017, eff.
12-18-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Appointment; Term
2-1-2: Meetings
2-1-3: Functions
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby reestablished a Plan Commission for the City, which Commission
shall consist of the chairman of the Board of Appeals 1  and six (6) members
appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council. The chairman and
secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of
the Council. Such members shall serve for six (6) year terms; provided, that
each year, one member shall be appointed or reappointed to the Commission. The
Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the Plan Commission as provided by law 2
. (Ord. 2829, 3-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 2 of this Title.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.
2-1-2: MEETINGS:
The Plan Commission shall meet at such times as it may, by resolution,
designate, and it shall hold special meetings on call by the chairman or any
two (2) members thereof, provided twenty four (24) hours' notice of such
special meeting is given to each member. Service of such notice may be waived
by any member. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VIII, § 2)
2-1-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Plan Commission shall prepare and recommend the adoption of a comprehensive
program of public improvements and such changes therein as it may, from time to
time, deem desirable. It shall hold hearings and make recommendations to the
City Council regarding all changes of City zoning or subdivision plats 1  and
shall have such additional power and duties as may be delegated to it by
statute or ordinance. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VIII, § 3)
 
Notes
1 3. See Titles 10 and 11, respectively, of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Established; Appointment; Term of Office
2-2-2: Organization
2-2-3: Powers
2-2-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
A Board of Appeals is hereby established pursuant to chapter 24, division 13,
article II of the Illinois Revised Statutes. There shall be seven (7) members
of the Board of Appeals who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the City Council. Each member of the Board of Appeals shall
serve for five (5) years. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. IX, §§1,2)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
shall name one of the members so appointed chairman and one secretary, and such
person shall serve as chairman or secretary throughout his term as member of
the Board. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. IX, §3)
   B.   Meetings: The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings
and shall fix the time for regular meetings of the Board; special meetings may
be called by the chairman or at the request of two (2) members, upon twenty
four (24) hours' notice being given to all members. Any regular or special
meeting may be adjourned to a specific time without such notice being given.
All meetings shall be open to the public. A quorum shall consist of four (4)
members, and the Board shall require an affirmative vote of four (4) members to
control its official actions. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. IX, §4)
2-2-3: POWERS:
   A.   The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals 1  where it is
alleged that there is an error in any action by the Zoning Enforcing Officer 2
or other administrative officer in carrying out the provisions of the City
Zoning Ordinance 3  and for the interpretation of the Zoning Maps and
variations. 4
   B.   The Board of Appeals hears all cases of applications for variations4 of
the City Zoning Ordinance but shall not have power to permit a use not
permitted in the district involved. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall
not be subject to review, reversal or modification by the corporate
authorities, but shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the
"Administrative Review Act". 5  (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. IX, §6)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-9-4 of this Code.
2 2. See Section
  10-9-1 of this Code.
3 3. See Title 10 of this Code.
4 4. See Section
  10-9-5 of this Code.
5 1. S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶11-13-13; S.H.A. ch. 110, ¶3-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Established; Membership
2-3-2: Meetings
2-3-3: Powers and Duties
2-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established the Board of Local Improvements for the City, which
Board shall consist of the Mayor and two (2) other members, one of whom shall
be the Superintendent of Streets and Sewers, and the other shall be the City
Engineer. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. I, §1)
2-3-2: MEETINGS:
The Board of Local Improvements shall meet, from time to time, on call by the
Mayor. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. I, §2)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the Board of Local Improvements shall include:
   A.   To make written reports to the City for three (3) years following the
completion of any public work, concerning the condition of the public work,
based upon a physical examination thereof.
   B.   To originate any local improvement projects and consider any petitions
for any local improvements.
   C.   To originate a scheme for any local improvement to be paid by special
assessment or special tax, either with or without a petition and, in either
case, shall adopt a resolution describing the proposed improvement.
   D.   To fix the time and place of any public hearings required of any local
improvement proceeding.
   E.   To make a recommendation of such improvement to the City.
   F.   To assist in the preparation of an estimate of cost of said local
improvement.
   G.   To take whatever other or additional steps are authorized by statute to
commence and complete any local improvement project in the City. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created; Appointment; Term of Office; Removal
2-4-2: Qualifications; Oath; Bond
2-4-3: Powers and Duties
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners as provided by
law. 1  The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the
Mayor of the City, by and with the consent of the City Council. The Board shall
consist of three (3) members; the terms of office of which shall be three (3)
years or until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified.
(1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VI, §§1, 2)
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be subject to
removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the City. (1979
Code Ch. 8, Art. VI, §3)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 24, ¶10-2.1-1 et seq.
2-4-2: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND:
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such
qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law. Each
member of the Board shall take oath or affirmation of office and shall execute
and deliver to the City a bond, payable to the City of Taylorville, in the sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with such sureties as the Mayor and City
Council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties
of the office of each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
(1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VI, §3)
2-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such powers and duties as
are now, or as may hereafter be, given to it by law.1 (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art.
VI, §4)
CHAPTER 5
PENSION FUND BOARDS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Firefighters' Pension Fund Board
2-5-2: Police Pension Fund Board
2-5-1: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND BOARD:
   A.   Board Created; Membership: There shall be a board of trustees of the
firefighters' pension fund, which beginning on the third Monday in April 2006,
shall consist of five (5) members. Two (2) members of the board shall be
appointed by the mayor. Two (2) members of the board shall be active
participants of the pension fund who are elected from the active participants
of the fund. One member of the board shall be a person who is retired under the
firemen's pension fund act of 1919 or 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4 who is
elected from persons retired under the firemen's pension fund act of 1919 or 40
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.
   B.   Duties: The board of trustees of the firefighters' pension fund shall
have control of the management of all funds belonging to or designated by law
as part of the firefighters' pension fund and of the administration of such
funds, as provided by state law and other duties and powers granted, from time
to time, by statute. (Ord. 3456, 2-16-2010)
2-5-2: POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD:
   A.   Board Created; Membership: There shall be a board of trustees of the
police pension fund which shall consist of five (5) members. Two (2) members of
the board shall be appointed by the mayor. Two (2) members of the board shall
be elected from the active participants of the pension fund by such active
participants of the fund. One member of the board shall be elected by and from
the beneficiaries.
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the members of the police pension board
to manage, invest and control the police pension fund and all monies pertaining
thereto in the manner provided by statute. The board shall have such other
duties and powers granted, from time to time, by statute. (Ord. 3456, 2-16-
2010)
CHAPTER 6
TREE BOARD 1
SECTION:
2-6-1: Board Created; Appointment; Terms Of Office; Vacancies
2-6-2: Organization
2-6-3: Duties
2-6-4: Compensation
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 2 of this code for tree regulations.
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city which
shall consist of one alderman of the city council and five (5) members,
citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor, with
the approval of the city council. The terms of the five (5) persons to be
appointed by the mayor shall be three (3) years; except, that the term of two
(2) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year, and
the term of two (2) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. The
mayor shall appoint the one alderman at each municipal election to serve a two
(2) year term.
In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 3286,
4-3-2006)
2-6-2: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with this chapter and
title 8, chapter 2 of this code, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A
majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
2-6-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and
develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in city owned property, along streets and in other public areas.
Such plan will be presented annually to the city council, and upon its
acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree
plan for the city. The board, when requested by the city council, shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work. The board shall report
to the city health and building officer 1  any violations of
title 8, chapter 2 of this code which comes to its attention. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-
1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article B of this code.
2-6-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
CHAPTER 7
CEMETERY BOARD
SECTION:
2-7-1: Board Established; Appointment; Term Of Office
2-7-2: Organization
2-7-3: Powers And Duties
2-7-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby established a Board of Cemetery Managers for Oak Hill Cemetery
1 . The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
appoint a Board of Cemetery Managers which shall consist of one Alderman of the
City and four (4) other members. Such members shall serve for terms of three
(3) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1979 Code Ch.
8, Art. II, §§ 1, 2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 3 of this Code.
2-7-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The Board of Managers may appoint one of its members chairman
and another secretary of such Board. The secretary shall keep a record of all
of the proceedings of the Board and shall make an annual report of such
proceedings. He shall also file and preserve all papers, vouchers and records
pertaining to the proceedings of the Board and pertaining to the conduct and
affairs of the cemetery.
   B.   Meetings: A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum thereof,
and the Board may hold general or special meetings at such times as it deems
necessary.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The Board of Managers shall make such rules and
adopt such regulations as may be necessary to carry out its duties. (1979 Code
Ch. 8, Art. II, § 3; amd. 1993 Code)
2-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Control Of Cemetery: The Board of Managers shall have the control,
superintendence and charge of the cemetery and its appurtenances and shall
supervise and direct the ornamentation, laying out and improving the grounds of
the cemetery. The Board shall, when authorized by the City Council, hire such
labor and purchase such material as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this subsection. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. II, § 4)
   B.   Cemetery Maintenance: The Cemetery Board may cause to be erected such
buildings, vaults and fixtures for the care and operations of the cemetery and
hire such laborers, make such purchases and let such contracts as may be
authorized by the City Council, from time to time. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. II, §
5)
   C.   Perpetual Care: The Board of Managers is hereby authorized to make such
arrangements with the owner or owners of any lot or other portions of the
cemetery grounds for keeping in repair foundations, monuments, and vaults by
either special provision or by contract. The Board shall, each month, set aside
fifteen percent (15%) of all lot sales coming into its hands for a permanent
fund for the future maintenance of the cemetery. This fund shall be invested
according to statute 1 . (Ord. 2810, 10-20-1997)
   D.   Burials; Sale Of Lots: The Board of Managers shall arrange for digging
graves, sealing crypts in the mausoleum, handling vaults, sodding graves and
building foundations for monuments and footstones and fix the charges to be
made for each. The Board of Managers shall appraise the squares or lots which
may remain unsold in the cemetery and shall, from time to time, reappraise such
lots or squares. It shall file such appraisals with the City Clerk for use in
selling such lots. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. II, § 7)
 
Notes
1 1. 205 ILCS 620/2-10.
CHAPTER 8
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-8-1: Board Established; Appointment; Term of Office
2-8-2: Organization
2-8-3: Powers and Duties
2-8-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
There shall be a Board of Library Directors for the City as provided by law. 1
The Board shall consist of nine (9) Directors to be appointed by the Mayor, by
and with the advice and consent of the Council, and not more than one Director
shall be a member of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VII, §1)
The term of the Library Directors shall be three (3) years, staggered so that
three (3) terms expire each year, as provided by law. 2  (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art.
VII, §2)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 81, ¶4-1 et seq.
2 2. S.H.A. ch. 81, ¶4-1.1.
2-8-2: ORGANIZATION:
The Library Directors shall elect a president and secretary, as provided by
statute, 1  and shall meet at such times as the Library Board may determine.
(1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VII, §3)
 
Notes
1 3. S.H.A. ch. 81, ¶4-6.
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Library Board shall have charge of the operation of the
City Library and of the expenditure of all Library funds. Each year it shall
file a report with the City Council containing, among other things, an itemized
statement of the expenses anticipated for the coming year, as required by law.
1  (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VII, §4)
   B.   Library Rules and Regulations: The Board of Library Directors shall
have the power to make any reasonable rules and regulations governing the use
of the Library and Library facilities. Any person violating any such rule
shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VII, §5; 1991 Code)
 
Notes
1 4. S.H.A. ch. 81, ¶4-10.
CHAPTER 9
TECHNICAL TRAINING CENTER BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Board Established
2-9-2: Appointment; Term of Office
2-9-3: Organization
2-9-4: Powers and Duties
2-9-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
The City, in order to promote and foster a stronger economic climate in its
community, does hereby establish the Taylorville Technical Training Center
Board. (Ord. 2390, 5-8-90)
2-9-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
appoint a Board of Directors of the Taylorville Technical Training Center
consisting of not less than fifteen (15) nor more than nineteen (19) persons.
Such members shall serve for terms of three (3) years or until their successors
are appointed and qualified. (Ord. 2390, 5-8-90)
2-9-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers:
      1.   Established: The Board of Directors may appoint one of its members
chairman, another secretary and another treasurer of the Board.
      2.   Secretary: The secretary shall keep a record of all of the
proceedings of the Board and shall make an annual report of such proceedings.
He shall also file and preserve all papers, vouchers and records pertaining to
the proceedings of the Board and pertaining to the conduct and affairs of the
Board. He shall send a copy of the minutes of any regular or special meeting of
the Board to the City Council.
      3.   Treasurer: The treasurer shall keep accurate and complete books of
account showing all income and all disbursements of the Board.
   B.   Quorum; Meetings: A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum
thereof, and the Board may hold general or special meetings at such times as it
deems necessary.
   C.   Rules and Regulations: The Board of Directors shall make such rules and
adopt such regulations as may be necessary to carry out its duties. (Ord. 2390,
5-8-90)
2-9-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board of Directors shall have the following duties and powers:
   A.   To negotiate an agreement between the City and the Institute of Higher
Learning Provider.
   B.   To negotiate the purchase of property for the Taylorville Technical
Training Center.
   C.   To plan and determine modification of the property and facility in
conjunction with the Institute of Higher Learning Provider, now and in the
future.
   D.   To make any reasonable rules and regulations governing the use and
operation of the facilities.
   E.   To report periodically to the City Council its acts and doings. (Ord.
2390, 5-8-90)
CHAPTER 10
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-10-1: Board Created; Appointment
2-10-2: Powers and Duties
2-10-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Board of Health for the City. The Board of Health
shall consist of two (2) members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. III, §1)
2-10-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by statute or ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
Board of Health to enforce all ordinances of the City which relate to public
health or relate to nuisances. 1
   B.   Health Rules and Regulations: The Board of Health shall make all
necessary rules and regulations for the protection of the health of the City
and to guard against the spread of contagious diseases 2  and to prevent, by
necessary rules, the induction of diseases, contagious or otherwise, within the
corporate limits of the City. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. III, §2)
   C.   Quarantine and Vaccination: The Board of Health is hereby authorized to
make such reasonable rules as may be necessary regarding quarantines 3  and
vaccination for the prevention and spread of contagious diseases and to
quarantine premises where such diseases occur for such time as may be necessary
to protect public health.
The Board shall have the power to prevent persons from entering or leaving
premises on which a case of contagious or epidemic disease occurs or is found
and to placard the same with signs indicating the nature of such disease and
the existence of quarantine. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. III, §3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4, Chapter 4 of this Code.
2 2. See Section
   4-2-1 of this Code.
3 3. See subsection
  4-2-1B of this Code.
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL BAND
SECTION:
2-11-1: Band Established
2-11-2: Band Committee
2-11-3: Operating Funds
2-11-1: BAND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established in and for the City a band to be known as
Taylorville Municipal Band. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. X, §1)
2-11-2: BAND COMMITTEE:
   A.   Appointment; Membership: In May of every odd year, the Mayor, by and
with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a committee of five (5)
voters of the City, one of whom shall be an Alderman of the City, which
Committee shall be designated and known as the Band Committee and shall have
charge, control and management of the Band (except as may, from time to time,
be otherwise provided and directed by the City Council by ordinance). (1979
Code Ch. 8, Art. X, §2)
   B.   Term of Office; Vacancies: The term of such Band Committeemen shall be
two (2) years, and any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. X, §3)
   C.   Band Rules and Regulations: The Committee shall formulate and present
to the City Council, for its approval, such rules and regulations for the
conduct and management of the Band as the Committee shall, from time to time,
deem proper and necessary. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. X, §4)
2-11-3: OPERATING FUNDS:
The costs and expenses of operating and conducting the Band shall be paid only
from the funds to be collected, from time to time, for said purpose by the City
under and by authority of the voters of the City. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. X, §5)
CHAPTER 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Purpose Of Historic Preservation
2-12-2: Composition; Qualifications; Terms
2-12-3: Officers
2-12-4: Meetings
2-12-5: Powers And Duties
2-12-6: Surveys And Research
2-12-1: PURPOSE OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the city of Taylorville by:
   A.   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and
architectural characteristics of Taylorville which represents elements of the
city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
   B.   To promote civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in Taylorville's landmarks and historic districts;
   C.   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of
Taylorville's landmarks and historic areas;
   D.   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to have buyers,
visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce, industry, and
providing economic benefit to the city;
   E.   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of structures,
areas, and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight. (Ord.
2968, 6-19-2000)
2-12-2: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS:
   A.   The Taylorville historic preservation commission shall consist of seven
(7) voting members, residents of the city of Taylorville, appointed by the
mayor and approved by the city council. One of the members shall be a member of
the Main Street design committee. The remaining members shall be appointed on
the basis of expertise, experience or interest in the area of architectural
history, building construction or engineering, finance historical and
architectural preservation, neighborhood organizing or real estate.
   B.   Members of the commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3)
years. Of those members first taking office, two (2) shall be appointed for one
year, three (3) for two (2) years, and two (2) for three (3) years. No members
shall serve more than two (2) successive three (3) year terms. Alternate
members shall be appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of
the regular members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2968, 6-19-2000)
2-12-3: OFFICERS:
Officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and a secretary elected by
the preservation commission who shall serve a term of one year and shall be
eligible for reelection, but no members shall serve as an officer for more than
two (2) consecutive years. The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall perform the duties of the
chairman. If both are absent, a temporary chairman shall be elected by those
present. The secretary to the preservation commission shall have the following
duties:
   A.   Take minutes of each preservation commission meeting;
   B.   Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports, and decisions of the preservation commission to the members
of the preservation commission;
   C.   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings
conducted by the preservation commission;
   D.   Advise the mayor of vacancies on the preservation commission and
expiring terms of members; and
   E.   Prepare and submit to the city council a complete record of the
proceedings before the preservation commission on any matter requiring council
consideration. (Ord. 2968, 6-19-2000)
2-12-4: MEETINGS:
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or actions
of the historic preservation commission shall be made by a majority vote of
those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists. Meetings
shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of
the commission at the beginning of each calendar year or any time upon the call
of the chairman. There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year.
All meetings of the preservation commission shall be open to the public. The
preservation commission keeps minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
preservation commission and shall be a public record. (Ord. 2968, 6-19-2000)
2-12-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   To adopt its own procedural regulations.
   B.   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and areas.
   C.   To investigate and recommend to the city council to adopt procedures to
protect properties or structures having special historic, community, or
architectural value.
   D.   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of properties or
structures which have special historic, community, or architectural value.
   E.   To advise property owners on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on the state or national register of historic places.
   F.   To inform and educate the citizens of Taylorville concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the city by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars.
   G.   To accept and administer on behalf of the city of Taylorville, upon
designation by the city council, such gifts, grants and money as may be
appropriate for the purpose of this chapter.
   H.   To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for
technical advice.
   I.   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the city plan
commission and the zoning board of appeals, on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant properties.
   J.   To periodically review the Taylorville zoning ordinance and to
recommend to the city plan commission and the city council any amendments
appropriate for the protection and continued use of historically or
architecturally significant properties. (Ord. 2968, 6-19-2000)
2-12-6: SURVEYS AND RESEARCH:
The historic preservation commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the city of Taylorville to identify neighborhoods, areas,
sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community, architectural, or
aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the historic
preservation commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies
by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. The historic preservation commission
shall identify significant structures based upon the following criteria:
   A.   Architecturally or historically significant properties in one
identifiable neighborhood or district geographical area of the city of
Taylorville;
   B.   Association with a particular person, event, or historical period;
   C.   Representation of a particular architectural style or school, or of a
particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman;
   D.   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the preservation commission to
assure systematic survey of all significant properties within the city of
Taylorville. (Ord. 2968, 6-19-2000)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applications for Licenses
3-1-2: Persons Subject to License
3-1-3: Forms; Contents of License
3-1-4: Investigation of Applicant
3-1-5: License and Permit Fees
3-1-6: Termination of License
3-1-7: License to be Posted
3-1-8: Building and Premises
3-1-9: Change of Location
3-1-10: Unwholesome, Nuisance Businesses Prohibited
3-1-11: Inspections and Analyses
3-1-12: Revocation of License or Permit; Hearing
3-1-13: Appeals
3-1-14: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-1-5 of this Code, business regulations at Lake Taylorville.
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made,
in writing, to the City Clerk in the absence of provisions to the contrary.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid, and each application shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of the City officials in the issuing of the
permit or license applied for. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §1)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever, in this Code or as provided in chapter 1211/2 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes for businesses going out of business, 1  a license is required for the
maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment or for doing
business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject
to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he
holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the City. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I,
§2)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. ch. 121/2, ¶157.2.
3-1-3: FORMS; CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be prepared
and kept on file by the City Clerk. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §3)
Each license issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk
in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §4)
3-1-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the
City necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof.
The Health and Building Officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in
regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling of food and
the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of
health and shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structure. All other investigations except
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other
officer designated by the Mayor. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §5)
3-1-5: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
   A.   In the absence of provision to the contrary in the Taylorville City
Code, all fees and charges for licenses and permits shall be paid in advance at
the time application therefor is made to the City Clerk.
   B.   When an applicant is not engaged in the business until the expiration
of part of the applicable current license year, and except as otherwise
provided in Section
3-3-7 of the Taylorville City Code, the license fee shall be pro-rated for the
unused portion of the license.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of
the City’s Corporate Fund. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, § 6; amd. Ord. 4165, 4-3-
2023)
3-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on April 30, where no provision to the
contrary is made.
The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the City, a statement of the time
of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license, three
(3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration; provided, that a failure to
receive it shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license
or a renewal thereof nor shall it be a defense in an action from operation
without a license. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §7)
3-1-7: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §13)
3-1-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for anything or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the City. No such license
or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any
act which would involve a violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City. 1
(1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §8)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
3-1-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may
be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the City Clerk,
in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the building, 1
zoning,1 and frontage consent requirements of the ordinances are complied with.
(1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I, §9)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 9 of this Code.
3-1-10: UNWHOLESOME, NUISANCE BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Unwholesome Businesses: It shall be unlawful to establish any packing
plant, slaughterhouse, rendery, tallow warehouse, soap factory, glue factory,
tannery or any offensive or unwholesome business within the City or within one
mile of the limits thereof. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, §16)
   B.   Nuisance Businesses: No business, licensed or not, shall be so
conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1979 Code Ch. 11,
Art. I, §10)
3-1-11: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee
or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit thereto for
the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the City who is
authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that
admission is requested.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the municipality
whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer
or employee of the City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material
or commodity for such analysis upon request.
   C.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the
City who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to
make such inspection or to take such sample to make the inspection or take an
adequate sample of the commodity or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection;
provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand
is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of
the City, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is
sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1979 Code Ch. 11, Art. I,
§11)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
   A.   Revocation of License or Permit: Licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the City, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor
after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this Section for
any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit
or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village.
      5.   Refusing to provide convenient access or samples of such data or
other information as may be reasonably requested by the City in evaluating any
application or renewal of any permit or license.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of
any other penalties for the violation of other applicable ordinances of the
Village.
   B.   Notice of Hearing: Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee or permittee at his
last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
   C.   Hearing: The licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Mayor shall
preside and shall render the decision. (1993 Code)
3-1-13: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor in regard to the denial of an
application for a business license, as provided in Section
3-1-1 of this Chapter, or in connection with the revocation of, or refusal to
renew, a license or permit as provided in Section
3-1-12 of this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within ten (10) days after
notice of denial of an application or a revocation of, or refusal to renew, a
license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically
the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall thereupon set the time and place
for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in Section
 3-1-12 of this Chapter. The decision of the City Council on such appeal shall
be final. (1993 Code)
3-1-14: PENALTY:
   A.   Generally: Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or any
business, occupation, activity or use that is continued without a license or
permit having been secured therefor as provided in this Chapter or elsewhere in
the Taylorville City Code shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of the Taylorville City Code.
   B.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Taylorville City Code:
(1) a thirty percent (30%) late fee payment penalty shall be assessed against
any person who fails to pay when due the applicable license or permit fee or
charge for each initial license or permit or for each renewal license or permit
as required in the Taylorville City Code; and (2) no license or permit shall be
issued to or renewed for any person until and unless the requisite license or
permit fee or charge plus said additional thirty percent (30%) late fee payment
penalty has been fully paid to the City.
   C.   Other Remedies: The availability or imposition of any of the foregoing
penalties shall not limit or preclude any other remedy or remedies by way of
injunction or other relief available to the City, either at law or in equity.
(1993 Code; amd. Ord. 4165, 4-3-2023)
CHAPTER 2
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Municipal Retailer's Occupation Tax
3-2-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-2-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-2-4: Municipal Utility Tax
3-2-5: Foreign Fire Insurance Company Tax
3-2-6: City Hotel/Motel Tax
3-2-7: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-2-8: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this city at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business while this section is in effect. (Ord. 1517, 8-18-1969,
eff. 10-1-1969)
In addition to the above one percent (1%) a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other
than an item of tangible personal property titled and registered with an agency
of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 0.75
percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, at the rate of 0.75 percent of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. This "nonhome rule municipal retailer's occupation tax" shall not be
applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks,
and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of this nonhome rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of
sections 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4, respectively of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
(Ord. 3441, 9-8-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
   B.   Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the city
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a
tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
to purchasers for use or consumption 2 ", approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month. (Ord. 1517, 8-18-1969, eff. 10-1-1969)
   D.   State Exclusions Not Included: The exclusion contained in section 2(d)
of the "retailers occupation tax act", approved June 28, 1933, as amended 3 ,
shall not apply to property within the city. (Ord. 1894, 12-11-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3, 5/8-11-1.4.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
3 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this
municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by
said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form
of real estate as an incident to a sale of service. (Ord. 1518, 8-18-1969, eff.
10-1-1969)
In addition to the above one percent (1%) a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other
than an item of tangible personal property titled and registered with an agency
of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 0.75
percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, at the rate of 0.75 percent of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. This "nonhome rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be
applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks,
and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of this nonhome rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of
sections 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4, respectively of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
(Ord. 3441, 9-8-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
   B.   Report Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for
municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall
file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act
2 ", approved July 10, 1961, as amended.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord.
1518, 8-18-1969, eff. 10-1-1969)
   D.   State Exclusions Not Included: The exclusion contained in section 2(e)
of the "service occupation tax act 3 ", approved July 10, 1961, as amended,
shall not apply to property within the City of Taylorville. (Ord. 1895, 12-11-
1978)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3, 5/8-11-1.4.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
3 3. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
3-2-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions
of Section 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in
the Municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased
outside Illinois, at retail, from a retailer and which is titled or registered
with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one
percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price
to have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act 1 , approved July 14, 1955.
   B.   Collection And Payment Of Tax: Such tax shall be collected by the
Illinois Department of Revenue for all municipalities imposing the tax and
shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal
property is issued. (Ord. 1702, 10-7-1974)
 
Notes
1 4. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6.
3-2-4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this Section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages or
for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling natural gas or electricity
for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be, except that
consideration received from the City, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages, without any
deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied,
the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expenses
whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this State or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person
to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of
services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration by such persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages.
   B.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:
      1.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from such
business originating within the corporate limits of Taylorville.
      2.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling natural gas for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of Taylorville, and not for resale, at the rate of three percent (3%) of
the gross receipts therefrom.
      3.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of Taylorville, and not for resale, at the rate of three percent (3%) of
the gross receipts therefrom.
      4.   
         a.   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
Municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
            (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.366 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.24 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.216 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.21 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.204 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.192 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.189 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.186 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.183 cents per kilowatt hour; and
            (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; $0.18 cents per kilowatt-hour.
The tax rates set forth in the preceding table shall be used effective January
1, 2009, and they shall remain in effect until such time as amended.
         b.   (Rep. by Ord. 3402, 10-20-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
         c.   (Rep. by Ord. 3402, 10-20-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
         d.   The tax authorized herein shall be collected from the purchaser
by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Section and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the Municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering
electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount
equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
Municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to
collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the Municipality in the manner prescribed by the
Municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this
subsection shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the Municipality the
amount of the tax collected pursuant to this Section.
   C.   Exceptions: None of the taxes authorized by this Section may be imposed
with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the
extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
Statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this State or
any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting
gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail,
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this Section for those
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act 1 " authorized by Section 8-11-
1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, nor shall any tax authorized by this Section
be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the
tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in
businesses of the same class in the Municipality, whether privately or
Municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
Municipality.
   D.   Additional Taxes: Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied
upon the taxpayer or its business; and such tax shall be in addition to the
payment of money or value of products or services furnished to this
Municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys
or other public places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of
the taxpayer's business.
   E.   Tax Return Required: On or before December 31, 1989, each taxpayer
shall make a return to the City Treasurer for the months of September, October
and November 1989, stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
Authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, commencing January 1,
1990, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer for each one
month period until September 30, 1998. Commencing October 1, 1998, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer at the time set forth
below which corresponds to such taxpayer's total annual taxes accrued and
payable to the City ("annual" shall mean and include the period commencing
January 1 and ending December 31 of each year):
 
Annual Taxes Accrued Return Due Date Each Calendar Year
$0.01 to $0.99       No return until tax liability exceeds $0.99
$1.00 to $99.99      Annually (January 30 for previous January through
                     December)
$100.00 to $299.99   Semiannual (July 30 for January through June; and January
                     30 for July through December)
                     Quarterly (April 30 for January through March; July 30 for
$300.00 to $1,199.99 April through June; October 30 for July through September;
                     January 30 for October through December)
$1,200.00 and over   Monthly (on last day of each month for previous month)
 
   F.   Payment Of Tax: The taxpayer making the return herein provided for
shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the City Treasurer the amount
of tax herein imposed.
   G.   Tax Credits: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid
which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as the result
of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from the taxpayer who
made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more
than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.
   H.   Violation Of Provisions; Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a
return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other
provision of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and in addition, shall be liable in
a civil action for the amount of tax due, plus statutory interest.
   I.   Statute Of Limitations: No action to recover any amount of tax due
under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount.
   J.   Division Of Municipal Utility Taxes: The Municipal Utility Taxes
collected shall be deposited in the City's Street Maintenance Fund and
allocated therein and expended as follows:
      1.   One-fifth (1/5) to a Common Street Maintenance Account Fund up to a
maximum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); and one-fifth (1/5) to
Ward 1; and one-fifth (1/5) to Ward 2; and one-fifth (1/5) to Ward 3; and one-
fifth (1/5) to Ward 4.
      2.   At any time the balance in the Common Street Maintenance Account
Fund is three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), then any Municipal
Utility Taxes shall be then equally divided and allocated as follows: one-
fourth (1/4) to Ward 1; and one-fourth (1/4) to Ward 2; and one-fourth (1/4) to
Ward 3; and one-fourth (1/4) to Ward 4.
      3.   All monies to be expended from the Common Street Maintenance Fund
for any proposed project from time to time must first be presented, debated and
voted on at a Street and Sewer Committee meeting. If such vote results in a
positive recommendation, then such proposed project and proposed expenditure of
funds from the Common Street Maintenance Fund shall be presented to the City
Council for consideration and vote; provided, however, no expenditure of funds
from the Common Street Maintenance Fund may be approved unless it is for
emergency purposes and such approval received a minimum of six (6) affirmative
votes from the aldermen then in office declaring and identifying such
emergency. (Ord. 2345, 8-21-1989; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 2872, 9-8-1998; Ord.
2909, 4-19-1999; Ord. 3402, 10-20-2008, eff. 1-1-2009; Ord. 3858, 8-20-2018;
Ord. 4065, 9-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-2-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY TAX:
   A.   Tax Due City On Fire Policies: All corporations, companies and
associations not incorporated under the laws of the State, and which are
engaged in the City in effecting or soliciting fire insurance shall pay to the
City Treasurer annually, on or before July 15, a sum equal to two percent (2%)
of the gross receipts of premiums received by such corporation, company or
association or their agency or agents, for business effected or transacted for
fire insurance within the City for the year ending July 1, preceding said
dates. The sum above named shall be as a tax or license fee upon all such
corporations, companies or associations transacting said business within the
City pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 et seq.
   B.   Statement Of Premiums Collected: Every person acting as agent or
otherwise, for or upon behalf of any such corporation, company or association
shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the city clerk a full, true
and just account, verified under oath, of all the premiums which, during the
year ending on July 1 of each and every year, shall have been received by him,
or any other person for him, in behalf of any such corporation, company or
association and shall have fully and specifically set out in said report, the
amount or amounts received as premiums for fire insurance.
   C.   Tax Due With Report: The agent or agents shall also at the time of the
making of the above mentioned report, pay to the city treasurer the sum of two
percent (2%) upon the gross receipts of such corporation, company or
association, obtained as premiums for effecting fire insurance in the city, as
is specified in subsection A of this section.
   D.   Examination Of Books And Records: The city clerk or the secretary of
the fire department may examine the books, records and other papers and
documents of a designated agent, corporation, company or association for the
purpose of verifying the correctness of the report of the amounts received for
fire insurance.
   E.   City Fire Department's Duties: The fire department of the city shall
annually, on the third Monday of May, or as soon thereafter as practicable,
organize by the election of such officers, by said department, as they may deem
necessary, including a clerk and a treasurer, and they may make such rules and
regulations, not in conflict with this section, in respect of the election of
such officers and the management of the funds arising from the tax or license
aforesaid as may be needful. They shall file a copy of such rules and
regulations, and any amendment thereof, in the office of the city clerk. The
city treasurer shall pay to the treasurer of the fire department all sums of
money received by him from insurance companies for the tax or license
aforesaid. The treasurer of the fire department shall execute a bond to the
city in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with security to be
approved by the city council, conditioned for the faithful performance of his
duties under this section and under the rules and regulations made by the fire
department in pursuance thereof. He shall receive the monies collected as
aforesaid and shall pay out the same upon the order of the fire department for
the purpose of the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department and
shall semiannually, on May 1 and November 1 of each year, and more often upon
request by the council, file with the city clerk his report in writing showing
all items or receipts and expenditures and stating the purpose of all
disbursements on account of such fund. The treasurer of the fire department
shall give written notice to the city council on any single expenditure in
excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   F.   Penalty: If such account be not rendered on or before the day herein
designated for that purpose, or if the above mentioned rates for the said tax
or license fee shall remain unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any
such corporation, company or association, to transact any business of fire
insurance in the city until the requirements hereof have been fully complied
with; nevertheless, this provision shall in no way affect the validity of any
risk that may be taken in violation hereof, between such corporation, company
or association and the person so insured.
If any such corporation, company or association fails to render the account or
report herein designated by the day required by this section, or if the above
mentioned rates, as a tax or license fee, shall remain unpaid after the date
designated, July 15, every such corporation, company or association shall
forfeit and pay to the city the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon
conviction, for each and every offense, and in addition to such penalty, the
city shall recover, in an action in its name, for its use against such
corporation, company or association so failing to make such report, or pay such
license fee or tax to the full amount of the said license fee, which would be
due under the provisions hereof. (1993 Code)
3-2-6: CITY HOTEL/MOTEL TAX:
   A.   Definitions: Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
      FACILITATOR: Any person or entity who provides a means through which a
person may book a hotel room and/or transient occupancy rental unit to lessees,
regardless of whether payment is transferred through or processed by such
facilitator. Facilitators are considered lessors, as used herein.
      GROSS RENT: The total amount of consideration for occupancy, valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash,
credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, including but not
limited to, amounts charged for the making, booking, facilitating or servicing
of reservations. Gross rent means both (a) the "net rate" paid to the hotel or
motel by a facilitator for room occupancy by the consumer; and (b) the amount
retained by the facilitator for travel-related services provided to the
consumer (sometimes referred to as a "facilitation fee"), and any additional
amounts retained by the facilitator as compensation for its services to the
consumer for the individual transaction, or, in the instance of a consumer's
direct rental of a room with the hotel or motel, gross rent shall mean the
amount charged by the hotel or motel directly to the consumer for the occupancy
of the room.
      HOTEL: A structure kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out
to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment, home, lodging house,
dormitory or place where sleeping, rooming, office, conference or exhibition
accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals.
For avoidance of doubt, transient occupancy rental units are hotels under this
definition.
      LESSEE: Any person who pays for the privilege of occupying all or part of
a hotel.
      LESSOR: Any person having a sufficient proprietary interest in conducting
the operation of a hotel, or receiving the consideration for the rental of all
or part of such hotel, so as to entitle such person to all or a portion of the
net receipts thereof, including facilitators, as defined herein.
      ONLINE TRAVEL COMPANY: An organization that books, reserves, or rents
hotel or motel rooms and makes other travel arrangements for consumers via the
World Wide Web, internet or other digital means. Online travel companies are
considered facilitators, as used herein.
      PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who has occupied or has the right to
occupy all or part of a hotel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
      PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-
partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting
as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise,
whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part-
owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the offices thereof, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
      TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY RENTAL UNIT: A dwelling unit or a habitable unit that
is offered, in whole or in part, for rent, lease or hire that is rented, leased
or hired for which a lessor receives consideration from a person for a period
of thirty (30) days or less and that person has the right to use, occupy or
possess all or part of the dwelling unit or habitable unit for said period.
   B.   Hotel Use Tax Imposed:
      1.   There is levied and imposed a tax of five (5) percent of the gross
rent charged
for the privilege and use of renting a hotel room within the City of
Taylorville for each twenty-four (24) hour period or any portion thereof for
which a room charge is made.
      2.   Accommodations within said buildings or structures which are leased
to the same occupant for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days
shall be exempt from the tax provisions of this Article.
      3.   Lessors renting or leasing hotel rooms within the City are required
to collect the Hotel Use Tax; however, the ultimate incidence of any liability
for payment of the tax is to be borne by the lessee.
      4.   The Hotel Use Tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges.
      5.   It shall be the duty of every lessor of every hotel within the City
to separately state such tax at the five (5) percent rate upon the total amount
of compensation charged for the use of the hotel. The lessor shall also state
separately the amount of tax on the invoice for the transaction that will be
tendered to the lessee.
      6.   It shall be the duty of every lessor of every hotel within the City
to collect the tax from the lessee at the time the lessee pays for the
privilege of occupying all or part of a hotel transient occupancy rental unit,
and to remit to the City the tax under procedures provided for in this chapter
or otherwise prescribed by the City. If more than one person is the lessor as
related to a particular transaction, the lessors are jointly and severally
responsible for collecting and remitting the tax.
      7.   It shall not be a defense to this ordinance that the lessor is not
licensed by the City to rent hotels and the lessor will still be required to
remit the proper tax to the City.
      8.   All funds collected by the City under this tax shall be expended
solely to promote tourism and conventions within the City or otherwise to
attract nonresident overnight visitors to the municipality. No funds received
under this tax shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new
competition in the hotel business within the City.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The Tax Administrator may promulgate rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter concerning
enforcement and application of this chapter. The phrase "rules and regulations"
includes, but is not limited to, case-by-case determination of whether or not
the tax imposed by this chapter applies.
   D.   Transmittal Of Tax Revenue:
      1.   The lessor of each hotel within the City shall file returns and
remit collected taxes, to the City Clerk's Office showing tax receipts received
with respect to each hotel during each monthly period commencing on (date), and
continuing on the first day of every month thereafter on forms prescribed by
the City. The return shall be due on or before the last day of the calendar
month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period. Each lessor shall file
an application with the City Clerk for a City Taxpayer Identification Number
prior to filing its first tax return.
      2.   The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall
commence on [August 1, 2020]; and the tax return and payment for such period
shall be due on or before [the last day of the calendar month succeeding the
end of the monthly filing period like in the draft]. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. At the time of filing such tax returns, the owner shall pay to the Tax
Administrator all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   E.   Other Actions Authorized: The officers, employees and/or agents of the
City of Taylorville shall take all action necessary or reasonably required to
carry out, give effect to and consummate the amendments contemplated by this
ordinance and shall take all action necessary in conformity therewith. The
officers, employees and/or agents of the City are specifically authorized and
directed to draft and disseminate any and all necessary forms to be utilized in
connection with these amendments. Any and all actions previously performed by
officials, employees and/or agents of the City in connection with carrying out
and consummating the intent of this ordinance are hereby authorized, approved
and ratified by this reference.
   F.   Tax Return; Payment Of Tax: Except as provided hereinafter in this
subsection, on or before the thirtieth day of each calendar month, every person
engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in this
city during the preceding calendar month shall file a return with the city
clerk of the city of Taylorville stating:
      1.   The name of the operator;
      2.   His residence address and the address of his principal place of
business and the address of the principal place of business (if that is a
different address) from which he engages in the business of renting, leasing,
or letting rooms in a hotel in this city along with his phone number;
      3.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms during such preceding
calendar month;
      4.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent residents
during such preceding calendar month;
      5.   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts allowed
by this section;
      6.   Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the
preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      7.   The amount of tax due;
      8.   The amount of penalty due, if any;
      9.   Such other reasonable information as the city may require.
An operator, in lieu of the return described above, may submit to the city a
copy of its Illinois department of revenue hotel operators' occupation tax
return as and for the return required above. (Ord. 3395, 8-4-2008)
Notwithstanding any other provision in this section concerning the time within
which an operator may file his return, in the case of any operator who ceases
to engage in a kind of business which makes him responsible for filing returns
under this section, such operator shall file a final return under this section
with the city clerk not more than one month after discontinuing such business.
Where the same person has more than one hotel located within the city, such
person shall file separate returns for each such hotel.
In his return, the operator shall determine the value of any consideration
other than money received by him in connection with the renting, leasing or
letting of rooms in the course of his business and he shall include such value
in his return. Such determination shall be subject to review and revision by
the city in the manner hereinafter provided for the correction of returns.
The person filing the return herein provided for shall, at the time of filing
such return, pay to the city clerk the amount of tax herein imposed. All monies
received by the city clerk for taxes herein imposed shall be promptly deposited
in a separate account designated as "Taylorville hotel operator's occupation
tax fund".
The city may, upon separate written notice to a taxpayer, require the taxpayer
to prepare and file with the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city,
within not less than sixty (60) days after receipt of the notice, an annual
information return for the tax year specified in the notice. Such annual return
to the city shall include a statement of gross receipts as shown by the
operator's last state income tax return. If the total receipts of the business
as reported in the state income tax return do not agree with the gross receipts
reported to the city for the same period, the operator shall attach to his
annual information return a schedule showing a reconciliation of the two (2)
amounts and the reasons for the difference. The operator's annual information
return to the city shall also include any additional reasonable information
which the city deems would be helpful in determining the accuracy of the
monthly, quarterly or annual tax returns by such operator as provided for in
this subsection.
If the annual information return required by this subsection is not filed when
and as required, the taxpayer shall be liable for a penalty equal to one
percent (1%) of the tax due from such taxpayer under this section during the
period to be covered by the annual return for each month or fraction of a month
until such return is filed as required with the penalty to be assessed and
collected in the same manner as any other penalty provided for in this section.
If the monthly tax return and payment of tax is not filed and paid when due,
the taxpayer shall be liable for a penalty equal to one and one-half percent
(11/2%) per month or a fraction thereof of the delinquent tax then due from the
taxpayer until such return is filed and tax paid with the penalty to be
assessed and collected in the same manner as any other penalty provided for in
this section.
The chief executive officer, proprietor, owner or highest ranking manager shall
sign the annual return to certify the accuracy of the information contained
therein. Any person who wilfully signs the annual return containing false or
inaccurate information shall be guilty of perjury and punished accordingly. The
annual return form prescribed by the city shall include a warning that the
person signing the return may be liable for perjury.
The foregoing portion of this subsection concerning the filing of an annual
information return shall not apply to an operator who is not required to file
an income tax return with the United States government.
   G.   Enforcement: The corporate authorities of the city shall have all
powers necessary to enforce the collection of the tax imposed and collected by
the city pursuant to this section including, but not limited to, subpoena power
and the power to create and enforce liens. No such lien shall affect the rights
of bona fide purchasers, mortgagees, judgment creditors or other lien holders
who acquire their interests in such property prior to the time a notice of such
lien is placed on record in the office of the recorder of deeds of Christian
County. Any such lien placed of record shall only act as a lien upon property
located within the corporate boundaries of the city. In creating a lien
pursuant to this subsection, the procedures for its notice and enforcement
shall be the same as those provided for in the retailers' occupation tax act,
as now or hereafter amended, for state tax liens, and the recorder of deeds
with whom a notice of such lien is filed shall treat such lien as a state tax
lien for recording purposes.
   H.   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   I.   Inspection Of Books And Records: The city clerk, or any person
otherwise designated by the city, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel
for inspection and examination of books and records in order to effectuate the
property administration of this section and to assure the enforcement of the
collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder or interfere with the city clerk or any other duly authorized agent of
the city in the discharge of his or her duties in the performance of this
section. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the city clerk or other authorized city official
shall at all times have access, which books and records shall be as described
and set forth in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 3379, 4-21-2008); amd.
Ord. 3969, 6-15-2020)
3-2-7: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business. Such three percent (3%) tax collected shall be earmarked for the Lake
Restoration.
      2.   All funds received from the State of Illinois in reference to
Cannabis shall also be earmarked for the Lake Restoration.
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue ("Department"). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 3908, 8-19-2019; amd. Ord. 4254, 8-5-2024)
3-2-8: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   B.   The City of Taylorville, Illinois is a non-home rule Illinois
municipality pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as
amended;
   C.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   D.   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   E.   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   F.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries" as "an
incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax")
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   G.   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   H.   The City Council believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City and its residents, that the City levy a Municipal
Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   I.   The City Council believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City and its residents, that the City levy a Municipal
Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   J.   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in
effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   K.   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in Division A., above. The imposition of this tax is
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   L.   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   M.   City Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
Ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue before October 1, 2025
through MylocalTax or via USPS, FedEx or UPS.
   N.   Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on
the later of:
      1.   January 1, 2026;
      2.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
      3.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of
this chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the
preceding October 1.
(Ord. 4308, 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR CONTROL 1
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License And Compliance Required
3-3-2-1: Posting Of Warning To Minors
3-3-3: Application For License
3-3-4: Restrictions On Holding, Issuance, Or Renewal Of License
3-3-5: Classification Of Licenses; Fees
3-3-5-1: Video Gaming Signage Prohibited On City Property
3-3-6: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
3-3-7: Term Of License; Prorating Fee
3-3-7-1: No Refunds Of License Fee
3-3-8: Transfer Of License/Sale Of Business
3-3-9: Renewal Of License
3-3-10: Closing Hours
3-3-11: Location
3-3-12: Sanitary Conditions
3-3-13: Conditions Of License
3-3-14: Minors
3-3-15: Annexation Of Establishments Selling Liquor
3-3-16: List Of Licenses
3-3-17: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-3-18: Closure Of Licensed Premises For Repeated Fighting Disturbances
3-3-19: Penalty
3-3-20: Appeals
3-3-21: Number of Liquor Licenses
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  5-4-5, "Offenses Involving Liquor", of this Code.
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this
Chapter, shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more
than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.
BOWLING ALLEY: A business establishment open to the general public on the
premises for the game of bowling (i.e., rolling a large, heavy ball down long
narrow smooth wooden floor lanes or alleys toward a set of pins to knock them
down) and such premises has at least six (6) such bowling lanes or alleys, and
where alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises.
BREWPUB: A person who manufactures microbeer only at a designated premises to
make sales to importing distributors, distributors, and to nonlicensees for use
and consumption only, who only stores microbeer at the designated premises, and
who is allowed to sell only microbeer at retail from the licensed premises,
provided that a brewpub licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption
more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per year.
CLUB:
   A.   A not for pecuniary profit corporation authorized to transact business
in the State of Illinois and in good standing, organized and operated solely
for the promotion of some common object other than the sale and consumption of
alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment
of annual dues and owning or hiring or leasing a building or space in a
building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate kitchen
and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and guests; provided, that such club files with the Mayor at the
time of its yearly application for a license under this chapter a list of names
and residences of its officers and directors, and that no member or any officer
of the club shall be paid or directly receive a salary or other compensation
for the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or its members or
its guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any
annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing
body out of the general revenue of the club.
   B.   A corporation authorized to transact business in the State of Illinois
and in good standing, organized and operated according to its charter primarily
as a body fitness, development and physical improvement facility exclusively
for the benefit of its members and authorized guests and maintained principally
from membership dues and fees. Such club shall submit a current list of its
directors and officers and residential addresses thereof to the Mayor in
conjunction with annual application for renewal of its liquor license.
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold on the premises at any time while a
daycare center is in operation.
   C.   Club shall not include any municipal corporation, township, public park
district, or any other governmental entity.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited
partnership, association, organization, or any other group acting as a unit, as
well as a natural person.
GROCERY STORE: A public place whose primary business is the retail sale of
food, either fresh, prepackaged, frozen, or preserved, and household non-food
goods, supplies or items, healthcare and personal care products; and includes
the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or liquor for consumption on the
premises. It does not include a "convenience store" as defined in this Chapter,
but it can include a "supermarket" which is commonly considered a larger
version of a grocery store.
RESTAURANT:
   A.   Any public place whose primary business is kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a place where food and meals
(including nonalcoholic and/or alcoholic beverages) are regularly and actually
cooked, prepared, and served for consumption on and off the premises of such
public place, such public space being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food and meals for the general public for consumption on the premises or for
carry out of food and meals that are prepared and cooked on the premises for
consumption off the premises. A restaurant shall not include a retail grocery
store or supermarket that primarily sells groceries, food and nonfood products,
and may or may not include the preparation or cooking of hot or cold food,
deli, bakery, meat, poultry or fish items; and an restaurant shall not include
a convenience or general store that is primarily a retail business that stocks
and sells a range of everyday items such as groceries, snack foods,
confectionery, cold or hot food, sandwiches, pizza, soft drinks, alcohol for
consumption off the premises, tobacco products, sundries, and motor vehicle
gasoline and/or diesel fuel.
   B.   Shall also mean any public place whose primary business is a pharmacy
operated by an Illinois licensed pharmacist or Illinois licensed pharmacists
for the preparation, dispensing, and retail sale of prescription and over the
counter pharmaceutical drugs or medication and medical supplies and sundries,
and which includes an ancillary on site restaurant business that is kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where food and
meals (including nonalcoholic and/or alcoholic beverages) are regularly and
actually cooked, prepared, and served for consumption on or off the premises of
such public place, such public space being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food and meals for the general public for consumption on the premises or for
carry out of food and meals that are prepared and cooked on the premises for
consumption off the premise; and includes the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages or liquor for consumption on the premises.
RECEPTION HALL: Any building regularly kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the general public by the owners thereof as a place inside of which
building is available for rent, for a period of less than twenty four (24)
hours for any one occasion, by the general public to have wedding receptions,
birthday receptions, anniversary receptions, reunion receptions, fundraiser
events, parties, or other similar special events or celebrations; and includes
the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or liquor for consumption on the
premises.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A business establishment, other than a bowling alley, whose
primary business is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or liquor for
consumption on and off the premises. (1979 Code §13-1; amd. Ord. 2152, 10-22-
1984; Ord. 2806, 10-6-1997; Ord. 2812, 10-20-1997; Ord. 3710, 4-20-2015; Ord.
3713, 5-18-2015; Ord. 3743, 3-21-2016; Ord. 3753, 6-6-2016; Ord. 3760, 7-5-
2016; Ord. 3783, 11-21-2016; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City any
alcoholic liquor without having a proper retail liquor dealer's license or to
sell in violation of the terms of any such liquor license. (1979 Code §13-2;
amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-2-1: POSTING OF WARNING TO MINORS:
Every licensee hereunder shall cause the following warning message to be posted
and maintained during the entire term of the license issued hereunder in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises at or adjacent to each cash
register:
   WARNING TO MINORS
A MINOR WHO PURCHASES OR ATTEMPTS TO PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, OR WHO
POSSESSES ANY FALSE EVIDENCE OF AGE, MAY BE GUILTY OF A CLASS "A" MISDEMEANOR
AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL PENALTIES, INCLUDING A FINE UP TO TWO THOUSAND
FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($2,500.00).
The City Clerk shall furnish the licensee posters for displaying such warning
message. (Ord. 3223, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Applications for a liquor license shall be made to the Mayor, in
writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized
agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and
said application shall be in such forms on file in the City and incorporated
herein by reference or in such other form(s) and contain such information as
the Mayor shall hereafter determine from time to time.
   B.   1.   All original license applications and renewals for a liquor
license shall be accompanied with proof of completion within the last three (3)
years of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and
training (BASSET) program or other state of Illinois liquor control commission
(ILCC) approved program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages,
all management personnel working on premises, and anyone whose job description
entails the checking of identification for the purchases of alcoholic
beverages, pursuant to that license.
         a.   All original license applications and renewals for a liquor
license by any governmental, not for profit, service club, or religious
organizations who utilize unpaid volunteers for the activities described in the
preceding paragraph are subject to the following rules:
         Unpaid volunteers are not required to have completed a state certified
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program or
other state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) approved program as
long as their activities at all times are within the presence of another person
who has completed BASSET or other approved seller and server training.
         Compliance is required with all other provisions of this subsection
B1a and, further, the production requirement in subsection B4a of this section
shall be construed to require any governmental, not for profit, service club,
or religious organization to maintain on the premises or at the function in
question a photocopy of all certificates of completion of BASSET or other
approved seller and server training, including certificates of those
individuals under which unpaid volunteers are claimed to be lawfully acting.
      2.   Any new owner, new manager, new employee, or new agent required by
this section to complete alcohol seller and server training, shall within
ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with that licensee,
provide proof of completion within the last three (3) years of a State of
Illinois liquor control commission approved seller and server training program
and shall, until completion of the seller and server training program, work
under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET or other approved
seller and server training.
      3.   A "state certified BASSET training program" is defined as a BASSET
program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) as
required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1) and 6-27 and Title 77
of Illinois Administrative Code, Chapter XVI, Section 3500. Training programs
may be in the classroom or online as provided by law or administrative
regulations. All licensed BASSET providers and trainers shall be required to
produce upon request of state or local liquor control authorities all licenses
and certificates to prove current qualifications. BASSET providers and trainers
shall provide a certificate of course completion to participants as proof of
completion.
      4.   A photocopy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET or other approved
seller and server training shall:
         a.   Be maintained, by the establishment, in a manner that will allow
inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor
control authorities.
         b.   Be attached to original license applications and renewals for a
liquor license.
      5.   The City of Taylorville and establishments must honor all state of
Illinois liquor control commission BASSET and other approved seller and server
training programs and the statutes and administrative rules that apply. (Ord.
3529, 8-15-2011; amd. Ord. 3650, 11-4-2013; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-4: RESTRICTIONS ON HOLDING, ISSUANCE, OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
No City liquor license shall be held by or issued or renewed to or for the
following persons or entities or under the following circumstances:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the City.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of pandering.
   F.   A person whose license under this Chapter has been revoked for cause.
   G.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   H.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the City; provided,
however, that the partnership shall designate in its application one person as
its general manager for all purposes of compliance and enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter, and that such person shall be a resident of
Christian County, Illinois.
   I.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any officer, manager or
director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate
more than 5% of the stock or membership of such corporation or limited
liability company, would not be eligible to receive a a license hereunder for
any reason other than residence within the City; provided, however, that the
corporation or limited liability company shall designate in its application one
person as its general manager for all purposes of compliance and enforcement of
the provisions of this Chapter, and that such person shall be a resident of
Christian County, Illinois.
   J.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or
organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983
or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois. The City
shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this Act proof
prepared from the Secretary of State’s website that the corporation or limited
liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the
   Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to
transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee and is a resident of Christian County, Illinois.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or who
has forfeited his bond to appear in court in answer to charges for any such
violation.
   M.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, including any mayor or alderperson,
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor except
as may be permitted under 235 ILCS 5/6-2 (a)(14).
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   P.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a) (11) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by Section 28.1.1 or 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of
2012, or as proscribed by a statue replaced be any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions.
   Q.   A person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other entity or form of
business enterprise not eligible for a State of Illinois retail liquor dealer’s
license.
   R.   To a person or entity who intends to sell or deliver alcoholic liquors
for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have
liquor liability insurance coverage in force for that premises for the entire
term of the requested liquor license in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of 735 ILCS 5/6-21 or any
amendments thereto.
   S.   To a person or entity for any store or other place of business where
the majority of the customers are minors or where the main business is selling
schoolbooks, school supplies, food or drink to said minors. (Ord. 3710, 4-20-
2015; amd. Ord. 3713, 5-18-2015; Ord. 3783, 11-21-2016; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020;
Ord. 4113, 6-20-2022)
3-3-5: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the City shall
pay a license fee to the City according to the application classification as
stated herein. As used herein, the term "annually" or "annual" shall be the
period of time commencing May 1 of each year until April 30 of the immediately
succeeding year.
CLASS A LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
taverns or lounges to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on and
off the premises. The fee for such license shall be nine hundred fifty dollars
($950.00) annually. Notwithstanding the above, no Class A liquor license shall
be issued for any premises associated with or primarily used as a sports
facility, recreational facility, or public park. A Class A license does not
allow for or permit video gaming. The application form for a Class A license
and the issued permit for a Class A license shall each state thereon as
follows:
   A CLASS A LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS A-1 LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
taverns or lounges to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on and
off the premises where the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the placement
and operation of video gaming terminals. The fee for such license shall be
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) annually. Notwithstanding the above, no
Class A-1 liquor license shall be issued for any premises associated with or
primarily used as a sports facility, recreational facility, or public park.
   A CLASS A-1 LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS B LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
grocery stores and convenience stores (as defined herein for a Class B license)
to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off the premises where sold.
The fee for such license shall be nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00)
annually.
The application form for a Class B license and the issued permit for a Class B
license shall each state thereon as follows:
   A CLASS B LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS C LICENSES: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
restaurants (only as defined in Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter) to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises. Licensees shall not permit signs advertising alcoholic liquor on
or about the outside of any building or other structure on the premises. The
fee for such license shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00) annually. A Class
C license does not allow for or permit video gaming. The application form for a
Class C license and the issued permit for a Class C license shall each state
thereon as follows:
   A CLASS C LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS C-1 LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
restaurants (only as defined in Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter) to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
and allows for the placement and operation of video gaming terminals authorized
by the Illinois Gaming Board. Licensees shall not permit signs advertising
alcoholic liquor on or about the outside of any building or other structure on
the premises. The fee for such license shall be three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) annually.
   A CLASS C-1 LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS D LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
clubs, as defined in Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter, to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on
the premises where sold. The fee for such license shall be seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) annually. A Class D license does not allow for or permit
video gaming. The application form for a Class D license and the issued permit
for a Class D license shall each state thereon as follows:
   A CLASS D LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS D-1 LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
clubs, as defined in Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter, to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on
the premises where sold and allows for the placement and operation of video
gaming terminals authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board. The fee for such
license shall be nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) annually.
   A CLASS D-1 LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS E LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
the retail sale of beer and/or wine only for special events for consumption on
the premises. The license shall be issued for periods not to exceed seventy-two
(72) hours as specifically set forth in the permit issued. This license shall
only be issued to duly certified educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious organizations or not for profit organizations; provided, however, the
licensee shall furnish satisfactory proof of purchase of dramshop insurance and
public liability and property damage insurance to provide for indemnification
due to death, personal injuries, property damages and loss of means of support,
as appropriate, in amounts not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) with respect to one individual and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) with respect to one occurrence. Licensees shall not advertise the
sale of said beverages from signs visible to the general public from outside
the premises. The fee for such license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day
or part thereof.
   A CLASS E LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS F LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
public golf courses (excluding what is commonly known as miniature golf
courses) to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises.
The fee for such license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   A CLASS F LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS G LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
reception halls and banquet halls to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for
consumption on the premises. The fee for such license shall be eight hundred
fifty dollars ($850.00) annually.
   A CLASS G LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS H LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
package liquor retail stores, including, but not limited to, wine and cheese
specialty shops, whose primary business is to sell alcoholic liquor for
consumption off the premises. The fee for such license shall be nine hundred
fifty dollars ($950.00) annually. Notwithstanding the above, no Class H liquor
license shall be issued for any premises associated with or primarily used as a
sports facility, recreational facility, or public park.
   A CLASS H LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS I LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
brewpubs to sell only microbeer at retail for consumption on and off the
premises where at least thirty percent (30%) of the total gross revenue at the
premises are the retail sales of microbeer. The fee for such license shall be
nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) annually. Notwithstanding the above, no
Class I liquor license shall be issued for any premises associated with or
primarily used as a sports facility, recreational facility, or public park. A
Class I license does not allow for or permit video gaming. The application form
for a Class I license and the issued permit for a Class I license shall each
state thereon as follows:
   A CLASS I LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS I-1 LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
brewpubs to sell only microbeer at retail for consumption on and off the
premises where the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the placement and
operation of video gaming terminals. The fee for such license shall be three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) annually. Notwithstanding the above, no Class I-
1 liquor license shall be issued for any premises associated with or primarily
used as a sports facility, recreational facility, or public park.
   A CLASS I-1 LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS J LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
bowling alleys to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the
premises. The fee for such license shall be nine hundred fifty dollars
($950.00) annually. A Class J license does not allow for or permit video
gaming. The application form for a Class J license and the issued permit for a
Class J license shall each state thereon the following:
   A CLASS J LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS J-1 LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
bowling alleys to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the
premises and where the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the placement and
operation of video gaming terminals. The fee for such license shall be three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) annually.
   A CLASS J-1 LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS K "CATERER RETAILER" LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this
classification shall permit the holder to serve alcoholic liquors for
consumption, either on or off site whether the location is licensed or
unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service that serves prepared meals
(which excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal) and where the
alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract. The
fee for such license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually. A
Class K "caterer retailer" license does not allow for or permit video gaming.
The application form for a Class K "caterer retailer" license and the issued
Class K "caterer retailer" license shall each state thereon the following:
   A CLASS K "CATERER RETAILER" LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO
GAMING.
CLASS L "SPECIAL USE PERMIT" LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this
classification shall permit a City liquor license holder to additionally apply
for such Class L "special use permit" license to allow such existing licensed
retailer to transfer a portion of its alcoholic beverages from its existing
licensed retail premises to a designated site for a specific event for sale at
retail for use or consumption only at the location and on the specific dates
designated in such Class L "special use permit" license (i.e., 1 day or less; 2
or more days to a maximum of 15 days per location in any 12 month period). The
fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per use. A Class L
"special use permit" license does not allow for or permit video gaming. The
application form for a Class L "special use permit" license and the issued
Class L "special use permit" license shall each state thereon the following:
   A CLASS L "SPECIAL USE PERMIT" LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW FOR OR PERMIT VIDEO
GAMING.
CLASS M LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit
grocery stores or convenience stores (as hereinafter defined) to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail for consumption on the licensed premises but only in a
separate enclosed room where video gaming terminals are located and the plans,
dimensions, specifications, and location of such enclosed room have been
approved by the City Council, and the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the
placement and operation of such video gaming terminals only in such enclosed
room location. The fee for such license shall be three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) annually. The licensee must provide a separate address (e.g.,
"Suite A") for the Class M licensed premises that is registered with the United
States Post Office located in the City.
   A CLASS M LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR AND PERMITS VIDEO GAMING.
For purposes of a Class M license, a "convenience store" shall mean a small-
size retail business and gas station establishment that sells gasoline, fuel
and petroleum products and a limited range and selection of household goods,
grocery items, snack foods, confectionery, soft drink beverages, alcoholic
liquor for consumption off the premises, tobacco products, over-the-counter
drugs, health and beauty aids, toiletries, newspapers, magazines, etc.
CLASS N LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall only
permit one convenience store (as hereinafter defined) to sell alcoholic liquor
at retail for consumption on the licensed premises but only in a separate
enclosed room where video gaming terminals are located and the plans,
dimensions, specifications, and location of such enclosed room have been
approved by the City Council, and the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the
placement and operation of such video gaming terminals only in such enclosed
room location. The fee for such license shall be three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) annually. There shall only be one Class N license issued at any
time. The licensee must provide a separate address (e.g., "Suite A") for the
Class N licensed premises that is registered with the United States Post Office
located in the City.
   A CLASS N LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR AND PERMITS VIDEO GAMING.
For purposes of a Class N license, a "convenience store" shall mean a small-
size retail business establishment that sells a limited range and selection of
household goods, grocery items, snack foods, confectionery, soft drink
beverages, alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises, tobacco products,
over-the-counter drugs, health and beauty aids, toiletries, newspapers,
magazines, etc.
CLASS O LICENSE: Licenses issued pursuant to this classification shall permit a
business establishment that may be approved by the City Council from time to
time that is located in a C-1 (Commercial C-1) zoning district or in a C-2
(Commercial C-2) zoning district to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for
consumption on the licensed premises but only in a separate enclosed room where
video gaming terminals are located and the plans, dimensions, specifications,
and location of such enclosed room have been approved by the City Council, and
the Illinois Gaming Board has authorized the placement and operation of such
video gaming terminals only in such enclosed room location. The fee for such
license shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) annually. The licensee must
provide a separate address (e.g., "Suite A") for the Class O licensed premises
that is registered with the United States Post Office located in the City.
   A CLASS O LICENSE DOES ALLOW FOR AND PERMITS VIDEO GAMING.
CLASS P COMBINED LICENSE: Combined licenses may be issued pursuant to this
classification to those business establishments who request: (1) a Class B
liquor license and a Class M liquor license; or (2) a Class B liquor license
and a Class N liquor license; or (3) a Class B liquor license and a Class O
liquor license.
In such cases, the annual fee for such Class P combined license shall be as
follows: three thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($3,950.00) plus two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for each video gaming terminal plus seven hundred
dollars ($700.00) for late closing hours (if City Code Section
3-3-10 is applicable) plus four hundred dollars ($400.00) or six hundred
dollars ($600) as the case may be for Sunday sales (if City Code Section
3-3-10 is applicable) plus a one hundred fifty dollars ($150) initial service
fee for the first Class P combined license issued to an applicant therefor. The
additional annual service fee for each combined license renewed thereafter to
the same Class P combined license applicant shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Such Class P combined license fee shall be in addition to any applicable
background check costs, change of manager or agent fee or "initial application
fee" as provided in City Code Section
3-3-5.
SUNDAY LICENSES: Liquor license holders qualified to sell or offer to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor may do so at any time on Sunday from twelve o’clock
(12:00) noon to twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight upon payment of an additional
Sunday license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) annually; provided,
however, such liquor license holders may do so on Sunday from six o’clock a.m.
(6:00 a.m.) to twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight upon payment instead of a total
Sunday license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually.
LATE CLOSING FEE: All licensees qualified pursuant to Sections
3-3-10 and
3-3-15 of this
Chapter to sell alcoholic liquor may elect to close at two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
on Friday and Saturday nights and on the evening preceding a legal holiday upon
payment of an additional annual late closing license fee of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00).
CHANGE OF MANAGER OR AGENT FEE: Each licensee whose place of business is
conducted by a manager or agent shall pay an additional one hundred dollar
($100.00) "change of manager or agent fee" for each time a manager or agent
exists and for each time a change in the identity of such manager or agent
occurs during the license term; provided, however, this additional "change of
manager or agent fee" shall not apply to Class E license holders.
COST OF BACKGROUND CHECKS: At the time of submittal of an application for a
license hereunder, each applicant for a license hereunder shall pay the cost
incurred by the City, in processing such application, to conduct a criminal
background check on the applicant and/or the applicant's manager and/or agent.
INITIAL APPLICATION FEE (DOUBLE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE): Each new applicant for a
license hereunder shall pay at the time such original application is filed with
the City, in addition to the aforesaid applicable annual license fee, an
"initial license fee" equal in amount to such applicable annual license fee.
This "initial license fee" shall be charged and paid only one time for each new
applicant for a license hereunder; provided, however, this "initial license
fee" shall not be required of any new applicant who held a license hereunder,
under the same applicant's name, as of April 29, 2003; and such "initial
license fee" shall not be required of any new applicant who first applies for a
license hereunder only because the new applicant's place of business was
annexed into the City after April 30, 2003, and such new applicant held a
liquor license under the same name of such new applicant which license was in
existence and issued by Christian County, Illinois, or by any municipality
within Christian County, Illinois, at the time of such annexation into the
City; and such "initial license fee" shall not be required for new applicants
for a Class E license.
REDUCED LIQUOR LICENSE FEE FOR "POUR ESTABLISHMENTS" FOR THE MAY 1, 2021 TO
APRIL 30, 2022 LIQUOR LICENSE TERM ONLY: For the May 1, 2021 to April 30, 2022
liquor license term only, the annual liquor license fee for all liquor
licensees that are considered "pour establishments" as determined by the Mayor
shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%) provided such liquor licensee held and
paid for a City liquor license for the entire May 1, 2020 to April 30, 2021
liquor license term. Those "pour establishments" as determined by the Mayor are
set forth on a written list in the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. 3836, 3-5-2018; amd. Ord. 3866, 10-1-2018; Ord. 3877, 11-19-2018; Ord.
3909, 8-19-2019; Ord. 3933, 12-2-2019; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020; Ord. 3949, 3-16-
2020; Ord. 4032, 5-3-2021; Ord. 4089, 1-4-2022; Ord. 4133, 11-7-2022; Ord.
4303, 4-7-2025)
3-3-5-1: VIDEO GAMING SIGNAGE PROHIBITED ON CITY PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to place, locate, or maintain
any signage or banner or any device or structure of any kind, nature or extent
whatsoever on City property or on any City right-of-way or on any City
boulevard or on any City street, roadway or alleyway that advertises or
displays or indicates the presence or availability of video gaming.
(Ord. 3866, 10-1-2018; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-6: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All license fees shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time application is
approved by the Mayor, and all license fees shall be turned over to the City
Treasurer for deposit in the General Corporate Fund. (1979 Code §13-10; amd.
Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-7: TERM OF LICENSE; PRORATING FEE:
Each such liquor license shall terminate on April 30 next following the date of
issuance. The liquor license fee to be paid shall be paid in full prior to
issuance or renewal of a liquor license; and such liquor license fee shall not
be reduced or prorated because such liquor license was issued or renewed on any
calendar day other than May 1 of any year.
Notwithstanding the foregoing and only because of the current COVID-19
pandemic, applicants for issuance or renewal of liquor licenses issued or
renewed after May 1, 2020 but prior to June 1, 2020 may pay the full annual
license fee for such liquor license in two installments as follows: one-third
(1/3) of the full license fee shall be paid on or before June 1, 2020; and the
remaining two-thirds (2/3rds) of the full license fee shall be paid on or
before July 1, 2020. (1979 Code §13-6; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020; Ord. 3956, 4-
20-2020)
3-3-7-1: NO REFUNDS OF LICENSE FEE:
A licensee shall not be entitled to any refund of any portion of the liquor
license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be voluntarily or
involuntarily prevented from operating under the license, whether same is due
to the licensee's death, suspension or revocation of the liquor license,
cessation of conducting business, court order, bankruptcy, insolvency, or any
other reason or cause. (Ord. 2775, 11-4-1996; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE/SALE OF BUSINESS:
   A.   A liquor license shall be purely a privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this Chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Such liquor license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture
of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise
the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the
death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of
such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the
liquor license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions
of this subparagraph A.
   B.   A liquor license shall earlier terminate upon the sale of the liquor
licensee’s business. The new owner(s) of such business must apply for a new
liquor license if such owner(s) intend(s) to operate and conduct a retail
liquor business at said previous liquor licensed location; provided, however,
if any previously existing co-owner of such business remains a co-owner of such
business following the sale thereof, then a new liquor license for the
remaining unexpired one-year license term may be issued to the new owners of
such business without the payment of any additional license fees provided all
applicants are then eligible to receive a liquor license under this Chapter.
(Ord. 2775, 11-4-1996; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020; Ord. 4113, 6-20-2022)
3-3-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any existing or future licensee may apply to renew a liquor license at
the expiration thereof, provided however, that such existing or future licensee
is then qualified and eligible to receive a liquor license under this Chapter,
and the premises and business establishment for which such renewal liquor
license is sought are suitable for the stated purpose and satisfies all
requirements and conditions for the particular class of liquor license applied
for under this Chapter, as may be amended by ordinance from time to time, and
which shall be in effect at the time of each renewal of such liquor license. In
any event, this Section shall not be construed as giving any existing or future
licensee vested right or privilege to obtain any renewal of any liquor license.
   B.   The Mayor and/or the City Council may from time to time decrease the
number and/or modify the kind of liquor licenses to be issued or renewed within
the City.
   C.   The renewal application for a liquor license shall be accompanied with
proof of completion within the last three (3) years of a State certified
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training Program or other
State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission approved program as otherwise set
forth in subsections
3-3-3B1 through B5 of this Chapter.
   D.   Any applicant for a liquor license who intends to sell alcoholic
liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises must have
in force liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises for the entire
term of the requested liquor license in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of 235 ILCS 5/6-21 or any
amendments thereto; and such applicant shall provide the City prior to issuance
of the liquor license with a certificate or certificates of such insurance
showing the City as a certificate holder and evidencing that the insurance
company will provide prompt written notice to the City in the event of any
cancellation or termination of such insurance.
   The issuance of a liquor license for the sale of alcoholic liquors for use
or consumption on the licensed retail premises is conditioned upon the City's
receipt of such certificate of insurance and the maintenance of such insurance
in force during the entire term of such liquor license. In the event such
insurance is canceled or terminated during the term of the liquor license, then
such liquor license shall be deemed revoked instanter without any further
notice or hearing and the mayor or his delegate shall be entitled to enter the
licensed premises at their convenience and repossess such liquor license. (Ord.
3710, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 3713, 5-18-2015; Ord. 3890, 3-4-3019; Ord. 3943, 2-
18-2020)
3-3-10: CLOSING HOURS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to sell or offer for
sale at retail any alcoholic liquor between the hours of one minute after
twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on any weekday or
Saturday except where the licensee has qualified for late closing by paying the
requisite additional annual license fee of three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) as set forth in Section
3-3-5 of this Chapter. Those licensees qualifying for late closing by paying
the said requisite additional annual license fee of three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) will be permitted to close at two o’clock (2:00) A.M. on Friday and
Saturday nights and on the night before a legal holiday.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any liquor license holder to sell or offer for
sale at retail any alcoholic liquor at any time on Sunday except from twelve
o’clock (12:00) noon to twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight with the exception of
those liquor licensee holders who have qualified for late closing on Saturday
nights by paying the requisite additional license fee of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) set forth in Section
3-3-5 of this Chapter; and with the further exception of those liquor license
holders who have paid the requisite total Sunday license fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) as set forth in Section
3-3-5 of this Chapter that permits them to sell or offer to sell at retail any
alcoholic liquor at any time on Sunday from six o’clock a.m. (6:00 a.m.) to
twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit any person
except the proprietor and employees thereof to any premises where alcoholic
liquor is sold at retail during the hours when such sales are prohibited;
except, that restaurants, clubs and retail grocery stores may be open at such
hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold during such hours. (Ord. 2103, 8-1-
1983; amd. Ord. 3909, 8-19-2019; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020; Ord, 4089, 1-4-2022;
Ord. 4133, 11-7-2022)
3-3-11: LOCATION:
   A.   Location Restrictions:
      1.   No liquor license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other
than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval
station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or
other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on; nor to the renewal of a liquor license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or
school where the church or school has been established within such one hundred
feet (100') since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a
church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs
and not to property boundaries.
      2.   No person shall hereafter engage in business as a retailer of any
alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any undertaking
establishment or mortuary.
   B.   Change of Location: A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. Such
location may be changed only upon a written permission to make such change
issued by the mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of this state and the City Code or ordinances of the City. (1979
Code §§ 13-14, 13-16; amd. 2103, 8-1-1983; Ord. 3737, 12-7-2015; Ord. 3943, 2-
18-2020)
3-3-12: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or
for the storage of such liquor for sale shall be kept in full compliance with
the ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage and/or
sale of food for human consumption.
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a
carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to be engaged in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (1979 Code §§ 13- 19, 13-
20; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-13: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Sales to Certain Persons Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
holder of a liquor license to sell, deliver or give any alcoholic liquor to any
intoxicated person or to any person known to him to be a habitual drunkard,
spendthrift or insane, feeble minded or distracted person.
   B.   Consumption on Premises Not Licensed for Consumption: It shall be
unlawful for anyone not having a liquor license providing for consumption on
the premises where sold to offer for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold.
   C.   Peddling Liquor: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
City.
   D.   Drive-Up Facilities Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for a licensee to
sell, dispense, deliver, or give any alcoholic liquor(s) to any person or
persons through or by use of a “drive-up” facility located in, on, or about the
premises where the sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is otherwise permitted
under the licensee’s license. For purposes hereof, a “drive-up” facility shall
include, but is not limited to, any premises which has any type of facility or
structure which allows the delivery of an item of goods or property by the
licensee or its agents or employees to any person who is situated in or on any
vehicle or to any person situated outside any premises and without such person
having to enter the premises where such item of goods or property is sold or
made available to any such person.
   Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph D to the contrary, a
Class B liquor license holder who receives a call-in purchase order or an
online purchase order through its online business website for curbside pickup
of groceries that includes the sale of alcohol liquor may deliver such sold
alcoholic liquor on such Class B liquor license holder’s property but outside
its business building provided such sold alcoholic liquor is in its original
unopened container and is delivered by an employee of such Class B license
holder who is at least 21 years of age to the same customer who ordered such
alcoholic liquor online or by a call-in order and such customer proves he or
she is over the age of twenty-one years by exhibiting such customer’s valid
driver’s license that evidences such minimum age.
   E.   Video Gaming Signage, Banners, Etc., Restricted:
      1.   A licensee is permitted to locate and maintain one outdoor
advertising banner affixed to a metal pole with a ground spike on the exterior
of the licensed premises that advertises or displays or indicates the presence
or availability of video gaming within the licensed premises, provided such
banner is either a feather flag style banner or a rectangle flag style banner
or a teardrop flag style banner, not to exceed in any case a width of two feet
(2') and an overall height of eight feet (8') from the ground level.
      2.   A licensee is permitted to locate and maintain one sign, not to
exceed twenty four inches (24") by thirty inches (30") in size, affixed on the
exterior of the licensed premises that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of video gaming within the licensed premises.
      3.   A licensee is permitted to locate and maintain one sign, not to
exceed twenty four inches (24") by thirty inches (30") in size, affixed in the
interior of the licensed premises where such signage is visible to persons
outside the licensed premises that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of video gaming within the licensed premises.
      4.   Except as otherwise permitted in subsections E1, E2, and E3 of this
Section, it shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to place, locate, or
maintain any flag, banner, signage or any other device or structure of any
kind, nature or extent whatsoever that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of video gaming within the licensed premises on or
about the exterior of the licensed premises and/or in the interior of the
licensed premises such that it is visible to persons outside the licensed
premises and/or on any adjoining property. (1979 Code §§ 13-15, 13-18, 13-25;
amd. Ord. 3069, 4-1-2002; Ord. 3890, 3-4-2019; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020; Ord. 4005,
11-2-2020; Ord. 4049, 7-6-2021)
3-3-14: MINORS:
   A.   Sales to Minors Prohibited: No licensee or agent of licensee or other
person shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years.
   B.   Age Misrepresentation: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the
City where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   C.   Persons Under Age Twenty One On Leased Premises: It shall be unlawful
for any holder of a liquor license or his agent or employee to suffer or permit
any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to
or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under age twenty-
one (21) who is accompanied by his parent or guardian or to any licensed
premises which derives its principal business from the sale or service of other
commodities than alcoholic liquor.
   D.   Employment as Bartenders: It shall be unlawful to employ in any
premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor a bartender who is under
twenty-one (21) years of age.
   E.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian to permit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, of which he
or she may be parent or guardian, to violate any provision of this Chapter.
(1979 Code §§ 13-22, 13-23, 13-24; amd. Ord. 1948, 1-7-1980; Ord. 2420, 2-18-
1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-15: ANNEXATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING LIQUOR:
In the event an establishment selling alcoholic liquor, duly authorized by the
County, is annexed into the corporate limits of the City of Taylorville, said
establishment shall be subject to this Chapter in regard to location
restrictions, classification of licenses, and closing hours. The City will not
prorate the liquor license fee of the difference between what was paid to the
County and the City's fees. (Ord. 3798, 4-3-2017; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-16: LIST OF LICENSES:
The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses
issued by him. (1979 Code §13-11; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-17: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Mayor may suspend or revoke any liquor license for any violation of any
section of this Chapter or for the violation of any State law pertaining to the
sale of alcoholic liquor. (1979 Code §13-26; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-18: CLOSURE OF LICENSED PREMISES FOR REPEATED FIGHTING DISTURBANCES:
It is hereby declared an immediate threat to the welfare of the community for
the continued operation of any licensed premises where repeated occurrences of
fighting or threat of fighting occurs either inside the licensed premises or
originates from the licensed premises.
In the event the City Police Department responds to more than one fighting
disturbance or call within a consecutive twenty four (24) hour period relating
to any fighting or threat of fighting between or among any persons either
inside or that which originates from the licensed premises, the Mayor, or any
City police officer responding to such disturbance or call, may without notice
or hearing, issue a written order immediately closing the licensed premises for
not more than seven (7) days.
Such written order shall state the reason for such closure, and give the
licensee an opportunity to be heard during the closure period. If such licensee
shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises such written order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses. (Ord. 3188, 8-2-2004; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-19: PENALTY:
Any person violating any section of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code; amd. Ord. 3188, 8-2-2004; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-20: APPEALS:
Any appeal of any order or action of the Mayor as Local Liquor Control
Commissioner pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/7-9 shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the proceedings of such Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. 3397, 8-4-2008; amd. Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-3-21: NUMBER OF LIQUOR LICENSES:
As of and from November 1, 2023, and notwithstanding anything in the
Taylorville City Code to the contrary, the total number of issued and
outstanding City liquor licenses that allow video gaming shall not exceed a
total of forty (40) of said liquor licenses, until and unless the City Council
by an affirmative majority vote from time to time determines to increase or
decrease the aforesaid total number of City issued and outstanding liquor
licenses that allow video gaming at any one time. (Ord. 4207, 11-20-2023)
CHAPTER 4
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Application of Provisions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Application for License; Fee
3-4-4: Street Shows
3-4-5: Conditions of License
3-4-6: Exit Lights
3-4-7: Inspections
3-4-8: Penalty
3-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions hereof, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all
public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the City, whether
specifically licensed in another article in this Chapter or not. (1979 Code Ch.
12, Art. I, §1)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the
public and for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this Section shall
not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any
other ordinance of the City. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §2)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Clerk and shall comply with
all of the general provisions of the ordinances relating to such application. 1
For such licenses there shall be a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day
paid to the City Clerk. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
3-4-4: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other
amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that
the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public
place, except on order of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §3)
3-4-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Order; Crowding:
      1.   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly
and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
such amusement of show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or
other risks. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §5)
   B.   Indecent Activity: It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise,
promote, sponsor or to show, present, exhibit, conduct or otherwise participate
in the presentation of any obscene show, play, dance, motion picture, still
picture or other electronic reproduction in any place of public accommodation
or before any public assembly or in any forum where the public is invited
within the limits of the City in violation of community standards for decency.
This provision shall not apply to activities not conducted for financial gain,
profit or other commercial purpose if and to the extent such activities are
restricted to personal associates. Further, this provision shall not apply to
persons engaged in artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other
activities possessing merits or justification of redeeming social importance.
The term "obscene" and the admissibility and interpretation of evidence of same
shall have the same meaning, definition and rules as are set forth in chapter
38, section 11-20(b) and (c), Illinois Revised Statutes, which provisions are
hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference as if fully set
forth herein. (Ord. 2038, 2-15-82)
   C.   Riots: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of
any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §9)
   D.   Smoking: It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building
used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than one hundred
(100) persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or other
entertainments are offered, presented, operated or exhibited. (1979 Code Ch.
12, Art. I, §10)
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge
to provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking" shall appear
in letters at least four inches (4") high, in conspicuous places, at least two
(2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one in each dressing
room. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §11)
3-4-6: EXIT LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall
used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one hundred (100) persons or
more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainment
is offered, operated or presented to provide and place a lighted red sign, on
which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high,
over every door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress
therefrom; said lighted red sign shall be kept burning during the entire period
that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall.
(1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. I, §12)
3-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief to see that
every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is
inspected by a member of the Police and Fire Department and to insure
conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. (1979 Code Ch. 12,
Art. I, §6)
3-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be punished as provided
in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE A. RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-4A-1: Definitions
3-4A-2: License Required; Qualifications
3-4A-3: Application for License; Fee; Issuance
3-4A-4: License Limitations and Restrictions
3-4A-5: Conduct of Raffles
3-4A-6: Penalty
3-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The City adopts and incorporates herein the definitions of "net proceeds" and
"raffle" as set forth in section 2301 of the "Raffles Act". 1  (Ord. 2247, 5-
18-87)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 85, ¶2301 et seq.
3-4A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a
license in accordance with this Article. Licenses shall be issued to qualified
bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, education or
veteran's organizations that operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have had, during that entire
five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects. The City hereby adopts and incorporates the definitions of such
organization as set forth in section 2302(b) of the "Raffle Act".1 (Ord. 2247,
5-18-87)
3-4A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE; ISSUANCE:
Written application for a raffle license shall be completed and signed in the
form attached to Ordinance 2247 and incorporated herein by reference. A fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid by the licensee upon issuance of such
license. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue such license if such
applications are in accordance with this Article. (Ord. 2247, 5-18-87)
3-4A-4: LICENSE LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed three hundred sixty five (365).
   E.   All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for only one raffle and
may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this Article.
   F.   All licenses issued hereunder shall only authorize the sale of raffle
chances within the corporate limits of the City.
   G.   All licenses issued are further subject to all terms and provisions as
set forth in section 2303 of the "Raffle Act" 1  which are incorporated herein
by reference. (Ord. 2247, 5-18-87)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 85, ¶2301 et seq.
3-4A-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to all the restrictions and requirements
as are set forth in sections 2304, 2305, 2306 and 2308 of the "Raffles Act"1
which are incorporated herein by reference. A manager's fidelity bond shall be
issued in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the aggregate
retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in the raffle,
whichever is greater. This requirement may be waived by unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 2247, 5-18-87)
3-4A-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, for each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE B. BOWLING ALLEYS
SECTION:
3-4B-1: License Required
3-4B-2: Application for License; Fee
3-4B-3: Hours of Liquor Sales
3-4B-4: Penalty
3-4B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without
having first secured a license therefor as is herein required. (1979 Code Ch.
12, Art. III, §1)
3-4B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Clerk and shall be in
writing and state thereon the intended location of the place of business and
the number of alleys to be used. The annual fee for such licenses shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00), payable on or before October 31 of each year.
(1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. III, §§1, 2)
3-4B-3: HOURS OF LIQUOR SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person who conducts a bowling alley 1  operation
to sell alcoholic beverages between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday and two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Friday, Saturday and the evening
before a holiday. 2  (Ord. 2424, 3-4-91)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-3-5 of this Title.
2 2. See Section
  3-3-10 of this Title.
3-4B-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE C. BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS
SECTION:
3-4C-1: License Required
3-4C-2: Application For License; Fee
3-4C-3: Closing Hours
3-4C-4: Minors
3-4C-5: Penalty
3-4C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or
pigeon hole table in any place of business, private club, or any public place,
excluding only churches, without having first obtained a license therefor as is
herein required. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-94)
3-4C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   All applications for such license shall state thereon the intended
location of the place of business, private club or public place, and the number
of tables to be used therein. This Section includes all such tables that may be
coin operated.
   B.   Each license year shall run from May 1 to April 30 of the following
year. For the license year May 1, 1994 to April 30, 1995, the annual fee for
any such licenses shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each table. Commencing
May 1, 1995, the annual fee for any such license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each table. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-94)
3-4C-3: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain open for business between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.; except, that
with respect to Saturdays, it shall be unlawful for any such entity to remain
open for business between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and one
o'clock (1:00) P.M. of the following Sunday, and except, that with respect to
Sundays, it shall be unlawful for any such entity to remain open for business
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
the following Monday. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. II, § 3)
3-4C-4: MINORS 1 :
Minors under the age of sixteen (16) years shall, under no circumstances,
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time
unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent under the direction and the
consent of and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the
lawful custody of such minor, and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of
any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or
remain within the hall in violation of this Section. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art.
II, § 4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-4G-5 of this Chapter for required supervision.
3-4C-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE D. SKATING RINKS
SECTION:
3-4D-1: License Required
3-4D-2: Application for License; Fee
3-4D-3: Restrictions on Issuance of License; Investigation
3-4D-4: Premises Requirements
3-4D-5: Conduct of Patrons and Business
3-4D-6: Penalty
3-4D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a public skating rink in the City
without first having obtained a license therefor as is herein provided. (1979
Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §1)
3-4D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions
of the ordinances relating to licenses 1  and shall specify the location of the
proposed skating rink and the person or organization sponsoring the same. (1979
Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §2)
The fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. (1979
Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
3-4D-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
No such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character
nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the City by a
person of good moral character.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of
such investigation to the Clerk. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §2)
3-4D-4: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct a public skating rink in any hall or building
which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits, and no hall or
building which is not provided with at least two (2) exits of four feet (4') or
more in width shall be used for such purpose. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §4)
3-4D-5: CONDUCT OF PATRONS AND BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful to indulge in any improper conduct or to permit any
improper conduct at any public skating rink, and it shall be unlawful to permit
music at any public skating rink after the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
(1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VIII, §5)
3-4D-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE E. MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS
SECTION:
3-4E-1: License Required
3-4E-2: Application for License
3-4E-3: License Fees
3-4E-4: Building Requirements
3-4E-5: Crowding; Order
3-4E-6: Prohibited Pictures
3-4E-7: Inspections
3-4E-8: Penalty
3-4E-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture or
theatrical, for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances
given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious,
educational or charitable organization, without having first secured a license
therefor as is herein provided. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §1)
3-4E-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the general
provisions relating to such applications 1  and shall state, in addition to
other information required, the place of the intended performance and the
seating capacity thereof. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1 of this Title.
3-4E-3: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Annual License Fee: The annual fee for any such license shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each theater.
Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures or theatricals,
naming a specific place or building where the performances are to be presented,
may present therein any number of performances, including theatricals, during
the year for which the license was secured without having to pay any additional
fee. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §3)
   B.   Motion Pictures and Theatricals on Unlicensed Premises: For motion
pictures or theatricals which are to be presented in premises which are not
covered by such license fees, the fee to be paid shall be ten dollars ($10.00)
per day; provided, that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be presented
in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply with the
requirements of the ordinances for the construction or maintenance of buildings
for this purpose. 1  (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
3-4E-4: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements; Exits:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any
building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by
the ordinances of the City or by the statutes of the State concerning buildings
or places intended for motion picture performances or on premises in which the
electrical wiring does not fully comply with the ordinances.
      2.   All places used for the exhibition of theatricals must be kept
adequately ventilated during the performance and for so long a time as the
audience remains therein. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §8)
      3.   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
aisles, corridors or exits leading from the room or enclosures in which a
motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or in which an audience
for such a performance is gathered. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §9)
   B.   Scenery: It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other
than nonflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered nonflammable by
the application of fire preventive coatings. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §7)
3-4E-5: CROWDING; ORDER:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater
employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is
presented during the time of such performance, and it shall be unlawful to
admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating
arrangements for the premises. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI, §6)
3-4E-6: PROHIBITED PICTURES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person to offer or present any motion
picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace
or any immoral, indecent or blasphemous picture or performance. (1979 Code Ch.
12, Art. VI, §5)
3-4E-7: INSPECTIONS:
Premises in or on which motion pictures or theatricals are presented shall be
inspected by the Health and Building Officer, the Fire Chief and the Chief of
Police as often as is necessary to comply with the provisions of this Article
and any other ordinance provisions relating hereto. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. VI,
§10)
3-4E-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE F. CIRCUSES
SECTION:
3-4F-1: License Required
3-4F-2: Application for License
3-4F-3: Parade Permit
3-4F-4: Fees
3-4F-5: Compliance with Provisions
3-4F-6: Inspections
3-4F-7: Penalty
3-4F-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a circus in the City without having first
obtained a license as is provided in this Article. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. IV,
§1)
3-4F-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
specify the place in or on which the circus is to be conducted. (1979 Code Ch.
12, Art. IV, §2)
3-4F-3: PARADE PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade connected with a circus in or on any
public street, alley or other public way or place in the City unless a permit
therefor is first obtained from the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 12, Art. IV,
§7)
3-4F-4: FEES:
   A.   Circuses and Parades: The fee for circus license shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) per day for each license and an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per
day for each circus parade. (1979 Code Ch. 12, §3)
   B.   Sideshows and Concessions: The license fee for each sideshow and
concession operated in connection with a circus shall be five dollars ($5.00)
per day. (1979 Code Ch. 12, §4)
3-4F-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this Article to obey the
provisions of Sections
 3-4-1 through
3-4-8 of this Chapter and all other ordinances relating to circuses or the
premises occupied. (1979 Code Ch. 12, §5)
3-4F-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief to see that
inspections, as provided for in Section
3-4-7 of this Chapter, shall be made of all circuses, circus performances and
of the premises used. (1979 Code Ch. 12, §6)
3-4F-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE G. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT OR MUSICAL DEVICES
SECTION:
3-4G-1: Definitions
3-4G-2: Operator's License Required; Fee; Exemptions
3-4G-3: Application For License
3-4G-4: License Fees For Amusement Or Musical Devices
3-4G-5: Supervision
3-4G-6: Penalty
3-4G-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Includes any mechanical device of any kind,
nature or extent whatsoever and which is capable of being operated by use of
coins or currency and is intended to be operated for fun, recreation,
amusement, or sporting purposes; and shall include, but not be limited to, dart
machines, basketball machines, bowling machines, riding machines, pinball
machines, video game machines, poker machines, slot machines, foosball
machines, shuffleboard, golf, air hockey, children's rides, children's games,
gift chance games and trivia machines.
   COIN OPERATED MUSICAL DEVICE: Includes any mechanical device of any kind,
nature or extent whatsoever, which is capable of being operated by use of coins
or currency; and is intended to be operated for the primary purpose of playing
musical records, discs, or tapes for listening pleasure.
   OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets
up for operation by another, or leases or distributes for the purpose of
operation by another, any coin operated amusement device and/or any coin
operated musical device, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or
distributing be for a fixed charge or rental or on the basis of a division of
the income derived from such coin operated amusement devices, coin operated
musical devices, or otherwise. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-4G-2: OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No person not owning either the business enterprise or the business
location concerned, shall place, locate or otherwise maintain therein any coin
operated amusement device or coin operated musical device for public use and
for which a charge is made without first obtaining an operator's license, which
license shall cost two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually. Each license
year shall run from May 1 to April 30 of the following year. The license as
issued, shall not be transferable.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to owners of business
enterprises and/or business locations. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-4G-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring the license required by this article shall, through a duly
licensed "operator" as herein defined, make application for that purpose to the
city clerk, which application shall set forth the full name and business and
residential addresses and phone numbers of the applicant, the location and
character of the building or place where such coin operated amusement devices
or coin operated musical devices are to be located, maintained and operated,
the number of such devices to be located, maintained and operated in such
building or place and the charge to be made to the customer for operating each
of such devices. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-4G-4: LICENSE FEES FOR AMUSEMENT OR MUSICAL DEVICES:
   A.   Annual License Fee: The annual license fee to be charged for each coin
operated amusement device or coin operated musical device shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) payable annually on May 1 of each year, and each license year
shall run from May 1 to April 30 of the following year. The license fee for
each coin operated amusement device or coin operated musical device first
acquired and put in operation between May 2 and the following April 30 of each
license year shall be prorated.
   B.   Issuance Of License: The license shall be issued to the business
enterprise or location as an entity, and the fee thereby due shall be assessed
on the basis of the number of devices specified in its application.
Accordingly, the entity may remove, replace or otherwise change machines at the
business enterprise or location at any time within the pertinent annual license
period without payment of additional licensing fees; however, in no event shall
the entity be permitted to place, locate or otherwise maintain for use more
than the number of devices specified in its application.
   C.   Identification Of License: Such license shall be identified by a
license sticker which the licensee shall affix to and maintain at all times on
each licensed coin operated amusement device or coin operated musical device.
   D.   Nontransferable: Such licenses and license stickers, as issued, shall
not be transferable to any purchaser of such business enterprise or entity but
the license fee to be paid by the purchaser of such business enterprise or
location shall be prorated for the balance of the license year in which such
seller paid such license fee. In no event, however, shall the seller of such
business enterprise be entitled to receive any refund of said license fee
previously paid. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
   E.   Coin Operated Amusement Device Fees For Civic, Church, And Fraternal
Organizations During Special Events: Any civic, church, or fraternal
organization desiring to have coin operated amusement devices at a special
event(s) shall make application for that purpose to the city clerk, which
application shall set forth the full name of the civic, church, or fraternal
organization, the location and character of the special event, the duration of
the special event, and the number of such devices to be present at the special
event. The fee for such limited license to a civic, church, or fraternal
organization shall be five dollars ($5.00) per coin operated amusement device.
The license shall be issued for periods not to exceed seventy two (72) hours
which limited time period shall be specifically set forth in the permit issued.
No permit pursuant to this subsection shall issue to a civic, church, or
fraternal organization unless the owner of the coin operated amusement devices
is licensed with the city of Taylorville as otherwise set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 3354, 10-15-2007)
3-4G-5: SUPERVISION:
Any establishment having pinball, pool tables 1  or other coin operated
amusement devices, except coin operated musical devices, shall be at all times
supervised by a person over the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-
1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See also article C of this chapter.
3-4G-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
CHAPTER 5
AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required
3-5-2: Application For License; Investigation
3-5-3: License Fees
3-5-4: Bond
3-5-5: Conditions Of License
3-5-6: Exemptions From Provisions
3-5-7: Penalty
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the city or to do
business as an auctioneer without having first obtained a license as is herein
required and paying the fee herein set forth. (1979 Code §14-1-1)
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
Application for an auctioneer's license shall be made, in writing, to the city
clerk and shall state thereon the place of business, if any, intended to be
occupied and the names of any employees, not to exceed two (2), who are to be
authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license. (1979 Code
§14-1-2)
The chief of police, or any other officer designated by the mayor shall
investigate the character of every applicant for an auctioneer's license, and
no such license shall be issued to any person who is not of good character.
(1979 Code §14-1-3)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEES:
The fees payable for an auctioneer's license shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for a license for five (5) days and fifty dollars ($50.00) additional
for each additional day over five (5). (1979 Code §14-1-4)
3-5-4: BOND:
No auctioneer's license shall be issued until the applicant has first filed an
indemnity bond, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned to
indemnify the city from any loss or damage resulting to it by such auction;
such bond to have sureties approved by the mayor. (1979 Code §14-1-5)
3-5-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Closing Hours: No auction shall be conducted between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following
day nor on Sunday before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and after six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. (Ord. 2084, 2-21-1983)
   B.   Auctions In Streets: No person shall sell or offer for sale or attempt
to sell at public auction any goods, chattels or real or personal property of
any kind upon the public streets or sidewalks of the city. (1979 Code §14-1-7)
3-5-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to public auction sales
described as follows:
   A.   Sale of real estate.
   B.   Sale of farm machinery, equipment and accessories.
   C.   Sale pursuant to judicial or other governmental order.
   D.   Sale pursuant to powers and authorities set forth in security
agreements or other forms of financing statements.
   E.   Sale by legal representative of a decedent in liquidation of an estate.
   F.   Sale by heirs and legatees of a decedent in liquidation of an estate.
   G.   Sale by a party of such party's household properties, provided such
sale is conducted on the party's premises.
   H.   Sale by a party (meaning only residents of the city) of such party's
household properties where such party's living quarters are not located on the
ground level or where inadequate space is not reasonably available to
facilitate sale on the premises. In such event, such party shall be allowed to
move the household properties to another location; provided, that no items not
a part of the household properties of that individual shall be included in the
sale. (Ord. 2084, 2-21-1983)
   I.   Any auctioneer conducting an auction for a person or entity having a
"going out of business sale" is only exempt from the license fee under section
3-5-3 of this chapter, but such auctioneer for such "going out of business
sale" is otherwise subject to all other provisions of this chapter 1 . (Ord.
3743, 3-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title.
3-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO DEALERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application For License; Qualifications; Fees; Penalty
3-6-4: Cigarettes, Tobacco, Alternative Nicotine Products, And Vape Pens
Advertisements, Banners, Signage, Etc. Restricted
3-6-5: Sanitary Requirements
3-6-6: Sales Or Gifts To Or Consumption Or Possession By Persons Under Age
Twenty-One Years
 
3-6-7: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "coin operated cigarette machine" is hereby defined to include any
mechanical device operated by coins or currency for the sale of and which
dispenses any cigarettes or tobacco in any form. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Retail Sale: It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale at retail of
cigarettes or tobacco in any form or in any number without having first
obtained a license therefor.
   B.   Coin Operated Cigarette Machine: It shall be unlawful to engage in the
sale of cigarettes or tobacco in any form or in any number through the use of a
coin operated cigarette machine without having first obtained a license
therefor. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; QUALIFICATIONS; FEES; PENALTY:
   A.   Coin Operated Cigarette Machine License:
      1.   Any owner of any coin operated cigarette machine desiring the
license required by this article shall make application for that purpose to the
city clerk, which application shall set forth the full name and business and
residential addresses and phone numbers of the applicant, the serial number of
each such coin operated cigarette machine, and the location and character of
the building or place where such coin operated cigarette machines are to be
located, maintained, and operated, and the number of such coin operated
cigarette machines to be located, maintained and operated in such building or
place. Such licensee shall notify the city clerk's office of any change of the
number of such coin operated cigarette machines, and any change in serial
numbers and any change where any such licensed coin operated cigarette machine
is located, maintained and operated. Such notification shall be made within ten
(10) days of such change in number or location.
      2.   The annual license fee to be charged for each coin operated
cigarette machine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable in advance on
May 1 of each year, and each license year shall run from May 1 to April 30 of
the following year. The license fee for each coin operated cigarette machine
first acquired and put in operation between May 2 and the following April 30 of
each license year shall be prorated.
      3.   The license shall be issued to the owner of such coin operated
cigarette machine and the license fee thereby due shall be assessed on the
basis of the number of coin operated cigarette machines specified in the
owner's application. Such license shall be identified by a license sticker
which the owner shall affix to and maintain at all times on each licensed coin
operated cigarette machine.
      4.   Such licenses and license stickers are not transferable, but in the
event the owner sells any such coin operated cigarette machine the license fee
to be paid by the purchaser thereof shall be prorated for the balance of the
license year in which such seller paid such license fee. In no event, however,
shall the seller of such coin operated cigarette machine be entitled to receive
any refund of such license fee previously paid.
   B.   Cigarette And Tobacco license:
      1.   Any owner of the business enterprise or location where any coin
operated cigarette machine is located, maintained, or operated or where the
retail sale of cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape
Pens) in any form is sold without the use of any coin operated cigarette
machines, is also required to obtain a Cigarette and Tobacco license therefor.
Such owner shall make application to the City Clerk for that purpose, which
application shall set forth the name and business and residential addresses and
phone numbers of the applicant and the location and character of the building
or place where such sale of cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g.
Vape Pens) in any form is to be sold.
      2.   The annual Cigarette and Tobacco license fee to be charged shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) payable in advance on May 1 of each year, and
each license year shall run from May 1 to April 30 of the following year. The
annual Cigarette and Tobacco license fee for a business applying for said
license between May 2 and the following April 30 of each license year shall be
prorated. Such license shall be issued to the owner of the business enterprise
or location as an entity.
      3.   Such Cigarette and Tobacco licenses are not transferable but in the
event the owner sells such business enterprise or entity, the Cigarette and
Tobacco license fee to be paid by the purchaser thereof shall be prorated for
the balance of the license year in which such seller paid such Cigarette and
Tobacco license fee. In no event, however, shall the seller of such business
enterprise or entity be entitled to receive any refund of such Cigarette and
Tobacco license fee previously paid.
      4.   No Cigarette and Tobacco license shall be issued for the retail sale
of cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape Pens) in any
form within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the nearest property boundary
lines of any church or school; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply
to businesses whose primary retail sales business is not the retail sale of
cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape Pens) in any
form.
      5.   No Cigarette and Tobacco license shall be held by or issued to or
renewed for any owner or owners who is/are not a resident of Christian County,
Illinois. For purposes hereof, an "owner" includes the individual owner of a
sole proprietorship, all stockholders of a corporation, all partners of a
partnership or limited liability partnership, and all members of a limited
liability company.
   C.   Moral Character: No license required herein shall be issued to any
person or owner who is not a person of good moral character or to any business
enterprise, corporation or entity that is not represented in the municipality
by a person of good moral character.
   D.   Number Of Licenses Limited: The number of licenses issued under
paragraphs A or B of Section
3-6-3 shall be limited to a total of twenty (20) at any one time unless and
until the City Council shall approve, by a favorable majority vote motion, an
increase in the number of such licenses from time to time.
   E.   Penalty: Each owner of a business enterprise who, individually or
through such owner's employee, agent, or representative, sells or gives or
furnishes any cigarette, tobacco, tobacco product, alternative nicotine
product, electronic cigarette, or nicotine containing product (e.g. vape pen)
in any form to any person without having first obtained the requisite cigarette
and tobacco license under this
Chapter 6 shall, for each offense, be fined the sum of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each sale or gift or act of furnishing upon which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord.
2543, 5-2-1994; amd. Ord. 3313, 10-16-2006; Ord. 4208, 11-20-2023; Ord. 4239,
4-15-2024; Ord. 4276, 11-4-2024)
3-6-4: CIGARETTES, TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, AND VAPE PENS
ADVERTISEMENTS, BANNERS, SIGNAGE, ETC. RESTRICTED:
   A.   A Cigarette and Tobacco Dealer licensee is permitted to locate and
maintain one (1) outdoor advertising banner affixed to a metal pole with a
ground spike on the exterior of the licensed premises that advertises or
displays or indicates the presence or availability of cigarettes, tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or
nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape Pens) within the licensed premises,
provided such banner is either a feather flag style banner or a rectangle flag
style banner or a teardrop flag style banner, not to exceed in any case a width
of two feet (2') and an overall height of eight feet (8') from the ground
level.
   B.   A licensee is permitted to locate and maintain one sign, not to exceed
twenty-four inches (24") by thirty inches (30") in size, affixed on the
exterior of the licensed premises that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of, alternative nicotine products, electronic
cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape Pens) within the
licensed premises.
   C.   A licensee is permitted to locate and maintain one sign, not to exceed
twenty-four inches (24") by thirty inches (30") in size, affixed in the
interior of the licensed premises where such signage is visible to persons
outside the licensed premises that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g.
Vape Pens) within the licensed premises.
   D.   Except as otherwise permitted in the preceding subparagraphs 1, 2, and
3, it shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to place, locate, or
maintain any flag, banner, signage or any other device or structure of any
kind, nature or extent whatsoever that advertises or displays or indicates the
presence or availability of cigarettes, tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or nicotine containing products (e.g.
Vape Pens)within the licensed premises on or about the exterior of the licensed
premises and/or in the interior of the licensed premises such that it is
visible to persons outside the licensed premises and/or on any adjoining
property.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to place, locate, or
maintain any signage or banner or any device or structure of any kind, nature
or extent whatsoever on City property or on any City right-of-way or on any
City boulevard or on any City street, roadway or alleyway that advertises or
displays or indicates the presence or availability of cigarettes, tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or
nicotine containing products (e.g. Vape Pens). (Ord. 4210, 11-20-2023; amd.
Ord. 4228, 2-21-2024)
3-6-5: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
Premises and buildings used for the sale of cigarettes or tobacco shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. The health and building officer shall
investigate such places sufficiently often to ensure compliance with this
section. (Ord. 2543, 5-2-1994)
3-6-6: SALES OR GIFTS TO OR CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY PERSONS UNDER AGE
TWENTY-ONE YEARS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sell or to give or furnish any cigarette,
tobacco, tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette,
or nicotine containing product (e.g. vape pen) in any form to any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age; provided, however, a parent or judicially
established legal guardian of such person under twenty-one (21) years of age
may give or furnish such person any cigarette, tobacco, tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette, or nicotine containing
product (e.g. vape pen), provided same is solely consumed in the privacy of the
residential home of such parent or guardian.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one years (21) years
of age to consume or possess any cigarette, tobacco, tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette, or nicotine containing
product (e.g. vape pen) in any form except in the privacy of the residential
home of a parent or judicially established legal guardian of such person.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section
3-3-6 shall be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first
offense, and a sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each subsequent
offense. Each sale or gift or act of furnishing upon which a violation occurs
or continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Each day of consumption
or possession upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be
a separate offense.
   D.   Any cigarette and tobacco licensee who, individually or through such
licensee's employee, agent, or representative, violates any of the provisions
of this Section
3-3-6 shall be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first
offense and the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
subsequent offense; and, in addition to such fine, for the second such offense
the license of said cigarette and tobacco licensee shall also be suspended for
a ninety (90) consecutive day period or for the remaining period of the
applicable license year, whichever date is the longest; and, in addition to
such fine, for a third such offense the license of said cigarette and tobacco
licensee shall be permanently terminated and shall not be subject to renewal or
reinstatement at any time in the future. Each sale or gift or act of furnishing
upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense. (Ord. 2940, 1-18-2000; amd. Ord. 3523, 7-18-2011; Ord. 4209, 11-20-
2023; Ord. 4276, 11-4-2024)
3-6-7: PENALTY:
Except for the penalties as otherwise provided in subsection E of section
3-6-3 and in subsections C and D of section
3-6-6 of this
Chapter 6, any person violating any provision of this
Chapter 6 shall, for each offense, be fined and punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this City Code. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2940, 1-18-2000; amd. Ord. 4239, 4-
15-2024; Ord. 4276, 11-4-2024)
ARTICLE A. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
(Rep. by Ord. 3939, 1-6-2020)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, AND ITINERANT VENDORS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: License Requirements; Prohibitions
3-7-3: Application For Peddler License
3-7-4: Application For Transient Merchant's Or Itinerant Vendor's License And
Regulations
3-7-5: Fees For And Term Of License
3-7-6: Display Of License
3-7-7: Revocation Of License
3-7-8: Holding Inventory
3-7-9: Receipts For The Purchase Of New And Unused Property
3-7-10: Compliance With City Zoning Code
3-7-11: Penalty
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, in Christian County, Illinois.
   FLEA MARKET: Any location, other than a permanent retail store, at which
space is rented or otherwise made available to others for conduct of business
as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor.
   ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale within the city and who does not maintain in the city an
established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center,
or residence from which such business is conducted. It shall be prima facie
evidence that a person is an itinerant vendor if the person does not transact
business from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or lease for a
term of at least six (6) months, the property from which business is conducted.
However, the term itinerant vendor shall not include any of the following
persons:
   A.   Any person who delivers tangible personal property within the city who
is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail,
phone, fax, e-mail, or other similar communication means.
   B.   A peddler.
   NEW AND UNUSED PROPERTY: Tangible property that is acquired in the ordinary
course of business by the unused property merchant directly from the producer,
manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer, that: a) has not been used since its
production or manufacture or b) is in its original and unopened package when
originally produced or manufactured.
   PEDDLER: Any person who is engaged in the retail or wholesale sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, services, or real or personal property of any kind, nature,
or extent whatsoever or who is engaged in soliciting funds or contributions and
who, for the purpose of conducting any such business, travels on foot or in any
vehicle from house to house or from place to place within the city or on city
owned property. However, the term peddler shall not include any of the
following persons:
   A.   Farmers, fruit growers and gardeners who sell the produce of their
farm, orchard or vineyard.
   B.   Persons who make sales presentations pursuant to and after making
previously scheduled appointment(s) or arrangement(s) with the owner or legal
occupant of the premises.
   C.   Sellers or deliverers of newspapers.
   D.   Persons, who without receiving any compensation for their services,
sell or solicit for any civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational, religious or
benevolent organizations, provided such organization is recognized as a tax
exempt organization under the federal internal revenue service laws, rules, and
regulations.
   E.   Any political candidate and/or persons, who solicit support, ideas,
votes, or political financial contributions for any political candidate.
   F.   Persons who are not engaged in the sale of any goods, wares, or
merchandise or to solicit funds or financial contributions but solely convey or
solicit ideas to or from any owner or occupant of property.
   G.   Any person who conveys religious messages or ideas or doorstep
proselytizing to the owner(s) or occupant(s) of any property.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm, association,
or other entity.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale
of goods, wares, or merchandise in the city and who, for the purpose of
conducting such business occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any
kind, or vacant lot. It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a
transient merchant if the person does not transact business from a fixed
location or if the person does not own, or lease for a term of at least six (6)
months, the property from which business is conducted. However, the term
transient merchant shall not include any of the following persons:
   A.   Any person selling goods, wares, or merchandise which are raised,
produced, or manufactured by him or her.
   B.   Any person selling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products at
an established city market.
   C.   Any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned
by him or her or upon which he or she resides.
   D.   Any person operating a stand or booth at a trade show, exposition,
convention or similar event.
   E.   Any person selling any goods, wares or merchandise at a special event
sponsored by any recognized not for profit charitable, civic, patriotic,
fraternal, educational, or religious organization. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person, either as principal or
agent, to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant or itinerant
vendor within the city, without first complying with the requirements of
section 2 of the retailer's occupation tax act 1  by obtaining a certificate of
registration and without first having obtained the appropriate license from the
city's police department under this chapter.
   B.   Certain Items Prohibited: No license shall be issued to any peddler,
transient merchant, or itinerant vendor to engage in business involving any
meats, fish or poultry of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever unless such
peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant vendor possesses the necessary and
current licenses or permits from all federal, state, or local regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the handling, sale, or delivery of such
items. It is unlawful for any peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant vendor
to engage in any business involving any meats, fish, or poultry of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever within the city without the necessary licenses or
permits from all such federal, state, or local regulatory agencies.
   C.   Distance From Playground Or School Property: It is unlawful for any
licensee while engaged in business activities of a peddler, transient merchant,
or itinerant vendor to park any vehicle or stand within two hundred feet (200')
of any playground or school property during the time that organized
recreational or school activities are in progress or in session.
   D.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   It is unlawful for a peddler to engage in the business of a peddler
within the city prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. on any day, or at any time on any Sunday; and
      2.   It is unlawful for a transient merchant to engage in the business of
a transient merchant prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. on any day; and
      3.   It is unlawful for an itinerant vendor to engage in the business of
an itinerant vendor prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. on any day.
   E.   Compliance With Signs Posted: It is unlawful for any peddler to engage
in business of a peddler at any residence within the city where there is
displayed upon or near the entrance of such residence a sign or notice which
has words thereon indicating solicitors or peddlers are not wanted or invited,
such as: "NO SOLICITORS INVITED" or "NO PEDDLERS INVITED" or words to the same
effect.
   F.   Request To Leave: It is unlawful for a peddler to remain at any
residence or place within the city after being asked by an owner or legal
occupant of such residence or place to leave.
   G.   Business On City Owned Or Residential Property: It is unlawful for a
peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant vendor to engage in the business of a
peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant vendor from any stationary vehicle on
any city owned property or from any stationary vehicle that is located on any
property zoned with a residential classification under the city's zoning code.
   H.   Transient Merchants Restricted: It is unlawful for a transient merchant
to conduct any business activities of a transient merchant on any city owned
property or on any property within the city that has a residential zoning
classification under the city's zoning code.
   I.   Prohibited Products: It is unlawful for any transient merchant or
itinerant vendor at a flea market to sell, offer for sale, or knowingly permit
the sale of baby food, infant formula, or similar products, or any
pharmaceuticals, over the counter drugs, cosmetics, or medical devices. This
subsection does not apply to a person who keeps available for public inspection
an identification card identifying him or her as an authorized representative
of the manufacturer or distributor of any pharmaceuticals, over the counter
drugs, cosmetics, or medical devices, as long as such card is not false,
fraudulent, or fraudulently obtained.
   J.   Locations Restricted: It is unlawful for any peddler or transient
merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in any business activity at any location
that is not identified and authorized in the applicable peddler's license or
transient merchant's license or itinerant vendor's license issued under this
chapter.
   K.   Bond Requirement: The city waives any requirement of posting a surety
bond or cash deposit by any applicant for a peddler's license or a transient
merchant's license or an itinerant vendor's license. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/2.
3-7-3: APPLICATION FOR PEDDLER LICENSE:
Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a peddler shall file a written
license application with the city's police department on a form approved by the
city's police chief from time to time, and such application shall set forth the
following information and the applicant shall provide the following documents:
   A.   The applicant's name, permanent business address (which must include a
street address), and phone number and residence address and phone number of the
principal (and, if the applicant is a corporation, the residence address and
phone numbers of its officers). The names, addresses and telephone numbers of
all persons who will engage in the business pursuant to the license to be
granted.
   B.   The nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct and a
description of the goods, wares, merchandise, services, and property intended
to be sold or solicited under the issued license.
   C.   The specific dates, days of the week, and times during which such
business is desired to be conducted under the issued license. No one peddler
license shall be issued for any longer period than twenty five (25) days within
a thirty (30) consecutive day period. Any subsequent written application(s) by
the same peddler for another peddler license must be submitted with the
requisite fees and be in compliance with this section.
   D.   The current name, business address, and telephone numbers of the
applicant's employer or contractor, if any.
   E.   For all peddlers who intend to sell tangible personal property, a copy
of the applicant's certificate of registration under the retailer's occupation
tax act 1  and the applicant's state business registration number issued by the
Illinois state department of revenue; and all other evidence to the
satisfaction of the city's police department that sales of tangible personal
property made within the city will be reported as taxable sales within the city
to the Illinois state department of revenue.
   F.   Current photo identification of the applicant and for each person who
will be engaged in the business under the license to be granted.
   G.   The license plate number, model, make, year, and color of any vehicle
that will be used while engaged in business. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
   H.   During the application process and prior to the issuance of the
license, a background check will be completed on all applicants. During this
process if it is determined an applicant has a criminal record, it will be
reviewed by the chief of police or his designee to determine if a license will
be issued to that applicant. (Ord. 3525, 7-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-7-4: APPLICATION FOR TRANSIENT MERCHANT'S OR ITINERANT VENDOR'S LICENSE AND
REGULATIONS:
Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor shall file a written license application with the city's police
department on a form approved by the city's police chief from time to time, and
such application shall set forth the following information and the applicant
shall provide the following documents:
   A.   The applicant's name, permanent business address (which must include a
street address), and phone number and residence address and phone number of the
principal (and, if the applicant is a corporation, the residence address and
phone numbers of its officers).
   B.   The location in the city at which the applicant intends to do business
and the specific dates, days of the week, and times during which such business
will be conducted. In the case of a transient merchant, the application shall
also include the specific location and address in the city from which the
business of a transient merchant will be conducted during the transient
merchant license period applied for and shall identify the legal names of all
owners of such location from which the business of a transient merchant will be
conducted. Such applicant shall further submit a written lease or other written
evidence of the applicant's authorization to conduct the business of a
transient merchant upon such property during all such times applied for.
   C.   The nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct.
   D.   For all transient merchants or itinerant vendors who intend to sell
tangible personal property within the city, copy of the applicant's certificate
of registration under the retailer's occupation tax act 1  and the applicant's
state business registration number issued by the Illinois state department of
revenue; and all other evidence to the satisfaction of the city's police
department that sales of tangible personal property made within the city will
be reported as taxable sales within the city to the Illinois state department
of revenue. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
All transient merchants and itinerant vendors shall provide a list of products
that will be sold and the prices at which each product will be sold at the time
application for a license is sought. In addition, all transient merchants and
itinerant vendors shall clearly display a list of products that they will be
selling and the prices at which each product will be sold on said merchants'/
vendors' unit/equipment used in the sale of said products while selling to the
public. It is the intent of this subsection that the list of products and the
price at which each product will be sold will be clearly visible to the public
so that the public will know the price of each product prior to purchase. (Ord.
3248, 9-19-2005)
   E.   A complete inventory of the goods the applicant intends to offer for
sale.
   F.   A list of all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant or
an itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in the state of Illinois in the
twelve (12) months preceding the date of filing of the application.
   G.   Current photo identification of the applicant and for each person who
will be engaged in the business under the license to be granted.
   H.   The license plate number, model, make, year, and color of any vehicle
that will be used while engaged in business. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
   I.   The following regulations shall apply to all itinerant vendors within
the city of Taylorville, Illinois:
      1.   An itinerant vendor may only operate at a location which has been
approved by the Taylorville city council.
      2.   Any equipment used by an itinerant vendor shall be maintained in a
manner acceptable by the Christian County health department.
      3.   An itinerant vendor which requires power (electricity) shall have
his own power source unless otherwise waived or permitted by the Taylorville
city council.
      4.   An itinerant vendor's unit/equipment shall display the owner's name
which shall be affixed to the unit/equipment in a manner that is clearly
visible to the public.
      5.   An itinerant vendor who has cooking apparatus on their unit/
equipment shall have a fully charged fire extinguisher accessible to the
operator.
      6.   An itinerant vendor shall have litter receptacles which are
available for customer use if the itinerant vendor offers food and/or beverages
for sale.
      7.   Itinerant vendors shall not:
         a.   Discharge fat or other waste into the city's storm sewer;
         b.   Leave the itinerant vendor's unit/equipment unattended;
         c.   Leave a location without disposing of all litter;
         d.   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles;
         e.   Operate within three hundred feet (300') of another itinerant
vendor unless permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         f.   Operate within five hundred feet (500') of a public school
property unless permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         g.   Operate within fifty feet (50') of an intersection unless
otherwise permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         h.   Operate on any city street where the speed limit exceeds thirty
(30) miles per hour unless otherwise permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         i.   Operate within fifty feet (50') of any other business that sells
food or beverages unless otherwise permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         j.   Provide tables or seating for customers unless otherwise
permitted by the Taylorville city council;
         k.   Block any street, alley, or lane of traffic unless otherwise
permitted by the Taylorville city council;
      8.   Failure on the part of an itinerant vendor to comply with the
provisions of this subsection I may result in the revocation of the vendor's
license. (Ord. 3248, 9-19-2005)
   J.   During the application process and prior to the issuance of the
license, a background check will be completed on all applicants. During this
process if it is determined an applicant has a criminal record, it will be
reviewed by the chief of police or his designee to determine if a license will
be issued to that applicant. (Ord. 3525, 7-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-7-5: FEES FOR AND TERM OF LICENSE:
   A.   At the time of submittal of the application, the applicant for a
transient merchant license or an itinerant vendor license shall pay to the
city's police department in advance a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
day within the city; provided, however, if the license application requests a
period of four (4) days or more in the same calendar year, then such license
fee shall be a total of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such calendar year.
Any such license shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year it was
issued. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
   B.   Pursuant to 215 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/415, the aforesaid twenty
five dollar ($25.00) per day per person fees for a peddler's license shall not
apply to insurance salesmen or agents who are employed by or are an agent of an
insurance company legally authorized to conduct business in Illinois and
provided such insurance company is subject to the fees, charges, and taxes
provided for under the Illinois insurance code. However, such insurance
salesmen or agents whose business activities include that of a "peddler", as
defined in this chapter, shall apply for and obtain a peddler's license in
accordance with this chapter prior to engaging in such business within the
city. (Ord. 3222, 4-4-2005)
   C.   All such fees collected by the city's police department shall be
delivered to the city's treasurer for the general account of the city. (Ord.
3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall have the license issued under this chapter in the licensee's
personal possession while in the city conducting business under such issued
license; and a licensee shall immediately show such issued license to any and
all persons contacted by the licensee, and to any and all city law enforcement
officers who request, from time to time, to see such issued license. (Ord.
3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   At his or her sole discretion, the chief of police and/or his or her
designee may revoke the license issued by the city's police department to any
peddler or transient merchant or itinerant vendor under any of the following
circumstances:
      1.   After review of any one or more complaints regarding the adverse
behavior of any licensee, or any of the licensee's employees or agents, towards
any person(s); or if any licensee, or any of the licensee's employees or
agents, engages in any unethical practices while engaging in any business
activities.
      2.   If any licensee, or any of the licensee's employees or agents,
provides any false or misleading information to any person(s) while engaging in
any business activities.
      3.   If two (2) or more complaints are received on the behavior of any
one or more licensed persons engaged in business for the same person.
   B.   The city's police chief shall revoke the license of any licensee under
any of the following circumstances:
      1.   If it is determined that the licensee made any false material
statement in the licensee's application for a license.
      2.   If the licensee, or any of the employees or agents of the licensee,
violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   If the aforesaid state business registration number issued by the
Illinois state department of revenue to the licensee is revoked or suspended.
   C.   If a license is revoked, then such person whose license was revoked
shall not be entitled to apply for another license for a period of three
hundred sixty five (365) days from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 3093, 9-
3-2002)
3-7-8: HOLDING INVENTORY:
   A.   If any person makes retail sales as a peddler or transient merchant or
itinerant vendor without having obtained a license under this chapter, the
city's police department may hold the inventory, truck or other personal
property of the person until such person obtains a license under this chapter
to conduct business as a peddler or as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor
in the city. If the property has been held by the city's police department for
more than sixty (60) days and the person whose property is being held has not
obtained a license under this chapter, the city's police department or the city
may petition the circuit court in the city for an order for the sale of the
property being held. If the circuit court finds that the person whose property
is held has not obtained a license under this chapter, the circuit court may
order the city's police department or the city to sell the property. Proceeds
of the sale of the property, less reimbursement to the city's police department
of the reasonable expenses of storage and sale of the property, shall be
deposited with the city treasurer. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-9: RECEIPTS FOR THE PURCHASE OF NEW AND UNUSED PROPERTY:
   A.   An unused property merchant must maintain receipts for the purchase of
new and unused property purchased or acquired on or after the effective date of
the enactment of this chapter. The receipts must contain the following
information:
      1.   The date of the transaction;
      2.   The name and address of the person, corporation, or entity from whom
the new and unused property was acquired;
      3.   An identification and description of the new and unused property
acquired;
      4.   The price paid for the new and unused property; and
      5.   The signature of the seller and buyer of the new and unused
property.
   B.   It is a violation of this section for an unused property merchant
required to maintain receipts under the provisions of this section to
knowingly:
      1.   Falsify, obliterate, or destroy the receipts;
      2.   Refuse or fail to make the receipts available for inspection upon
request within a period of time that is reasonable under the individual
circumstances surrounding the request; however, the unused property merchant is
not required to possess the receipt on or about his or her person without
reasonable notice; or
      3.   Fail to maintain the receipts required by this section for at least
two (2) years.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   The sale of a motor vehicle or trailer that is required to be
registered or is subject to the certificate of title laws of the state of
Illinois;
      2.   The sale of livestock, ice, or wood for fuel;
      3.   Business conducted in any industry or association trade show;
      4.   Property, although never used, whose style, packaging, or material
clearly indicates that the property was not produced or manufactured recently;
      5.   A person who sells by sample, catalog, or brochure for future
delivery;
      6.   The sale of arts or crafts or other merchandise by the person who
produced those arts or crafts or other merchandise or by a person or persons
acting on his or her behalf; or
      7.   A person who makes sales presentations pursuant to a prior,
individualized invitation issued to the consumer by the owner or legal occupant
of the premises. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-10: COMPLIANCE WITH CITY ZONING CODE:
The fact that any person may be determined exempt from this chapter does not
authorize such person to conduct any business or activities at any location
within the city where it is prohibited under the city's then existing zoning
code. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
3-7-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision(s) of this chapter shall, for each offense,
be punished and/or fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed to occur on each day
any such violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3093, 9-3-2002)
CHAPTER 8
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: License And Compliance Required
3-8-2: Application For License; Investigation; Fee
3-8-3: Records Kept
3-8-4: Stolen Goods
3-8-5: Revocation Of License
3-8-6: Penalty
3-8-1: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without having
first secured a license therefor as is herein provided or in violation of any
of the provisions herein contained. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. III, § 1)
3-8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION; FEE:
Applications for pawnbrokers' licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business, the
number of employees intended to be engaged, and whether or not the applicant
intends to sell, purchase, trade, or engage in the pawning of firearms and/or
ammunition; and, if so, a certified copy of the applicant's Federal license,
issued by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms authorizing such
applicant to engage in the sale, purchase, trade, or pawning of firearms and/or
ammunition, shall be attached to such application. The Chief of Police or any
other officer of the City designated by the Council shall investigate each
applicant for such license and shall report back whether or not such applicant
is a person of good character. No license shall be issued to a person who has
been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or
robbery; and no license shall be issued to any applicant for the sale,
purchase, trade, or pawning of firearms and/or ammunition without having the
aforesaid Federal license; and any such license once issued shall be subject to
immediate revocation by the Mayor upon termination, suspension, or revocation
of said Federal license. The annual fee to be paid for a pawnbroker's license
shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 2764, 9-3-1996)
3-8-3: RECORDS KEPT:
Every pawnbroker doing business in the City shall keep a record of every
article pledged with him or sold to him, and this record shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer at any time during business hours. (1979 Code
Ch. 14, Art. III, § 4)
3-8-4: STOLEN GOODS:
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article
pledged with him, or which it is sought to pledge with him, if he shall have
reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person
attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art.
III, § 5)
3-8-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any pawnbroker's license may be revoked by the Mayor and Council for any
violation of any provision of this Chapter. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. III, § 1)
3-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 9
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARDS 1
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definition
3-9-2: Permit Required
3-9-3: Application for Permit; Fee; Nontransferability
3-9-4: Conditions of Permit
3-9-5: Fences and Advertisements
3-9-6: Sanitary and Safety Requirements
3-9-7: Inspections
3-9-8: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 10 of this Title for junk yards.
3-9-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the term "automobile salvage" shall mean any lot or
place which is exposed to the weather, upon which more than five (5) motor
vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, are placed. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-
88)
3-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall maintain or operate an automobile salvage yard without first
having obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-88)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Application for a permit shall be made to the City Clerk and shall contain the
name and address of the applicant and the location of the premises where the
business is to be carried on. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
charged, and the permit is not transferable. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-88)
3-9-4: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
   A.   Hours:
      1.   Demolishing and Wrecking Cars: Work in connection with the
demolishing or wrecking of cars shall be permitted only on weekdays and
Saturdays between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M.
      2.   Purchases by Operator: No purchaser operating or maintaining an
automobile salvage yard shall purchase any vehicles, or parts or accessories
thereof, except between the hours of sunrise and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   B.   Vehicles Without Identification Marks: No purchaser shall knowingly
buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his possession any motor
vehicle, part or accessory from which the manufacturer's serial number or any
other number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered
or destroyed for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of
the vehicle, part or accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale any
motor vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed, defaced, covered,
altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or any number or
identification mark shall immediately notify the Chief of Police. (Ord. 2277,
3-7-88)
3-9-5: FENCES AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Fence Requirements: An automobile salvage shall be entirely enclosed by
a fence eight feet (8') in height which shall be kept neatly painted and in
good repair at all times and which shall be constructed of plank board or
corrugated iron so as to exclude such yard from public view. No inoperable
motor vehicle or parts thereof shall be permitted to remain outside the fenced
area. A period of fifteen (15) days from the effective date hereof is allowed
the operators of such yards to construct the fence or fences required by this
Chapter.
   B.   Advertisements on Fences: The fence enclosing an automobile salvage
shall not be used for bill-postings or other advertising purposes.
   C.   Contents Not to Exceed Above Fence Height: The contents of an
automobile salvage yard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater
than the height of the fence surrounding it, excluding equipment used in the
operation of the salvage yard. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-88)
3-9-6: SANITARY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Removal of Rubbish and Waste: An automobile salvage yard shall, as far
as practicable, be kept clear and clean of all rubbish or waste matter.
   B.   Open Fires: No open fire for the burning of rubbish, trash,
automobiles, or any parts thereof, or other waste matters, shall be permitted.
   C.   Gasoline to be Drained From Vehicles: All tanks and engines shall be
kept thoroughly drained of gasoline and fluids which shall be disposed of in an
environmentally safe method.
   D.   Fire Extinguishers: Each auto salvage yard shall have on hand at least
one fire extinguisher of a type recommended by the manufacturer to put out
gasoline fires and fires in automobiles. Such fire extinguisher shall be in
plain sight in an easily accessible location and shall be kept charged. Each
employee shall be informed of the location of the fire extinguisher and of the
manufacturer's instructions for using it. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-88)
3-9-7: INSPECTIONS:
All automobile salvage yards, together with the books required by this Chapter,
shall be, at all times, open for inspection to all officers of the City having
police power and the Health and Building Officer. (Ord. 2277, 3-7-88)
3-9-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 10
JUNK YARDS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definition
3-10-2: License Required
3-10-3: Application for License; Fee
3-10-4: Nuisance Conditions Prohibited
3-10-5: Revocation of License
3-10-6: Penalty
3-10-1: DEFINITION:
A "junk yard" is hereby defined as a plot of ground which may be covered with
buildings, partly covered with buildings or without any buildings, which plot
is used for the buying, selling, storing and trading of old iron, rags, hides,
furs, old furniture, rubber, wool, junked car parts, 1  old metals, bottles and
the like, commonly called junk. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. II, §2)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 9 of this Title.
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junk yard anywhere in the City
without first securing a license therefor. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. II, §1)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Any person desiring a license for a junk yard shall make application, in
writing, to the City Clerk. Such application shall state the name and address
of the applicant and the address of the proposed junk yard. Such application
shall be referred by the Clerk to the City Council, and no permit shall be
issued until after approval of the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. II,
§3)
The annual fee for such licenses shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). (1979
Code Ch. 14, Art. II, §4)
3-10-4: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed hereunder to permit any premises
used by him to become a nuisance by virtue of unhealthful conditions, piling of
articles or lumber, fire hazards or any other dangerous condition. (1979 Code
Ch. 14, Art. II, §5)
3-10-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to the penalty provided, the Mayor may revoke any junk yard license
for any violation of this Chapter or any ordinance of the City applicable
thereto. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. II, §6)
3-10-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SCAVENGERS AND USE OF ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS 1
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Scavenger License Required
3-11-3: Scavenger License Fees
3-11-4: Insurance Required
3-11-5: Schedule Of Scavenger Rates
3-11-6: Conditions Of Scavenger License
3-11-7: Inspection Of Scavenger And Roll-Off Container Vehicles Required
3-11-8: Roll-Off Container Permit Required And Conditions Of Permit
3-11-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 3 of this code.
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms or words used herein shall
be interpreted and construed as follows:
   GARBAGE: Shall mean and include any and all trash, refuse, waste, ashes,
rubbish, debris, junk, scrap, recycling materials, construction waste, or
garbage of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever or items of a similar nature.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any firm, entity, partnership, association,
organization, or any other group acting as a unit, corporation, as well as any
natural person; provided, however, "person" shall not include the city or its
employees, officials, or officers while acting in the course of their
employment or office of the city.
   ROLL-OFF CONTAINER: Shall mean and include any receptacle with a capacity of
two (2) cubic yards or more that is designed for the purpose to collect
quantities of garbage.
   ROLL-OFF CONTAINER VEHICLE: Shall mean and include any vehicle designed for
the purpose of transporting any roll-off container, but shall not include any
scavenger vehicle.
   SCAVENGER, SCAVENGERS OR SCAVENGER BUSINESS: Shall mean and include any
person engaged in the business, within the city, of the collection and/or
removal and/or disposal of garbage and/or the providing of any roll-off
containers for the collection of garbage.
   SCAVENGER VEHICLE: Shall mean and include any vehicle designed for the
purpose for collecting and/or compacting and/or removing and/or disposing of
garbage incident to a scavenger business. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-2: SCAVENGER LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a scavenger business within
the city over the city's streets, alleyways, roadways, or other public ways
without first obtaining a scavenger license in the manner set forth in this
chapter from the city. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-3: SCAVENGER LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The license fee for a scavenger's license for each
twelve (12) month period shall be an amount determined by the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each scavenger vehicle and/or roll-off container
vehicle to be used by a scavenger in the scavenger business during each twelve
(12) month period.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: All scavenger license fees shall be payable to the
city clerk. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each scavenger shall maintain, throughout the entire term of the scavenger's
license issued hereunder, liability insurance, with a reputable insurance
company authorized to do business in the state of Illinois, in an amount of not
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence and such insurance shall
specifically name the city as an additional named insured. Such insurance shall
provide liability protection on an "occurrence basis", and not a "claims made
basis", incident to the operation of such scavenger business and the operation
and/or use of each scavenger vehicle and/or roll-off container vehicle used or
provided by such scavenger in such scavenger business. At the time of
application for a scavenger license, and from time to time thereafter upon
request of the city clerk, each scavenger shall provide the city clerk with a
certificate of insurance evidencing such insurance coverage for the entire term
of the scavenger's license. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-5: SCHEDULE OF SCAVENGER RATES:
Each scavenger shall, at each time a scavenger license is issued to the
scavenger and immediately following any rate change, file with the city clerk,
a schedule of rates to be charged to the scavenger's customers. (Ord. 3124, 5-
19-2003)
3-11-6: CONDITIONS OF SCAVENGER LICENSE:
   A.   Sunday Hours: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive
any scavenger vehicle or roll-off container vehicle on, through, or over any
city streets, alleyways, roadways, or other public ways prior to twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on any Sunday.
   B.   Disposal Or Storage Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any
scavenger to dispose of or store any garbage within the city limits.
   C.   Parking Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
scavenger vehicle or any roll-off container vehicle at any time within the city
limits when such scavenger vehicle or roll-off container vehicle is not
actually then being used and operated in the course of a scavenger business.
   D.   Limited Capacity Of Scavenger Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive or operate or use any scavenger vehicle within the city that
has a "packer capacity" (as that term is generally and customarily used in the
scavenger business) for the collection of garbage, in excess of twenty five
(25) cubic yards. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-7: INSPECTION OF SCAVENGER AND ROLL-OFF CONTAINER VEHICLES REQUIRED:
The city clerk, before issuing a scavenger license, shall require the scavenger
to obtain the written approval of the city health and building officer to the
effect that each scavenger vehicle and/or roll-off container vehicle has been
inspected by such officer and found to be satisfactorily constructed to prevent
the littering of garbage onto the city's streets, alleyways, roadways, or other
public ways and that each scavenger vehicle has a "packer capacity" (as that
term is generally and customarily used in the scavenger business) for the
collection of garbage of twenty five (25) cubic yards or less. (Ord. 3124, 5-
19-2003)
3-11-8: ROLL-OFF CONTAINER PERMIT REQUIRED AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, place, use, or maintain
any roll-off container on any city street, alleyway, roadway, sidewalk, or
other public way without first obtaining a roll-off container permit from the
city. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
   B.   The fee for each roll-off container permit shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each roll-off container located, placed, used, or maintained at
each general location for each period of time of thirty (30) days or less. An
additional fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be required for each
additional period of time of thirty (30) days or less at the same or nearby
location. (Ord. 3372, 2-19-2008)
   C.   A roll-off container permit shall not be issued until after the city
street and sewer superintendent approves of the intended location of each roll-
off container on such city street, alleyway, roadway, sidewalk, or other public
way and has inspected such roll-off container and indicates to the city clerk
that such roll-off container(s) and the intended location thereof meet(s) the
requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Each roll-off container must have affixed thereon reflectors on all
four (4) corners of each roll-off container and at a height that would be
within the direct headlight beam of vehicles that may approach such roll-off
container.
   E.   The name, address, and twenty four (24) hour phone number of the
scavenger who owns each roll-off container must be clearly and visibly marked
on such roll-off container in reflective letters and numbers.
   F.   No roll-off container permit shall be issued unless a scavenger who
holds a current scavenger license issued by the city is providing such roll-off
container.
   G.   A roll-off container permit may be denied issuance upon the
recommendation of the city street and sewer superintendent if such roll-off
container has a garbage collection capacity of more than twenty (20) cubic
yards.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, place, use, or maintain
any roll-off container on any city street, alleyway, roadway, sidewalk, or
other public way unless such roll-off container is protected by lighted
barricades placed in the front and the rear of the roll-off container and the
sides of the roll- off container facing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic
have reflective tape of at least two inches (2") in width vertically affixed to
such side(s) of the roll-off container.
   I.   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, place, use, or maintain
any roll-off container on any street, alleyway, roadway, sidewalk, or other
public way that will interfere with vehicular traffic or that reduces the
usable vehicular width of such street, alleyway, roadway, or other vehicular
public way to less than eighteen feet (18').
   J.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store any materials
or garbage on any street, alleyway, roadway, sidewalk, or other public way
other than in a roll-off container for which a roll-off container permit has
been issued under this chapter.
   K.   With or without a roll-off container permit having been issued under
this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use any city sidewalk
during the alteration, repair, improvement, or construction of any building or
structure unless such sidewalk is protected by a temporary roof whenever danger
from falling objects is present and unless such sidewalk is covered to protect
such sidewalk from mortar, paint, etc., or any other construction materials of
any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
3-11-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
fined, upon conviction, an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of the
evidence. (Ord. 3124, 5-19-2003)
CHAPTER 12
TAXICAB DRIVERS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: License Required; Fee
3-12-3: Restrictions on Issuance of License
3-12-4: Requirements for the Operation of Taxicabs and Taxicab Companies
3-12-5: Suspension or Revocation of License
3-12-6: Penalty
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter 12, the following definitions shall apply and
control:
TAXICAB: A motor vehicle of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever that carries
passengers for a fare usually determined by the distance traveled or the
location selected.
TAXICAB COMPANY: Shall mean and include any sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company or partnership, or corporation or any other company
or entity of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever that operates a taxicab
business with owned or non-owned taxicabs. Such "taxicab company" shall also
include any taxicab driver who owns the taxicab he or she drives or operates,
and any company operated under the names of "Uber" or "Lyft".
TAXICAB DRIVER: Shall mean and include any person whose occupation or job is to
take people in a taxicab to the place they want to go in return for money. Such
"taxicab driver" shall also include, but is not limited to, any taxicab driver
who is hired as an employee or is an independent contractor of the company or
entity that owns or operates the taxicab service business and owns the taxicab
the taxicab driver is to drive or operate. (Ord. 3935, 12-2-2019)
3-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   No taxicab company shall operate any taxicab business in the City
without having first secured a taxicab company license and paid the annual
license fee of one-hundred dollars ($100.00) per taxicab operated by the
taxicab company. Each issued taxicab company license shall be for a period not
exceeding three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days and shall expire at 12
midnight (12:00 a.m.) on December 31 of each year. Such annual taxicab company
license fee shall be paid in full and shall not be subject to proration
regardless of the date of issuance of such taxicab company license.
   B.   No taxicab driver shall drive any taxicab without having first secured
a taxicab driver license and paid the annual license fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) therefor. Each issued taxicab driver license shall be for a period not
exceeding three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days and shall expire at 12
midnight (12:00 a.m.) on December 31 of each year. The twenty-five dollar
($25.00) annual taxicab driver license fee shall be paid in full and shall not
be subject to proration regardless of the date of issuance of such taxicab
driver license. (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. VIII, §§ 1.2; amd. Ord. 3935, 12-2-
2019)
3-12-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The Taylorville Police Department shall annually conduct a criminal and local
history check or inquiry on each applicant for a taxicab company license or for
a taxicab driver license.
No such license shall be issued or renewed to any taxicab driver:
   A.   Who does not hold a valid Illinois driver's livery license to operate a
taxicab; or
   B.   Who is a registered sex offender; or
   C.   Who fails to provide evidence that the person has filed the requisite
proof of financial responsibility as required by the State of Illinois (see 625
ILCS 5/8-101). (1979 Code Ch. 14, Art. VIII, §3; amd. Ord. 3935, 12-2-2019)
3-12-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OPERATION OF TAXICABS AND TAXICAB COMPANIES:
   A.   The taxicab driver's picture, the taxicab driver's license or
registration number, and the taxicab medallion number or an exterior
identification number must be posted in a visible location in each taxicab.
   B.   There must be posted in a visible location in each taxicab a telephone
number for a passenger to call if the taxicab driver is operating the taxicab
in a reckless manner.
   C.   If a taxicab driver collides with a pedestrian while operating a
taxicab, resulting in bodily injury, then any responding law enforcement
officers must test the taxi driver for drug and alcohol use.
   D.   A taxicab company shall not hire or employ any taxicab driver who is a
registered sex offender. It is the sole responsibility and obligation of a
taxicab company to investigate, determine, and advise the Chief of Police if
any of its taxicab drivers are registered sex offenders.
   E.   A taxicab company shall not allow any taxicab driver to drive or
operate a taxicab after the taxicab driver is or becomes a registered sex
offender. It is the sole responsibility and obligation of a taxicab company to
investigate, determine, and advise the Chief of Police if any of its taxicab
drivers become registered sex offenders. (Ord. 3935, 12-2-2019)
3-12-5: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Mayor or the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any taxicab company
license and/or any taxicab driver's license for any one or more of the
following offenses:
   A.   A taxicab driver who violates any State of Illinois statute or City
Code provisions regulating the conduct of drivers of motor vehicles; or
   B.   A taxicab driver who operates or drives a taxicab while in possession
of or while consuming or while under the influence of alcohol, marijuana, or of
any illegal drugs or contraband or any combination thereof; or
   C.   A taxicab driver who sells, gives, distributes, or delivers alcoholic
liquor to any person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years or to any
intoxicated person or to any person known by the taxicab driver to be of legal
disability or in need of mental treatment; or
   D.   A taxicab driver who sells, gives, distributes, transports, or delivers
any illegal drug or contraband to or for any person; or
   E.   A taxicab driver who operated or drove a taxicab without holding a
valid Illinois driver's livery license to operate a taxicab; or
   F.   A taxicab driver is or becomes a registered sex offender; or
   G.   A taxicab driver who fails to provide evidence that such person has
filed and maintained the requisite proof of financial responsibility as
required by the State of Illinois (see 625 ILCS 5/8-101).
   H.   A taxicab company who fails to investigate, determine, and advise the
Chief of Police that any of its taxicab drivers is or becomes a registered sex
offender.
   I.   A taxicab company or a taxicab driver who fails to satisfy any of the
applicable requirements of Section
3-12-4 of this Chapter 12.
   J.   A taxicab driver who fails to submit to a drug and alcohol test as
required by paragraph (c) of Section
3-12-4 of this Chapter 12. (Ord. 2291, 6-6-88; amd. Ord. 3935, 12-2-2019)
3-12-6: PENALTY:
In addition to the suspension or revocation of any taxicab driver's license or
taxicab company license, and not in lieu thereof, any taxicab driver and/or
taxicab company violating any provision of this Chapter 12 shall, for each
offense, be punished and fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this City Code; provided, however, and notwithstanding the two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) minimum fine provision of said Section
1-4-1, a minimum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed for
each offense committed by a taxicab company. (1993 Code; amd. Ord. 3935, 12-2-
2019)
CHAPTER 13
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
SECTION:
3-13-1: License Required
3-13-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person or entity having a "going out of business sale" must first make
application to the city clerk for a license and obtain such license and pay a
seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee for each issuance of such license or renewal
thereof in accordance with 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 350/1 et seq., of the
Illinois statutes and as may be amended from time to time in the future. (Ord.
3743, 3-21-2016)
CHAPTER 14
ADULT USE LICENSING AND REGULATION
SECTION:
3-14-1: Purpose
3-14-2: Definitions
3-14-3: License Required
3-14-4: Issuance Of License
3-14-5: Liquor
3-14-6: Fees
3-14-7: Inspection
3-14-8: Expiration Of License
3-14-9: Suspension
3-14-10: Revocation
3-14-11: Hearing; Judicial Review
3-14-12: Transfer Of License
3-14-13: Business Records
3-14-14: Liquor License
3-14-15: Adult Entertainment Cabarets; Restrictions
3-14-16: Video Viewing Booths; Restrictions
3-14-17: Hours Of Operation
3-14-18: Law Enforcement Access
3-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses to protect the community
from the many types of criminal activity frequently associated with such uses.
The city recognizes that such regulation cannot effectively prohibit such uses,
but can balance the competing interest of the community in reducing criminal
activity and protecting property values versus the protected rights of the
owners, operators, employees and patrons of adult uses. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any
other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which
regularly features: a) persons who appear in a state of nudity; or b) live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or c) films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic or computer reproductions which
are characterized by the depictions or descriptions of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult clubs allowing nudity at regular or frequent
times, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
   EMPLOYEE: Means and includes employees, independent contractors or any other
person who is retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at
the licensed premises.
   ESTABLISHED OR ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license.
   NUDITY, OR STATE OF NUDITY: Means and includes the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, female breasts with less than a full opaque
covering below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered
or, that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn
"thong" type bikini bottom.
   OPERATE OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation.
   OPERATOR: Means and includes any person on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of
the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner,
or licensee of the business.
   PERSON: Means and includes any individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Means and includes any location frequented by the public, or
where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places
include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business
and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether
open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or
membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country
clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by social, fraternal or
similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether
permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public
places shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single
sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals
and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a
state of nudity in a modeling class operated by a proprietary school licensed
by the state or by a college, junior college or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation, or by a private college or university which maintains
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or a university supported entirely or partly by
taxation or an accredited private college.
   SEMINUDE: Means and includes a state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: A business that includes an adult use.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, 2) pubic
region, 3) buttocks, 4) anus, 5) female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Means and includes any of the following
offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; public indecency; indecency with a child; engaged in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling;
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of the state of Illinois or
other states or countries;
   B.   For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or
2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is the later date,
if the conviction is a felony offense; or 3) less than five (5) years have
elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurred within any twenty four (24) month period; and
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purposes of this chapter, "specified
sexual activity" means and includes: a) human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; b) human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, artificial or simulated; c) fondling or other erotic touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; and d)
excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth
in this definition.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and
includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use without a
valid adult use business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter;
or to employ a person who is not licensed as an adult use employee as provided
by subsection B of this section or who is not authorized to work or perform
services pursuant to subsection C of this section.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to be an employee of a sexually oriented business
without a valid license. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
an employee of an adult bookstore, unless such bookstore is operated in
combination with one or more of the following businesses as defined herein:
"adult entertainment cabaret", "adult motion picture theater" and "adult
novelty store".
   C.   An applicant, upon receipt by the city clerk of his or her application
for a sexually oriented business employee license, may work or perform services
without an employee license until such time as the license is granted or the
decision to deny the license becomes final pursuant to section 3-14-11 of this
chapter. Upon receipt of the applicant's completed application for an employee
license, the city clerk shall issue the applicant a temporary work permit. The
applicant shall keep the temporary work permit on his or her person or on the
premises where the applicant is then working or performing services, and
produce such permit for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or
other authorized city official.
   D.   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the city to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.
   E.   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the
city clerk an application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city.
The applicant must be determined to be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter. The application shall be signed under oath by the applicant and
notarized. If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant, and must file the
application in person at the city clerk's office. If the applicant is a club,
consisting of private or public membership, then such entity must also be
licensed under this chapter. If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is
other than an individual or club, each individual who has a twenty percent
(20%) or greater interest in the business, including corporations, must sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified
under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee
if the license is granted.
   F.   The completed application for an adult use business license shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/
her legal name and any other names used in the last five (5) years, submit
proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age, and the current residential
mailing address and telephone number.
      2.   If the applicant is a club, consisting of private or public
membership, a copy of the bylaws of the club must be submitted with the
application. In addition, a sworn statement as to the purposes, general
activities and requirement for a club membership must be submitted.
      3.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the
names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
      4.   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the
date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacities of all
officers, directors and principal shareholders (those with a 20 percent or more
stake), and the name and address of the registered corporate agent.
      5.   The adult use name, business location, business mailing address and
telephone number.
      6.   If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a
name other than that of the application, he/she must state: a) the business'
fictitious name and b) submit any required registration documents.
      7.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any "specified criminal
activity" as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
      8.   A photograph of the applicant and two (2) sets of the applicant's
complete fingerprints. The photograph and fingerprints, if not taken at the
office of the city's chief of police, shall be taken within the preceding one
month by a law enforcement agency and accompanied by a notarized verification
by that agency.
      9.   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter
or similar laws or ordinances in another jurisdiction denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension
or revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was
licensed under this chapter or similar laws or ordinances in another
jurisdiction and a license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
include the name and location of the business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
      10.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or other similar laws or ordinances in another jurisdiction and if so, the
names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
      11.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises.
   G.   The information provided pursuant to subsections F1 through F11 of this
section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the city clerk within ten (10) working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
   H.   The information provided by an applicant in connection with the
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the city
clerk on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed to
other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public
safety function or pursuant to any requirement under the Illinois freedom of
information act. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed adult use business
license application, the city council shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The city council shall approve the issuance of a
license unless it determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, any one or
more of the following:
      1.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her/it in relation to
any business;
      3.   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.
      4.   The applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate an
adult use business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to
operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
      5.   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity"
as defined in this chapter.
      6.   The premises to be used for adult use business has not been
inspected and approved by the city's fire chief and the city's health and
building officer as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
      7.   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      8.   The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation or is
not in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that
applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for an adult use
business, the address of the adult use business. An adult use business employee
license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The adult use business
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
adult use business so that it may be easily read at any time. An adult use
business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on
the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall
produce such a license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer
or other authorized city official.
   C.   The city's fire chief and the city's health and building officer shall
complete their inspection certification that the premises is in compliance or
not in compliance with this code within twenty (20) days of receipt of the
application by the city.
   D.   No adult use business license shall be issued unless it meets all
criteria set forth in the city's zoning code. However, an adult use business
license may be issued for a premises which is a legal nonconforming use which
has not yet been terminated or for a premises where such termination is being
challenged by litigation.
   E.   No signs, advertising or other notice to the public may be given for
any premises where adult use is conducted, pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-5: LIQUOR:
No liquor license shall be issued to a licensee or to premises where adult use
is conducted, nor shall liquor be sold, given away or allowed to be consumed on
the premises where any adult use is conducted. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-6: FEES:
Every application for an adult use business license or adult use business
employee license (whether a new license or for renewal of an existing license)
shall be accompanied by a seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) nonrefundable
application and investigation fee. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-7: INSPECTION:
   A.   An applicant, operator or licensee shall permit representatives of the
city's police department, fire department, health and building officer, zoning
enforcing officer, or other city or city designated departments or agencies to
inspect the premises of the adult use for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the provisions of this chapter at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
   B.   A person who operates an adult use or his agent or employee violates
this chapter if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises
at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-8: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Each license shall expire on the January 1 after it was issued and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in section
3-14-3 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty
(30) days before that expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, the expiration of license will not be affected.
   B.   If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-
2004)
3-14-9: SUSPENSION:
The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if,
after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee: a)
violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter, b) refused
to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises as authorized by this
chapter, c) knowingly permitted gambling by any person or the adult use
business premises, or d) has been on the adult use business premises while in
an intoxicated or disorderly condition.
If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found guilty in a court
of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary prior to
suspension of the license. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-10: REVOCATION:
   A.   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section
3-14-9 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified
criminal activity.
   B.   The city may revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing, that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      2.   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed possession,
use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
      3.   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
      4.   A licensee or management personnel knowingly operated the adult use
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      5.   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to
occur in or on the licensed premises;
      6.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county or state for
any taxes or fees past due;
      7.   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly facilitated another
commission of the offense of public indecency; or
      8.   The adult use is a public nuisance as defined by statute, ordinance
or case law.
   C.   If the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business license for one
year from the date the revocation became effective. If subsequent to
revocation, the city finds that the factual basis for the revocation did not
occur, the applicant may be granted a license.
   D.   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-11: HEARING; JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   If the city determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license under this chapter, the city shall notify the applicant
or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke,
including a summary of the grounds therefor. The notification shall be by
certified mail to the address on file with the city clerk. Within ten (10)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the city
clerk in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the
license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked and may include a
request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the city clerk in the
time stated, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be final and notice of
such will be sent to the applicant or licensee. Within five (5) working days
after receipt of a response, the city shall either withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke, and so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail
or shall schedule a hearing before the city council and shall notify the
respondent in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled not less than fifteen (15) nor more
than twenty (20) working days after receipt by the city clerk of the request
for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The
respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of evidence shall not
apply. The city council shall render a written decision within five (5) working
days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by
certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the city clerk. In
no event shall more than forty five (45) days elapse between receipt by the
city clerk of a request for a hearing and mailing by the city clerk of a final
decision to the respondent. An applicant or licensee may continue to work or
perform services under his or her temporary work permit or license pending
receipt of the final decision of the city council. The decision shall be final
at the end of five (5) working days after it is mailed and shall constitute
final administrative action.
   B.   When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final,
the applicant or licensee whose application for a license has been denied or
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to seek
judicial review of the decision by way of special action or other available
procedure in the superior court. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her/its license to another nor shall a
licensee operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address on the license. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-13: BUSINESS RECORDS:
All adult uses shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the
licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the preceding
calendar year. In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and retain for a
period of two (2) years, the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed,
including independent contractors, by the licensee. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-14: LIQUOR LICENSE:
No adult use may be issued a liquor license. Nor shall any establishment with a
liquor license operate as an adult use. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-15: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS; RESTRICTIONS:
All dancing or other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that
purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor. No
dancing or other performance shall occur closer than ten feet (10') to any
patron. In addition, no dancer or performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise
touch any patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any
dancer or performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
dancer or performer, and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron. Gratuities may be indirectly given to dancers or performers by placing
the gratuity on the stage. A person below the age of eighteen (18) years may
not observe or appear in a state of nudity or in such live performances on the
premises of an adult use business. A sign in a form to be prescribed by the
city and summarizing the provisions of this section shall be posted near the
entrance of the adult use business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to
patrons upon entry. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-16: VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS; RESTRICTIONS:
No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used
for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall have
doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or
partitioned portions or a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least
one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted
in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures
or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but
such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the view of the
motion pictures or other offered entertainment. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-17: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No adult use shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. No adult use shall be open on any
Sunday. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
3-14-18: LAW ENFORCEMENT ACCESS:
Any licensee hereunder shall permit law enforcement officials free and
unlimited access to the premises during hours of operation, upon reasonable
request, for the purposes of investigating compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 3205, 11-15-2004)
CHAPTER 15
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: Video Gaming Terminals Allowed
3-15-3: Permit Required
3-15-4: Filing Of Application And Fee Provisions
3-15-5: Display Of Permit
3-15-6: Right Of Entry
3-15-7: Penalty Or Ordinance Violation
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BOARD: The Illinois gaming board.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic
liquor is drawn, poured, mixed or otherwise served for consumption on the
premises, and such retail establishment has a current City of Taylorville Class
A-1 liquor license, Class C-1 liquor license, Class D-1 liquor license, Class
I-1 liquor license, Class J-1 liquor license, Class M liquor license, Class N
liquor license, or Class O liquor license. "Licensed establishment" does not
include a facility operated by an organization licensee, an intertrack wagering
licensee, an intertrack wagering location licensee licensed under the Illinois
Horse Racing Act of 1975, or a riverboat licensed under the Riverboat Gambling
Act.
   LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets, and such fraternal organization has a current City of
Taylorville Class D-1 liquor license.
   LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: A facility that is at least a three (3)
acre facility, with a convenience store, separate diesel islands for fueling
commercial motor vehicles, and parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles as
defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-101.
   LICENSED VETERANS' ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified veterans'
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans' organization
regularly meets, and such veterans' organization has a current City of
Taylorville Class D-1 liquor license.
   TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act and that owns,
services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal
establishments, or licensed veteran's establishments.
   VIDEO GAMING ACT: Illinois Compiled Statutes Chapter 230, Act 40.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which
the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The
term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens,
or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 3710, 4-20-2015; amd. Ord. 3713, 5-18-
2015; Ord. 3798, 4-3-2017; Ord. 3943, 2-18-2020)
3-15-2: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS ALLOWED:
   A.   Video gaming terminals are permitted within the corporate limits of the
City only if licensed and registered by the Illinois gaming board under the
Video Gaming Act and are located in a licensed establishment that has a current
City of Taylorville Class A-1 liquor license, Class C-1 liquor license, Class
D-1 liquor license, Class I-1 liquor license, Class J-1 liquor license, Class M
liquor license, Class N liquor license, or a Class O liquor license.
   B.   The number of licensed video gaming terminals permitted to be operated
in each licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, or licensed veterans' establishment is the number
established by the Video Gaming Act. (Ord. 3783, 11-21-2016; Ord. 3943, 2-18-
2020)
3-15-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate any video gaming terminal in any
licensed establishment, licensed veterans' establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the corporate limits
of the City, without having first obtained a video gaming terminal permit
signed by the Mayor of the City of Taylorville.
   B.   Each video gaming terminal shall require a separate permit.
   C.   No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be
transferable or assignable. (Ord. 3613, 3-18-2013)
3-15-4: FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Every applicant for a permit to place a video gaming terminal in a
licensed establishment, licensed veterans’ establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment shall file an application
with the City Clerk, upon a form provided by the Clerk.
   B.   The fee for each video gaming terminal permit required in Section
3-15-3 of this Chapter shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per video
gaming terminal. In no case shall any portion of the permit fee be refunded to
the permittee.
   C.   Each video gaming terminal permit issued pursuant to Section
3-15-3 of this Chapter and this Section shall terminate on April 30 of each
year. The permittee shall be required to apply for renewal of the permit by
April 30 of each year, on a form provided by the Clerk. (Ord. 3613, 3-18-2013;
amd. Ord. 4156, 2-21-2023)
3-15-5: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Every permit issued shall be framed and hung in a conspicuous place in the
permitted premises. (Ord. 3613, 3-18-2013)
3-15-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, has the power to, and shall
inspect any licensed establishment, licensed veterans' establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the
corporate limits of the City, at such times and intervals as he or she may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of this Chapter. (Ord. 3613, 3-18-2013)
3-15-7: PENALTY OR ORDINANCE VIOLATION:
Any person convicted of violation of this Chapter shall be fined pursuant to
Section
1-4-1, "General Penalty", of this Code.
(Ord. 3613, 3-18-2013)
CHAPTER 16
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSING AND REGULATION
SECTION:
3-16-1:    Purpose
3-16-2:    Definitions
3-16-3:    License Required
3-16-4:    Issuance Of License
3-16-5:    Liquor
3-16-6:    Fees
3-16-7:    Inspection
3-16-8:    Term/Expiration Of License
3-16-9:    Unlawful Activities
3-16-10: Suspension
3-16-11: Revocation
3-16-12: Transfer Of License
3-16-13: Business Records
3-16-14: Liquor License
3-16-15: Hours Of Operation
3-16-16: Law Enforcement Access
3-16-17: Penalty
3-16-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate massage establishments to protect
the community from the many types of criminal activity and/or sexual activity
frequently associated with such uses.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICANT: Any person that applies for a massage establishment license.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons other than massage therapists, who render any
service to the licensee of a massage establishment and who receive compensation
directly from such licensee. It means and includes employees, independent
contractors or any other person who is retained by such licensee or subject to
dismissal from working at the massage establishment licensed premises.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a massage establishment
has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as a massage
therapist as an applicant on the application for a massage establishment
license.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment, operated by or who employs a massage
therapist, having a fixed place of business within the City that advertises or
offers or provides massage services, and where any person for any consideration
whatsoever engages in the practice of massage, or carries on, or permits to be
engaged or carried on any massage services as defined in this Chapter for any
massage establishment.
MASSAGE, MASSAGE SERVICES, OR MASSAGE THERAPY: Any system of structured
palpitation or movement of the soft tissue of the body, including, but not
limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage
or kneading, tapotement or percussion, tapping, pounding, friction, vibration,
compression, touching, stimulating, and stretching the external parts of the
body with or without the aid of lubricants, rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, salt or herbal
preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, a massage device that mimics or
enhances the actions typically performed by human hands, or any other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of massage as defined in this Chapter and who holds a valid
license from the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
under the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.) to perform
massage services, or who is a practitioner or person exempt from licensing
under the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/25).
OPERATE OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation.
OPERATOR: Means and includes any person on the premises of a massage
establishment who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the
business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
massage establishment whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or
licensee of the massage establishment.
OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICE: Any massage establishment, the function of which is
to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or
client rather than at a massage establishment.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership,
corporation,
limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company, association, or
other legal entity or any combination thereof in whatever form or character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus
or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purposes of this Chapter, "specified
sexual activity" means and includes: a) sexual stimulation or arousal of human
genitals; orb) human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
artificial or simulated; or c) fondling or other erotic or sexual touching of
human genitals, sexual or genital areas, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts; or d) causing excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in this definition; or e) prostitution; or f) human
sexual trafficking.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes
any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the massage establishment; or
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the massage establishment, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the massage establishment, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment
or for any massage therapist or employee to perform a massage or massage
services or massage therapy at any massage establishment or to provide out-call
massage services without a valid massage establishment license issued by the
City pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
Chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the City to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
Chapter.
   C.   All applicants for a massage establishment license shall file in person
at the office of the City clerk an application made on a form prescribed and
provided by the City. Each applicant must be determined to be qualified
according to the provisions of this Chapter. The application shall be signed
under oath by each applicant and notarized. If a person who wishes to operate a
massage establishment is an individual, the person must sign the application
for a license as applicant and must file the application in person at the City
Clerk's office. Each applicant must be qualified under the following Section
and each applicant shall be considered a licensee of a massage establishment if
the license is granted.
   D.   The completed application for a massage establishment license shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/
her legal name and any other names used in the last five (5) years, submit
proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age, and the current residential
mailing address and telephone number.
      2.   If the applicant is a club, consisting of private or public
membership, a copy of the bylaws of the club must be submitted with the
application. In addition, a sworn statement as to the purposes, general
activities and requirement for a club membership must be submitted.
      3.   If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general
or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
      4.   If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the
corporation or limited liability company shall state its complete name, the
date of incorporation or organization, evidence that the corporation or company
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation or
organization, the names and capacities of all officers, directors, principal
shareholders, or members (those with a twenty percent (20%) or more stake), and
the name and address of the registered corporate or company agent.
      5.   The massage establishment name, business location, business mailing
address and telephone number.
      6.   If the applicant intends to operate the massage establishment under
a name other than that of the application, he/she must state:
         a.   The business' fictitious name; and
         b.   Submit any required registration documents.
      7.   Whether the applicant has engaged in or participated in or allowed
any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this Chapter within the massage
establishment premises or at any out-call massage service location; and if so,
the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.
      8.   A photograph of the applicant and two (2) sets of the applicant's
complete fingerprints. The photograph and fingerprints, if not taken at the
office of the City's Chief of Police, shall be taken within the preceding one
month by a law enforcement agency and accompanied by a notarized verification
by that agency.
      9.   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this Chapter
or similar laws or ordinances in another jurisdiction denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension
or revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation or a member of a
limited liability company that is or was licensed under this Chapter or similar
laws or ordinances in another jurisdiction and a license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, include the name and location of the business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation.
      10.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this Chapter
or other similar laws or ordinances in another jurisdiction and if so, the
names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
      11.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises.
      12.   The applicant shall provide a certified copy of a current license
issued under the Massage Therapy Practice Act (220 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), or
written documentation of exemption under 220 ILCS 57/25, for all massage
therapists who will be providing massage services in the massage establishment
or who will provide out-call massage services.
   G.   The information provided pursuant to Subsections F.1. through F.12. of
this Section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the City Clerk within ten (10) working days of each change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
   H.   The information provided by an applicant in connection with the
application for a license under this Chapter shall be maintained by the City
Clerk and such information may be disclosed to other governmental agencies in
connection with a law enforcement or public safety function or purpose or
pursuant to any requirement under the Illinois freedom of information act.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed massage
establishment license application, the Mayor shall approve or deny the issuance
of a license to an applicant. The Mayor may approve the issuance of an massage
establishment license unless the Mayor determines any one or more of the
following matters exists or has occurred:
      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines
or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her/it in relation to any
business.
      3.   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.
      4.   An applicant has been denied a license by the Mayor to operate a
massage establishment within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license
to operate a massage establishment has been revoked within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
      5.   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity"
as defined in this Chapter with another person.
      6.   An applicant has a previous license under this Chapter that was
revoked because the licensee or an employee of a licensee had engaged in or
participated in or allowed a specific sexual activity the massage establishment
premises.
      7.   The premises to be used for massage establishment has not been
inspected and approved by the City's Fire Chief and the City's Health and
Building Officer as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
      8.   The license fee required by this Chapter has not been paid.
      9.   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation or is not
in compliance with all the provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that
applicant, the expiration date, the address of the massage establishment, and
names of each massage therapist who will be providing massage services at the
massage establishment or who will be providing out- call massage services. The
massage establishment license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the massage establishment so that it may be easily read at any
time.
   C.   The City's Fire Chief and the City's Health and Building officer shall
complete their inspection certification that the premises is in compliance or
not in compliance with this Code within twenty (20) business days of receipt of
the application by the City.
   D.   No massage establishment license shall be issued unless it also meets
all criteria set forth in the City's Zoning Code.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-5: LIQUOR:
   No liquor license shall be issued to a licensee or to premises where massage
services are conducted, nor shall liquor be sold, given away or allowed to be
consumed on the massage establishment premises. where any massage services are
conducted.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-6: FEES:
   A.   Every application for an annual massage establishment license (whether
a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a
ten dollar ($10.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee.
   B.   Each licensee shall pay the City an annual massage establishment
license fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00); and such license fee shall
not be prorated if issued for any time period less than one year.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-7: INSPECTION:
   A.   An applicant, operator or licensee shall permit representatives of the
City's police department, fire department, health and building officer, zoning
enforcing officer, Mayor, or other City or City designated departments or
agencies representatives to inspect the massage establishment premises for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Chapter at any time
and from time to time.
   B.   A person who operates a massage establishment or his agent or employee
violates this Chapter if he/she refuses to permit such aforesaid inspection or
inspections of the massage establishment premises.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-8: TERM/EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   An annual massage establishment license issued under this Chapter shall
commence on the date the application for such license is approved and shall
expire on the 30th day of April after it was issued and may be renewed only by
making application as provided in Section
3-16-3 of this Chapter.
   B.   Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before
said expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before said
expiration date, the expiration of license will not be affected.
   C.   If the Mayor denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the Mayor finds that the basis for denial of the license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-9: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, massage therapist, employee,
operator, or person to engage in or participate in or allow any specified
sexual activity (as defined in Section
3-16-2 of this Chapter) individually or with another person within the massage
establishment premises or at any out-call massage service location.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-10: SUSPENSION:
   A.   The Mayor may suspend a license instantor for any one of the following
circumstances:
      1.   A licensee, massage therapist, operator, or an employee of a
licensee violated or is not in compliance with any Section of this Chapter; or
      2.   A licensee, massage therapist, operator, or an employee of a
licensee refused to allow an inspection of the massage establishment premises
as authorized by this Chapter; or
      3.   A licensee, massage therapist, operator, or an employee of a
licensee permitted gambling in the massage establishment premises by any
person; or
      4.   A licensee, massage therapist, operator, or an employee of a
licensee has been in the massage establishment premises while in an intoxicated
or disorderly condition; or
      5.   A licensee, massage therapist, employee, operator, or person has
engaged in or participated in or allowed any specified sexual activity as
defined in this Chapter either within the massage establishment premises or at
any out-call massage service location.
   B.   Period of Suspension:
      1.   Such suspension for a first offense shall be for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days.
      2.   Such suspension for a second offense shall be for a period sixty
(60) consecutive calendar days.
      3.   Such suspension for a third offense shall be for a period ninety
(90) consecutive calendar days.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-11: REVOCATION:
   A.   The Mayor shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 3-
15-10 of this Chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months or if a licensee, massage therapist, employee,
operator, or person has engaged in or participated in or allowed any specific
sexual activity (as defined in Section
3-16-2 of this Chapter) individually or with another person on or within the
massage establishment premises or at any out-call massage service location.
   B.   The Mayor may also revoke a license without first imposing any license
suspension if the Mayor determines that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process; or
      2.   A licensee, massage therapist, employee, operator, or person has
allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the
massage establishment premises; or
      3.   A licensee, massage therapist, employee, operator, or person has
allowed prostitution on the massage establishment premises; or
      4.   A licensee, massage therapist, employee, operator, or person
operated the massage establishment during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended; or
      5.   A licensee, massage therapist, employee, operator, or person has
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation,
or other sex act to occur in or on the massage establishment premises; or
      6.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, county or state for
any taxes or fees past due; or
      7.   The massage establishment is or becomes a public nuisance as defined
by statute, ordinance or case law; or
   C.   If the Mayor revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued a massage establishment license for
one year from the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A licensee shall not transfer his/her/its license to another person or
persons, nor shall a licensee operate a massage establishment business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address on the license.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-13: BUSINESS RECORDS:
   All massage establishments shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2)
years, the full legal names, legal residence addresses (no post office boxes)
and ages of all massage therapists and employees employed by the licensee.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-14: LIQUOR LICENSE:
   No massage establishment may be issued a liquor license. Nor shall any
establishment with a liquor license operate as a massage establishment.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-15: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   No massage establishment shall be open prior to eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. or
after eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. Monday through Saturday. No massage
establishment shall be open on any Sunday.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-16: LAW ENFORCEMENT ACCESS:
   Any licensee hereunder shall permit law enforcement officials free and
unlimited access to the massage establishment premises during hours of
operation, upon reasonable request, for the purposes of investigating
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
3-16-17: PENALTY:
   In addition to, and not in lieu of any license suspension and/or revocation
imposed under this Chapter, any person found to have been in violation of any
of the terms and provisions of this Chapter shall be assessed a fine or penalty
in an amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each
day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of the
evidence.
(Ord. 4301, 3-17-2025; amd. Ord. 4306, 3-17-2025)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Department Established; Membership
4-1-2: Fire Chief
4-1-3: Appointments And Promotions
4-1-4: Organization
4-1-5: Duties Of Department Members
4-1-6: Command At Fires; Obedience To Orders
4-1-7: Training
4-1-8: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-1-9: Enforcement Of Provisions
4-1-10: Key Box Required
4-1-11: Arson Investigator
4-1-12: Charges For Services Inside Or Outside City Or Fire Protection District
4-1-13: Hazardous Materials
4-1-14: False Fire Alarms
4-1-15: Municipal Ambulance Service
4-1-16: National Fire Protection Association Code
4-1-17: Non-Municipal Owned ALS Ambulance Service
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created and established a Fire Department consisting of a full
time Chief and Assistant Chief, two (2) Captains and such other full time and
volunteer members as may, from time to time, be designated by the Mayor and
Council. (Ord. 2178, 7-15-1985)
4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment: The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of the Council. (Ord. 2178, 7-15-1985)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Equipment: The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the
order and direction of the Mayor and City Council, of the Fire Department and
all fire apparatus belonging to the City. Whenever any fire apparatus needs
repairing, the Fire Chief shall cause the same to be done without delay. (1979
Code §7-2)
      2.   Records And Reports: The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a
record of all meetings of the company and the attendance of the members, a
record of all fires and, during the last week in April of each year, file with
the City Clerk a full report of such records and attendance and fires, which
report shall be under oath. (1979 Code §7-6)
4-1-3: APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS:
   A.   Appointments to and promotions within the City's Fire Department,
except for the Fire Chief, shall be based on ability and qualifications and
made from a list of eligibles certified by the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners 1  of the City of Taylorville, State of Illinois, in accordance
with such board's rules and regulations. (Ord. 3103, 11-18-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 4 of this Code.
4-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
The Fire Department may have any organization approved by the Council and may
hold meetings and engage in social activities with the approval of the City
Council. The Secretary of the Fire Department, if any, is elected or appointed
and shall keep a record of all meetings and all activities of the Fire
Department. No officer shall be elected or appointed within the organization of
the Fire Department without approval of the Mayor and Council. (1979 Code §7-5)
4-1-5: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the function and the duty of the Fire Department and every member
thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the
occurrence or spread of such fires. (1979 Code §7-7)
4-1-6: COMMAND AT FIRES; OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS:
In case of fire, the Fire Chief and his officers shall rank in the following
order: Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Captains and the officer of the
highest rank at the fire shall take command of the Fire Department and direct
the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, and when it may be
necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of
conflagration, the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn
down or destroyed in the best manner possible. (Ord. 2178, 7-15-1985)
Any fireman in attendance at a fire who shall neglect or refuse to obey the
order of the officer in command at such fire shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code §7-8)
4-1-7: TRAINING:
The City hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the
Illinois Fire Protection Training Act 1 .
Before an individual may commence regular full time employment as a
firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshal as
a firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course
as provided in said Act.
The firefighter II certification must be completed by the trainee within his
probationary period of twelve (12) months. Failure of any trainee to complete
such basic training and certification within the required period will render
that individual and local governmental agency ineligible for reimbursement
funding for basic training for that individual in the fiscal year in which his
probationary period ends. The individual may later become certified without
reimbursement. (Ord. 2260, 9-8-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 740/1.
4-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Unauthorized Use Of Equipment: Whoever shall use any fire engine, hose,
cart or any other apparatus belonging to the City for any private purpose,
other than the extinguishment of fires, or whoever shall remove the same or any
part thereof from its place of deposit or, having control thereof, shall permit
such engine, hose, cart or other apparatus to be used for any private purpose
other than aforesaid shall, upon conviction, for each offense, be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Damage To Property: Whoever shall wilfully or negligently break, deface
or in any manner injure any fire engine, hose equipment or other fire apparatus
belonging to the city or shall remove any screw, bolt, nut or any part of such
engine or other fire apparatus or in any manner interfere with the same when
being used by the proper person or authority shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code § 7-10; amd. 1993 Code)
   C.   Entering Firehouses: It shall be and it is hereby declared unlawful for
any person to enter the fire department house or any place where the equipment
and apparatus of the fire department is stored at any time except on business
pertaining to the fire department or other city business. The penalty for the
violation of this subsection shall be as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code § 7-11; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-9: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all police
officers of the city to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced
and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist or refuse to obey any
such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to that end, all such officers
are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of police officers 1 .
(1979 Code § 7-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 1-9-4C of this code.
4-1-10: KEY BOX REQUIRED:
   A.   For purposes of this section, a "key box" shall mean a high security,
heavy duty locking metal box capable of at least holding an entrance key or
keys to the premises where the "key box" is located, and which "key box" must
be approved by the fire department.
   B.   A "key box" shall be installed and mounted near the main building
entrance or property entry gate or at an entrance or area approved by the fire
department of all business, commercial or industrial buildings constructed
after July 17, 2000. Such "key box" shall have therein at all times an entrance
key or keys to such building and/or gate. A master key to such "key box" shall
be provided to the fire department immediately following construction of such
building. It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of such building to
fully comply with this section. (Ord. 2974, 7-3-2000)
   C.   A "key box" shall be installed and mounted near the main building
entrance or property entry gate or at an entrance or area approved by the fire
department of all business, commercial, or industrial buildings that are
subject to the building permit requirements as set forth in subsection
9-1-1A of this code. (Ord. 3224, 4-4-2005)
4-1-11: ARSON INVESTIGATOR:
   A.   There is hereby created and established the position of arson
investigator within the fire department. The fire chief, by and with the advice
and consent of the mayor and city council as determined by motion duly adopted
by majority vote from time to time, shall designate the person or persons who
shall serve in the position as an arson investigator for the fire department.
Such arson investigator shall be specifically responsible for the investigation
of suspected arson fire incidents subject to the control and supervision of all
his or her superior officers (including, but not limited to, the fire chief)
and the mayor.
   B.   Any candidate for the position of arson investigator must first receive
the arson investigator certificate issued by the office of the state fire
marshal for the state of Illinois, after having satisfied all state of Illinois
prerequisites for certification as an arson investigator. (Ord. 3004, 1-2-2001)
4-1-12: CHARGES FOR SERVICES INSIDE OR OUTSIDE CITY OR FIRE PROTECTION
DISTRICT:
   A.   Definitions:
   NONRESIDENT: Any person who does not currently reside within the boundaries
of the city of Taylorville or the Taylorville fire protection district.
   SERVICES: Fire protection, emergency medical and/or rescue services and/or
water recovery and/or hazardous material spills and/or any situation where the
fire department service is requested.
   B.   Services Agreement: Other than pursuant to the city of Taylorville's
(city's) agreement for fire protection services and emergency medical and/or
rescue services with the Taylorville fire protection district (district), the
city is not required to supply any firefighting services and/or fire protection
services and/or medical and/or rescue services outside the corporate limits of
the city. Upon rendering said services inside, or outside the corporate limits
of the city or of the boundary limits of the Taylorville fire protection
district, to nonresidents of the district/city, it is anticipated the city will
recoup fees from those services.
Excepting any mutual aid agreement or MABAS, all firefighting services and/or
fire protection services and/or medical and/or rescue and/or emergency services
provided by the city's fire department inside or outside the corporate limits
of the city, or inside and/or outside the boundary limits of the Taylorville
fire protection district shall be provided only upon the condition that the
fees set forth herein for such services are charged, levied, and collected in
the manner set forth herein.
For purposes hereof, firefighter services and fire protection services shall
also include, but are not limited to, responding to and/or cleaning up and/or
removal and/or any remedial action regarding any and all spillage or release,
or any and all threats or risks of a spillage or release, of any and all
hazardous wastes and/or materials and/or chemicals, emergency medical services
including ambulance transports (section
4-1-15 of this chapter), and the following services when provided to
nonresidents of the city or district: motor vehicle fire suppression,
nonresident collision or accident response, auto extrication, and vehicle water
recovery services.
   C.   Fees And Charges: The fees and charges for such firefighting service
and/or fire protection service and/or medical and/or rescue and/or emergency
service shall be fixed, charged, and collected at the following rates:
      1.   One hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for each hour or part
thereof for each city firetruck or fire vehicle or rescue truck or rescue
vehicle dispatched and/or recalled for such firefighting service and/or fire
protection service and/or medical and/or rescue and/or emergency service.
      2.   Thirty five dollars ($35.00) for each hour or part thereof for each
city full time or volunteer fireman dispatched and/or recalled for such
firefighting service and/or fire protection service and/or medical and/or
rescue and/or emergency service.
      3.   All hourly fees shall be rounded to the nearest one-fourth (1/4)
hour with the time calculated from the time that each such truck or vehicle and
each such personnel are dispatched from the city's fire station for such
service(s) until such truck(s), vehicle(s), and personnel return to the city's
fire station from providing such service(s).
      4.   In addition to such hourly rate fees, a charge shall be levied to
reimburse the city for extraordinary expenses of materials used in rendering
such service(s).
      5.   Notwithstanding the above, there shall be assessed a minimum charge
of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each motor vehicle collision or accident
and/or for each hazardous waste incident and/or chemical spill incident; and a
minimum charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each motor vehicle
fire call not incidental to a motor vehicle collision or accident, and any
vehicle water recovery incidents.
      6.   A five hundred dollar ($500.00) charge shall be assessed for any
nonresident accident that requires extrication services.
      7.   The fee for nonemergency standby service to any commercial
enterprise shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour with the exception
of special events authorized by the fire chief.
      8.   Emergency service fees shall be evaluated on an annual basis and
adjusted if deemed necessary by the city of Taylorville emergency services
committee.
      9.   All such fees and charges shall be due and payable to the city on or
before the thirtieth calendar day following the date of the city's statement
for such fees and charges and there shall be assessed and collected interest on
the unpaid balance of such charges from time to time computed at the annual
percentage rate of eighteen percent (18%) for each day thereafter until such
statement of fees and charges is fully paid.
      10.   The billing for such fees and charges shall be done by the city of
Charleston under the current intergovernmental agreement. The city's fire chief
shall promptly report to the city of Charleston the detail of services, the
name and address of the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of the property and/or the
name and address of the person(s), business(es), or other entity(ies) for whom
such services were rendered, the amount of fees and charges due hereunder, and
the name and address of any applicable accident, casualty, or fire insurance
company for such owner(s) and/or occupant(s) and/or person(s) and/or business
(es) and/or entity(ies) if identified to the fire chief.
      11.   Each owner, occupant, person, business, and other entity who
receives the benefit of such firefighting services and/or fire protection
services, and/or medical and/or rescue and/or emergency services and/or who
owned or operated or occupied a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle collision
or accident or in a motor vehicle fire or in vehicle water recovery incident,
shall be liable, jointly and severally, to the city to pay and shall pay for
such firefighting services and/or fire protection services, and/or medical and/
or rescue and/or emergency services in accordance with the rate of fees and
charges set forth in this section. Such statement of fees and charges shall be
billed directly to such owner(s), occupant(s), person(s), business(es) or other
entity(ies), with a copy to any identified applicable accident, casualty, or
fire insurance company providing insurance coverage for such person(s),
business(es) or other entity(ies).
      12.   Each such owner, occupant, person, business, and other entity shall
be further liable, jointly and severally, to the city and shall further pay the
city's reasonable attorney fees and expenses and costs, including, but not
limited to, any applicable court costs, incurred in attempting and/or to
realize collection of the amounts due under this section.
      13.   All funds collected hereunder shall be paid into the general
corporate fund of the city.
      14.   Nothing herein shall operate to bar the city from any recovery of
funds from or through any state and/or federal government, agency, or political
subdivision under any applicable statute, regulation, or rule. (Ord. 3661, 3-
17-2014)
4-1-13: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   CITY: The city of Taylorville.
   CLEANUP: Includes all the activities necessary to contain, collect, analyze,
treat, disperse, remove and dispose of hazardous materials and/or
environmentally damaging substances, in a proper manner, and to restore the
site to preincident condition.
   COSTS: All expenses incurred by the Taylorville fire department or the city
and any other public agency assisting as a result of any mitigating or
remediating actions. Costs include, but are not limited to, contractual
services, wages, salaries, damaged or destroyed equipment, spill control
supplies, protective clothing, firefighting or vapor suppressing foam, medical
care and medical supplies. Costs include expenses incurred by the city for the
supervision and verification of mitigating or remediating activities. Costs
shall not include the expense of actual fire suppression services and emergency
medical services which are normally or usually provided to the public by the
Taylorville fire department, except as those costs directly relate to hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances, such as mitigating and
remediating activities by the Taylorville fire department hazardous material
response, and firefighting foam operations at petroleum spills and fires. The
billing for such fees and charges shall be done by the city clerk's office; and
the city's fire chief and/or respective superintendent shall promptly report to
the city clerk the detail of services, the name and address of the owner(s)
and/or occupant(s) of the property and/or the name and address of the person
(s), business(es), or other entity(ies) for whom such services were rendered,
the amount of fees and charges due hereunder, and the name and address of any
applicable accident, casualty, or fire insurance company for such owner(s) and/
or occupant(s) and/or person(s) and/or business(es) and/or entity(ies) if
identified to the fire chief and/or respective superintendent. Charges for
equipment used are taken from the Illinois department of transportation's
schedule of average annual equipment ownership expense.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY DAMAGING SUBSTANCES: Any substance spilled or released into
the environment in sufficient quantity so as to cause actual or potential human
health problems if not dealt with by remedial action, or to contaminate air,
land or water.
   FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline
including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly owned
treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, above and
below ground storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling
stock or aircraft, or any site or area where a hazardous material has been
deposited, stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed, or otherwise come to be
located.
   FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the Taylorville fire department or his designee.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, substance or mixture of materials or
substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive, carcinogenic or
radioactive including, but not limited to, any substance or material which is
designated a hazardous material pursuant to the "hazardous materials
transportation act" (49 USCA, section 1901 et seq.) in a quantity and form
which may pose substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
property or the environment when improperly released, treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous materials also
includes hazardous substances and hazardous wastes.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Any substance designated under the clean water act and
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act (CERCLA)
(423 USC section 6901 et seq.) regulated by the United States environmental
protection agency because of public health and safety concerns.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: Discarded material under resource conservation and recover
act (RCRA) (42 USC section 6901 et seq.) regulated by the United States
environmental protection agency because of public health and safety concerns.
   INCIDENT: A fire, a release or threatened release of hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances.
   MITIGATING: Any action consistent with permanent, remedy taken instead of,
or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or threatened
release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent or minimize
the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to cause a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or the
environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the
location of the release or storage, confinement, containment, perimeter
protection using dikes, trenches, or ditches, clay cover, neutralization,
cleanup of released hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or
reuse, diversion, destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or
replacement of leaking containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on site
treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and any
monitoring reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the public
health and welfare and the environment.
   MUTUAL AID: Any action taken by the Taylorville fire department or any other
public agency pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, including, but not
limited to, any agreement that is part of Christian County SOS Association.
   PERSON: Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assign.
   RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing, exploding or
burning of a hazardous material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream,
sewer or pipe so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may
enter the environment.
   REMEDIATING: The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from the
environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor, assess
and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous materials, the
disposal of removed material, or the taking of such action as may be necessary
to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare of the
environment. The term also includes, but is not limited to, security fencing,
provision of alternative water supplies, and temporary evacuation of threatened
individuals.
   RESPONSE: Any mitigating or remediating action taken, initiated or
coordinated by the Taylorville fire department or city of Taylorville.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY:
      1.   The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there is a
fire or release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material or
environmentally damaging substance;
      2.   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material or environmentally damaging substance owned
or operated the facility, or vehicle used for such disposal, transport,
treatment or storage from which there was a fire, release or substantial threat
of a release of any such hazardous material, or environmentally damaging
substances;
      3.   Any person who by contract, agreement, or otherwise has arranged
with another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances;
      4.   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances for transport to disposal, storage or
treatment sites from which there is a fire, release or substantial threat of
release of hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances;
      5.   In the case of an abandoned facility or vehicle any person owning or
operating the abandoned facility or any person who owned or operated or
otherwise controlled activities at the abandoned facility immediately prior to
abandonment;
      6.   In the case of a land trust owning or operating a facility or
vehicle the person owning the beneficial interest in the land trust.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: No person shall cause, threaten or allow the release
of hazardous materials into the environment unless such release is in
accordance with an appropriate permit granted by the Illinois environmental
protection agency or other state or federal agency having primary jurisdiction
over the release and such release is in such place and manner as will not
create a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or
the environment. Any prohibited release is hereby declared a public nuisance.
This shall be an absolute liability offense.
   C.   Response Authority:
      1.   The fire chief or his authorized representative shall have authority
to respond to any release or threatened release of hazardous materials within
the territory of the Taylorville fire department or affecting the public water
supply, wells or sewage treatment works located within the city or pursuant to
any lawful intergovernmental agreement to which the city is a party. This
authority includes, but is not limited to, remedial action and removal.
      2.   The fire chief shall have primary authority to respond to any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The
fire chief shall report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate federal, state and local public health, safety and
emergency agencies within twenty four (24) hours of any substantial release of
hazardous materials. The fire chief shall relinquish his response authority at
such time, if, as the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release has assumed responsibility for response to the release or threatened
release.
      3.   The fire chief, during such time as response authority is vested in
him, shall be authorized to utilize all Taylorville fire department personnel
and equipment and he may, in his sole discretion, take such mitigating or
remediating action as he may deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the
release or threatened release of hazardous material.
      4.   All responding personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the fire chief or other person then exercising response authority
under this section until such time as the person exercising such response
authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for
response is assumed by the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release.
      5.   The person exercising response authority under this section shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other federal, state or local public health,
safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened
release of hazardous materials.
   D.   Responsible Party Or Parties; Liability For Costs:
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and subject only
to the defenses set forth in subsection E of this section, the following
persons shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of mitigating and
remediating action incurred by the city as a result of a release or threatened
release of a hazardous material:
         a.   The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there
is a fire or release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material
or environmentally damaging substance;
         b.   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material or environmentally damaging substance owned
or operated the facility, or vehicle used for such disposal, transport,
treatment or storage from which there was a fire, release or substantial threat
of a release of any such hazardous material, or environmentally damaging
substances;
         c.   Any person who by contract, agreement, or otherwise has arranged
with another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances owned, controlled or
possessed by such person at a facility owned or operated by another party or
entity from which facility there is a release or substantial threat of a
release of such hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances;
         d.   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances for transport to disposal, storage or
treatment sites from which there is a fire, release or a substantial threat of
release of hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances;
         e.   In the case of an abandoned facility or vehicle any person owning
or operating the abandoned facility or any person who owned or operated or
otherwise controlled activities at the abandoned facility immediately prior to
abandonment;
         f.   In the case of a land trust owning or operating a facility or
vehicle the person owning the beneficial interest in the land trust.
   E.   Defenses: There shall be no liability under subsection D of this
section for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a preponderance of
the evidence that the release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous
material/substance and the damages resulting therefrom were caused solely by an
act as enumerated in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2.
   F.   Costs And Penalties:
      1.   Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or provide
mitigating or remediating action upon or in accordance with a notice and
request of the Taylorville fire department, or in accordance with any order of
any court having jurisdiction on the matter, shall be liable to the Taylorville
fire department for any costs incurred by the Taylorville fire department as a
result of such failure to provide or take such mitigating or remediating
action, together with the cost of any removal or remedial action taken by the
Taylorville fire department in accordance with this section, and all attorney
fees and related legal costs incurred in connection therewith.
      2.   In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this
section and shall be fined not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on
which a violation occurs or continues. If a violation is found to be the result
of wilful and/or wanton conduct or gross negligence, or the person committing
such violation attempts to evade responsibility hereunder by leaving the scene
of the occurrence or by other means, that person shall be subject to a fine as
provided for above or a fine in an amount equal to three (3) times the costs,
including attorney fees and legal costs, for which it is liable under
subsection F1 of this section, whichever is greater.
      3.   Charges for mitigating or remediating action when rendered by the
Taylorville fire department or any other agency rendering mutual aid shall be
as follows:
         a.   One hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for each hour or part
thereof for each city firetruck or fire department vehicle.
         b.   Forty five dollars ($45.00) for each hour or part thereof for
each city full time, and thirty five dollars ($35.00) for each hour or part
thereof for each volunteer firefighter dispatched and/or recalled.
         c.   All hourly fees shall be rounded to the nearest one-fourth (1/4)
hour with the time calculated from the time that each such fire department
vehicle and each such personnel are dispatched from the city's fire station for
such service(s) until such vehicle and personnel are returned to the city's
fire station and subsequently released from the duties of the response.
         d.   In addition to such hourly rate fees, a charge shall be levied to
reimburse the city for extraordinary expenses of materials used in rendering
such service(s). Materials and equipment used, expended, depleted, destroyed or
removed from service in accordance with federal, state or local ordinance as a
result of the mitigation or remediation operations of or at the request of the
city of Taylorville or any responding agency.
         e.   Each responsible party shall remit payment to the city of
Taylorville treasurer within thirty (30) days upon written notification of
cost.
   G.   Cleanup:
      1.   A responsible party or parties shall clean up the facility and site
at which there has been a fire, release or threatened release of hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances. The removal shall be in
accordance with state and federal laws, rules and regulations. The site shall
be restored to preincident condition and meet Illinois environmental protection
agency (IEPA) standards. The site shall, after cleanup, have a general good
appearance and shall also be free of noticeable odors or liquid runoff. Any
remediating actions shall prevent or minimize the release of hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances to prevent a substantial
presence of potential hazard to human health, property or the environment.
      2.   The fire chief or his or her designee shall supervise and verify the
adequacy of all remediating activities.
      3.   The fire chief or his or her designee shall have the authority to
order the responsible party or parties of a fire, release or threatened release
of hazardous materials to hire a cleanup contractor to clean up the site if the
responsible party or parties are not equipped or prepared to properly handle
hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances. No person shall
disobey the order of the fire chief or his or her designee. (Ord. 3297, 6-19-
2006)
4-1-14: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
   A.   Definition: A "false fire alarm" is defined as follows: The activation
of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation or through the negligence of the owner, or lessee of an alarm
system or of his employees or agents or other cause. In addition, a "false fire
alarm" is an alarm system signal eliciting a response by the fire department or
designated agency when a situation requiring a response by the fire department
does not, in fact, exist. "False fire alarm" does not include an alarm signal
caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.
(Ord. 3386, 6-2-2008)
   B.   Fees:
      1.   Commercial/business alarms and residential alarms shall both be
allowed two (2) false fire alarms in a consecutive ninety (90) calendar day
period at no charge. Commercial/business alarms and residential alarms shall be
charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third and fourth false fire alarm
in a consecutive ninety (90) calendar day period notwithstanding the fees
imposed in subsection B2 of this section. For the purposes hereof, a
"consecutive ninety (90) calendar day period" shall commence to run from the
date of the first false fire alarm offense.
      2.   Notwithstanding the fees charged for false fire alarms of
commercial/business alarms and residential alarms set forth in subsection B1 of
this section, fees shall also be imposed for false fire alarms of commercial/
business alarms and residential alarms based on the number of false fire alarms
in a year in the amounts as set forth as follows:
 
Number Of False Fire Alarms  Fee Imposed (For Each
In A Year                    False Fire Alarm)
                             No fee (with the exception that the fees imposed
First 4                      on said 90 calendar day period basis as set forth
                             in subsection B1 of this section shall still
                             apply)
5th through 10th             $ 50.00
11th through 15th            100.00
16th and over                175.00
 
(Ord. 3630, 8-5-2013)
   C.   Testing: No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages to the
fire department through intermediate services shall be tested or demonstrated
without first notifying the fire department dispatcher at Christian County 9-1-
1. An alarm user who fails to comply with this subsection shall be charged a
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and said alarm shall count toward the
alarm limits in subsection B1 of this section.
   D.   Notification: Whenever an alarm is activated thereby requiring
emergency response to the location by the fire department, and the fire
department does respond, the fire department personnel on the scene of the
activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall
determine whether the emergency response was, in fact, required as indicated by
the alarm system or whether the alarm signal was a false fire alarm. In
determining whether an alarm is a false fire alarm, all circumstances shall be
considered.
If the Fire Department personnel at the scene of the activated alarm system
determines the alarm to be false, said officer shall make a report of the false
fire alarm.
The Chief of the Fire Department or the designee of the Fire Chief shall cause
a notification of the false fire alarm report to be mailed, by certified mail,
or delivered to the alarm user at the address of said alarm system installation
location, advising the alarm user of the false fire alarm.
An alarm user who receives said notification shall have five (5) days within
which to inform the Chief of the Fire Department that the alarm user disputes
the existence of the false fire alarm. If the alarm user fails to make said
notification within the stated time, it shall be presumed that the existence of
the false fire alarm has been acknowledged.
   E.   Investigation: The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall
have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to which a response
has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any
reasonable time thereafter.
   F.   Response By Alarm User: Whenever an alarm user or owner of the
protected premises is notified or aware that their alarm system has been
activated, the alarm user or owner's designated representative shall cooperate
with any investigation undertaken by City personnel in responding to the
activated alarm. This shall include, but not be limited to, the alarm user's or
owner's presence at the premises protected by said alarm within a reasonable
period of time after the alarm or owner becomes aware that the alarm has been
activated. Furthermore, the use of an alarm system and its activation shall
constitute consent on the part of the alarm user and owner of the premises to
City personnel permitting said personnel to enter the premises to investigate
the cause(s) of the alarm. The alarm user's or owner's failure to cooperate in
any of the foregoing investigations shall constitute a violation of this
Section and subject the alarm user or owner or both to a fine in an amount not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   G.   Payment: Any person, firm, or corporation assessed a false fire alarm
fee hereunder shall make payment in full to the City Clerk within thirty (30)
days of receiving notice of the fee charged. The number of false fire alarms
will be counted per system. The fact that an alarm user subscribes to an alarm
system shall be no defense. This fee is imposed whether the Fire Department or
the designated agency received the alarm by direct connection or through an
intermediary such as an answering service or modified central station. The fee
imposed by this Section is imposed solely when the choice is made to employ an
alarm system. If the possessor of the alarm shows to the satisfaction of the
Fire Chief that the false fire alarm was not the result of negligence or
improper maintenance, such fee may be waived. (Ord. 3386, 6-2-2008)
4-1-15: MUNICIPAL AMBULANCE SERVICE:
   A.   Established Authority:
      1.   Established: There is hereby established a Municipal ambulance
service to be incorporated within the Fire Department for the purposes of
providing emergency and nonemergency care and transportation of sick, injured
and disabled citizens within the limits of the City of Taylorville and
Taylorville Fire Protection District (TFPD) and beyond the limits according to
policies.
      2.   Authority: The operation of the ambulance service shall be under the
direction of the Fire Chief.
      3.   Operation And Maintenance Of Emergency Vehicle: The Fire Department,
through appropriately trained personnel, is hereby authorized to operate and
maintain an emergency vehicle for emergency advanced life support rescue
transport services.
      4.   Services Provided: The Fire Department shall provide emergency
advanced life support ambulance rescue services.
      5.   Guidelines: The operations of the TFD ambulance will be subject to
the guidelines under SOG #211 "Ambulance Deployment" adopted herein by
reference. (Ord. 3558, 4-16-2012)
   B.   Ambulance Fees:
      1.   For emergency advanced life support rescue transport services
rendered, which consists of transport from the scene of an incident to any
hospital or medical facility, the following fees shall be assessed and paid:
         a.   If the patient is a resident of the City of Taylorville ("City")
or of the Taylorville Fire Protection District ("TFPD"), the fee shall be eight
hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) plus sixteen dollars fifty cents ($16.50) per
mile from the scene of an incident to any hospital or medical facility.
         b.   If the patient is a nonresident of the City or TFPD, the fee
shall be nine hundred dollars ($900.00) plus sixteen dollars fifty cents
($16.50) per mile from the scene of the incident to any hospital or medical
facility.
      2.   For advanced life support non-transport services rendered, the
following fees shall be assessed and paid:
         a.   If the patient is a resident of the City or TFPD, the fee shall
be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
         b.   If the patient is a nonresident of the City or TFPD, the fee
shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      3.   For emergency basic life support rescue transport services rendered,
which consists of transport from the scene of an incident to any hospital or
medical facility, the following fees shall be assessed and paid:
         a.   If the patient is a resident of the City of Taylorville ("City")
or of the Taylorville Fire Protection District ("TFPD"), the fee shall be six
hundred dollars ($600.00) plus sixteen dollars fifty cents ($16.50) per mile
from the scene of an incident to any hospital or medical facility.
         b.   If the patient is a nonresident of the City or TFPD, the fee
shall beseven hundred dollars ($700.00) plus sixteen dollars fifty cents
($16.50) per mile from the scene of the incident to any hospital or medical
facility.
      4.   A fee (on a current cost basis as determined by the Fire Chief)
shall be assessed and paid for all disposable medical supplies that are used by
the Municipal ambulance service in treatment of any patient.
      5.   A fee of one-hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour shall be assessed
and paid for nonemergency standby service to any commercial enterprise, with
the exception of special events as may be authorized from time to time by the
Fire Chief in his sole discretion.
      6.   A fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed and paid
for any vehicle accident that requires extrication for a nonresident of the
City or TFPD.
      7.   A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be assessed and paid
for each TFD apparatus or ambulance response to any call for service that turns
out to be for a non-emergency service that includes, but is not limited to, the
following examples: routine doctor visits, transfers between medical facilities
(including nursing homes) or clinics, general "stretcher van" calls, calls to
locate any handheld electronic device not critical to health or life support,
calls to assist any person with normal daily living activities, or any
ambulance response to any frivolous non-emergency call for service that does
not involve any acute or critical or serious traumatic injury or ailment.
      The TFD can refuse to respond to any further calls for ambulance service
from or for any person that has been involved with one or more ambulance
service in non-emergency situations as aforesaid stated.
      8.   The patient who received the benefit of any TFD ambulance or
personnel services or for whom the ambulance response was made and his/her
spouse, guardian of the person and/or estate, power of attorney agent, trustee,
caretaker, heirs, administrators, executors, legal and/or personal
representatives shall be jointly and severally liable for and shall pay the
aforesaid applicable fees. All such fees shall be due and payable within thirty
(30) days of receipt of a bill from the City.
      9.   Ambulance fees shall be evaluated on an annual basis and adjusted if
deemed necessary by the City of Taylorville Emergency Services Committee.
   C.   Billing: Billing services will be provided by the City of Charleston
under the current intergovernmental agreement.
(Ord. 3558, 4-16-2012; amd. Ord. 3947, 3-16-2020; Ord. 4290, 1-21-2025)
4-1-16: NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION CODE:
   A.   A copy of the NFPA 1, Fire Code - 2018 edition as published by the
National Fire Protection Association is on file with the City Clerk's Office.
Such NFPA 1 Fire Code - 2018 edition advances fire and life safety for the
public and first responders as well as property protection by providing a
comprehensive, integrated approach to Fire Code regulation and hazard
management.
   B.   To the extent not inconsistent with other applicable regulations in
this Code, such NFPA 1, Fire Code - 2018 edition is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference thereto; and the terms and provisions of such
NFPA 1, Fire Code shall apply to and govern Fire Code regulation and hazard
management by the City's Fire Department. (Ord. 3853, 7-16-2018)
4-1-17: NON-MUNICIPAL OWNED ALS AMBULANCE SERVICE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section
4-1-17, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
      1.   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS): A level of ambulance service also
referred to as Advanced EMT by the Illinois Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
systems under the Illinois Department of Public Health rules and regulations.
      2.   ALS AMBULANCE: A non-municipal owned ambulance that is licensed by
the State of Illinois to provide advanced life support services, but such ALS
ambulance shall not utilize the "In-Field Service Level Upgrade" option under
the Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH) rules and regulations.
      3.   OWNER/OPERATOR: An owner/operator of a non-municipal owned ambulance
company or entity that provides ALS ambulance services within the city and
within the Taylorville Fire Protection District.
      4.   CITY: The City of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
      5.   LICENSE: Written permission from the city to operate a non-municipal
ALS Ambulance service within the corporate limits of the city and of the
Taylorville Protection District.
   B.   License Required and Additional Requirements:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to operate any non-
municipal owned ambulance service within the city or within the Taylorville
Fire Protection District without having first obtained and operating under a
license issued from the city and which is in effect.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to violate any of the
terms or provisions of this section 4-1-17.
      3.   No license shall be issued to any owner/operator until and unless
the owner/operator meets and satisfies the minimum requirements set forth in
this section 4-1-17.
      4.   The form of the application for the license shall be on such form as
the city may approve from time to time; and the owner/operator shall provide
the city with all information required in such application.
      5.   As a condition of the license, the owner/operator shall comply with
any and all other city code provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations
relating to ambulance services and the operation of vehicles within the city as
are now in effect or as may be in effect from time to time hereafter.
      6.   As a further condition of the license, the owner/operator agrees to
and shall use it best efforts to provide a minimum of a ninety (90) day written
notice to the city prior to terminating its ALS Ambulance service in whole or
in part within the city and/or within the Taylorville Fire Protection District;
but in any event the owner/operator agrees to and shall provide minimum of a
sixty (60) day written notice to the city prior to terminating its ALS
Ambulance service in whole or in part within the city and/or within the
Taylorville Fire Protection District.
      7.   As a further condition of the license, the owner/operator agrees to
and shall provide ALS Ambulance services within the city and within the
Taylorville Fire Protection District.
      8.   As a further condition of the license, the owner/operator shall keep
their ambulance fleet records updated as ambulances are rotated out of ALS
Ambulance service.
      9.   The following additional requirements shall be met by the owner/
operator prior to the issuance of and as conditions for a License:
         a.   The owner/operator shall provide the city with the full legal
name and address of each individual shareholder, member, manager, partner and
person who owns an interest in and to the entity or entities (eq. a
corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other organization) formed by
the owner/operator to provide the ALS Ambulance services; and the trade names
under which the owner/operator intends to conduct the ALS Ambulance service
business.
         b.   The owner/operator shall provide the city with the following
information for each ambulance to operate under the license:
            (1)   Make;
            (2)   Model;
            (3)   Year of manufacture; and
            (4)   Current state license number.
         c.   The owner/operator shall provide the address of each facility
located within the city that will be used by the owner/operator to operate its
ambulance service under such license; and the owner/operator shall headquarter
its ambulance services, crews, and ambulances in a facility located within the
city.
         d.   The owner/operator shall have in effect at all times all licenses
and certifications required by the State of Illinois and the Illinois
Department of Public Health to operate an ALS Ambulance service; and the owner/
operator shall provide a copy of all such licenses and certifications to the
city at the time of application for a License, and within five (5) business
days of the owner/operator's receipt of each renewal license and/or
certification as the case may be from the appropriate licensing and/or
certifying entity or agency.
         e.   The owner/operator shall provide and maintain, twenty-four (24)
hours per day/ seven (7) days week/ three hundred sixty-five (365) days per
year, a minimum of one (1) ambulance in good operating condition at all times
that is fully equipped and licensed as required by the laws and regulations of
the State of Illinois and of the Illinois Department of Public Health for
operation of ambulance services and which is manned by qualified personnel at
all times who, as a minimum, meet the requirements and are duly licensed as
Advanced EMT under the laws and regulations of the State of Illinois and of the
Illinois Department of Public Health to provide Advance Life Support service.
Any additional ambulances that an owner/operator shall determine to immediately
operate 911 emergency calls under a license shall likewise meet the aforesaid
ambulance equipment, licensed manned personnel, and twenty-four/seven (24/7),
seven (7) days/week, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year time
operational requirements. Each ALS Ambulance is required to be equipped and
staffed by personnel and shall meet the ALS level of ambulance service at all
times under the rules and regulations of the State of Illinois and of the
Illinois Department of Public Health in lieu of utilizing and shall not utilize
the "In-Field Service Level Upgrade" option under the Illinois Department of
Public Health (IDPH).
         f. The owner/operator shall provide such other operational information
that may be requested by the city from time to time. Any owner/operator
providing ALS Ambulance service as of May 1, 2019 will have the first annual
fee waived but shall be required to provide the city all required information
and documentation as set forth in this section 1-4-17 and obtain a license to
continue to operate an ALS Ambulance service within the city.
         g.   The owner/operator shall notify Christian County 911 every time
each of its ambulances goes in service or out of service. The owner/operator
shall maintain accurate records utilizing Christian County 911 dispatch times
for all calls generated through a 911 emergency response. Such records shall
include the calls for service received within the city and within the
Taylorville Fire Protection District, the number of cancelled calls, the
identification of the responding ambulance, and the names of the attendants
responding. Such records that reflect response times shall be available to the
city on a requested basis from time to time either in hard copy or other media.
Upon a five (5) calendar day written notice mailed to the owner/operator at the
address shown on the license, the city shall have the right to inspect, at any
time or times during normal business hours (i.e. between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. Monday thru Fridays of each week) the aforesaid records of the
owner/operator within the allowable limits of the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
      10. The annual fee to apply for and/or for the issuance of the license
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Unless sooner revoked or terminated, a
license shall be valid for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days
following issuance of the license.
   C.   Rates and Charges:
      1.   The rates and charges for ambulance service under the license shall
be determined and collected by the owner/operator from time to time.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any owner/operator found to have been in violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this section
4-1-17 shall be assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established
by a preponderance of the evidence.
   2.   In addition to the fine and penalty as set forth in the preceding
subparagraph D.1. above, and not in lieu thereof, the Mayor may revoke the
license of an owner/operator or suspend such license for such time as he may
deem appropriate, all as determined from time to time by the Mayor in his sole
discretion. (Ord. 3896, 5-20-2019)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Contagious Diseases
4-2-2: Prohibited Acts Generally
4-2-3: Dense Smoke
4-2-4: Food Sales and Service
4-2-5: Cemeteries
4-2-6: Spitting
4-2-7: Penalty
4-2-1: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES:
   A.   Report Required: Every physician called in to care for or treat a
person afflicted with a contagious disease or epidemic disease shall make a
report of the same, within twenty four (24) hours after being called in, to the
Health and Building Officer. In case no physician is in attendance, it shall be
the duty of the person in charge of or having the care of such person to make a
report within twenty four (24) hours from the time the disease is recognized.
(1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §1)
   B.   Quarantine:
      1.   The Health and Building Officer shall have charge of the enforcement
of the quarantine rules. 1  He shall have the power and authority to place any
premises within which a contagious or epidemic disease occurs under quarantine,
and the Health and Building Officer shall determine the time when the
quarantine shall end. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §2)
      2.   Premises which have been quarantined in accordance with the terms of
subsection B above shall be thoroughly fumigated or otherwise freed from all
risk of contagious disease, under the supervision of the Health and Building
Officer before the quarantine shall end. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §3)
      3.   No person engaged in the delivery of food or drink intended for
human consumption shall enter any premises which are quarantined because of the
existence of a contagious or epidemic disease. No containers or bottles shall
be removed from any such premises until the termination of the quarantine, and
no such container which has been left at such premises during the quarantine
shall be placed in use for carrying food or drink until it has been thoroughly
sterilized. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §5)
   C.   Spreading Contagion: It shall be unlawful for any person to spread,
wilfully or carelessly, any contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the
same. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §4)
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section or
violating any of the reasonable rules of the Health and Building Officer with
regard to quarantined premises or disturbing or disregarding any notice of
quarantine placed by or under the direction of the Health and Building Officer
shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. I, §6; 1991 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  2-10-2C of this Code.
4-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health
or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art.
III, §8)
4-2-3: DENSE SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any
fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the City so as to
cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey,
shall be and is hereby adopted as a standard for such grading, and smoke shall
be and is hereby defined as and declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree
of density of number three (3) of said Chart, or greater, for more than six (6)
minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not.
(1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. III, §12)
4-2-4: FOOD SALES AND SERVICE:
   A.   Unwholesome Food: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome or polluted food or drink of any kind in the City. (1979 Code Ch.
16, Art. III, §1)
   B.   Premises: All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink
intended for human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
Premises shall be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds.
   C.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted
with a contagious disease to handle any food or drink intended for sale. (1979
Code Ch. 16, Art. III, §2)
   D.   Utensils: Utensils for personnel use in all places serving food or
drink to the public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after such
usage. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. III, §9)
   E.   Nudity in Places Serving Food and/or Beverages Prohibited:
      1.   Intent: The City Council hereby finds that the competitive
commercial exploitation of nudity is adverse to the public health, safety,
morals and welfare and that it is in the best interests of the public health,
safety, morals and welfare to restrict such nudity in places serving food and/
or beverages in an effort to suppress disease.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection E is to proscribe conduct
which encourages competitive commercial exploitation of nudity, in places
serving food and/or beverages, where such conduct is not related to any live
artistic performance or entertainment which may be protected by the United
States and Illinois constitutional provisions guaranteeing freedom and
expression.
      3.   Definitions:
   ESTABLISHMENT: Every kind of establishment where members of the public are
served food and/or beverages for consumption on the premises.
   FOOD: Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage including
liquor or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part
for human consumption.
   PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, joint
stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity.
   THEATER: A building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having permanently
affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed
view of the stage, upon which theatrical or vaudeville performances or similar
forms of artistic expression are presented, and where such performances are not
incidental to the promoting of the sale of food, drink or other merchandise.
      4.   Conduct Prohibited:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or
operating an establishment as defined herein to permit, allow, require or
otherwise direct any person, while selling food and/or beverages to any
customer, or while seating or directing customers to seats within any
establishment, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or
buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where
the areola and nipple are not covered by a fully opaque covering.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person while serving food and/or
beverages, or while seating or directing customers to seats within any
establishment as defined herein to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair,
pubic hair region or buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top
of the areola, where the areola and nipple are not covered by a fully opaque
covering.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or
operating an establishment as defined herein to suffer, permit, require or
otherwise direct any person, while such person is mingling, coming in contact
with, or likely to come into contact with, or in close proximity to customers
of said establishment, within areas where food and/or beverages is served, to
expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region or buttocks, or any
portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where the areola and
nipple are not covered by a fully opaque covering.
         d.   It shall be unlawful for any person while mingling, coming in
contact with, or likely to come in contact with, or in close proximity to
customers of an establishment within areas where food and/or beverages is
served, to expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic hair region, or
buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, where
the areola and nipple are not covered by a fully opaque covering.
         e.   The provisions of subsections c and d of subsection E4 herein
shall not apply to persons participating in any live act, exhibition or
performance upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above the immediate
floor level and removed at least six feet (6') from the nearest patron.
      5.   Exemption of Theatrical Establishment: The provision of this
subsection E shall not apply to any exhibition, presentation, showing or
performance in any theater which is principally devoted to theatrical
performances.
      6.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any provision of this
subsection E shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2464, 6-
15-92)
4-2-5: CEMETERIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or enlarge a cemetery or, in
the City, to bury any person within the City limits or within a mile thereof
except in an established cemetery. 1  (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. III, §6)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-3-7 of this Code; see Title 8, Chapter 3 of this Code.
4-2-6: SPITTING:
   It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or street
or other public place or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall,
public vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to which the public
is invited. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. III, §11)
4-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE 1
SECTION:
4-3-1: Prohibited Accumulations
4-3-2: Storage Of Garbage And Refuse
4-3-3: Prohibited Deposits
4-3-4: Combustible Refuse
4-3-5: Open Burning Of Refuse
4-3-6: Forbidding Scavenging And Dumping At Roll-Off Box Sites
4-3-7: Regulation Of Deposit Of Garbage And Refuse At Street Department
Facility
4-3-8: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-3-3 of this Code for Lake Taylorville provisions.
4-3-1: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS:
   A.   Duty Of Occupant: It shall be the duty and obligation of every occupant
of any premises in the City to see to the removal of all garbage and other
refuse from his premises or alleyway either by removing it himself to some
authorized dumping grounds or by having it removed by private scavenger 1 .
   B.   Duty Of Owners: It shall be illegal for owner of real estate to refuse
or neglect to remove trash and other debris on his property. Such trash and
debris is defined to include, but not be limited to, paper cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood or metal
furniture, bedding, metals, tin cans, dirt, rock, pieces of concrete, glass,
crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish, street sweepings, dirt, leaves,
catch basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles, solid wastes from industrial
operations, food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, unusable or rotting
lumber, scraps or shavings.
   C.   Removal By City; Payment Of Costs And Expenses: If an occupant or owner
refuses or neglects to remove or cause to be removed such garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, grass, leaves, branches, offal, carcasses, or other things
described in subsections
4-3-1A and B, and Sections
4-3-3 and
4-3-4 of this Chapter following a seventy two (72) hour written notice issued
by the City's Health and Building Officer or his representative, then the City
may remove or cause to be removed same at the expense of the occupant and/or
owner. Such occupant and/or owner shall be liable for and immediately pay to
the City the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) or an amount equal to the costs and
expenses incurred by the City to remove same, whichever amount is greater. Such
costs and expenses if not paid may be recovered by the City against such
occupant and/or owner in any civil action or ordinance violation proceedings in
a court of competent jurisdiction. Such occupant and/or owner shall, in
addition thereto and at the election of the City's Health and Building Officer
or his representative, be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth in
Section
 4-3-8 of this Chapter.
   D.   Notice Of Lien:
      1.   If the City removes or causes the removal of such items by virtue of
any owner's refusal or neglect to remove same following such seventy two (72)
hour notice to do so in accordance with subsection C above, then the City,
following a thirty (30) day notice to such owner, may cause a notice of lien of
the unpaid cost and expense thereof incurred by the City to be recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Christian County, Illinois against the
owner's property. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out: 1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof,
2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable
for the service, and 3) the date or dates when said cost and expense was
incurred by the City, and such notice of lien shall be filed within sixty (60)
days after the cost and expense are incurred. Such lien may be enforced in
accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes in such case made and provided.
      2.   A copy of the notice of lien may be delivered to the owner
personally, or may be mailed to the owner at his last known place of residence,
or may be posted on the owner's property. Service of a copy of said notice of
lien by any of the foregoing methods of service shall constitute notice to the
owner of such lien.
      3.   Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien is filed,
the lien shall be released by the City, and a release shall be filed of record
in the same manner as filing of the notice of said lien. (Ord. 2509, 10-18-93)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 3, Chapter 11 of this Code.
4-3-2: STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
   A.   Receptacles:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent or occupant of any
house, building, flat or apartment or tenement in the City where people reside,
board or lodge or where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or served, at
all times, to maintain in good order and repair a separate can for garbage and
a separate receptacle for tin cans, bottles, ashes and similar refuse; it shall
be the duty of every such occupant to deposit nothing but garbage or paper in
the container provided for the same and nothing but tin cans or bottles in the
receptacles provided for the same. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. II, § 1)
      2.   A receptacle for ashes, tin cans and bottles shall be either of
metal, wood or cement, and such receptacle shall have a capacity of not less
than ten (10) gallons. No hot ashes shall be placed in any such receptacle.
(1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. II, § 3)
   B.   Wrapping Garbage: It shall be the duty of every occupant to adequately
wrap all garbage before placing same in a watertight container provided for the
same. All garbage shall be wrapped in a watertight container to prevent any
leakage. (1979 Code Ch. 16, Art. II, § 2)
4-3-3: PROHIBITED DEPOSITS:
   A.   No garbage, refuse, trash, or litter shall be deposited in any street,
roadway, sidewalk, alley, or public way, excepting as is provided in this
chapter. Notwithstanding section
4-3-8 of this chapter, any person found guilty of violating this section shall
be fined an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, an
amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second offense, and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the third offense and any subsequent offenses; and in
addition to said fine and not in lieu thereof, the offending party shall be
ordered to perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited
to, the picking up of litter in public parks, along public highways, around the
downtown square area or the maintenance of public facilities. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each time garbage, refuse, trash, or litter
is deposited in violation of this section. (Ord. 3169, 4-19-2004)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or cause to be
dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches or any other things in the
roadway or gutter of any public street in the city. (1979 Code § 24-4-22)
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the city any
uncovered piles of garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals; such refuse
shall not be burned or buried within the city. (1979 Code § 16-3-5)
4-3-4: COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as
to create a fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind in any
alley, street or other public place in the city. (1979 Code § 24-4-11)
4-3-5: OPEN BURNING OF REFUSE 1 :
The outdoor burning of refuse, including, but not limited to, paint, oil,
automobiles, tires, plastics, building materials, debris or any other noxious
combustible material, within the boundaries of the city is hereby prohibited.
(1979 Code § 23-6-1)
 
Notes
  1. See also chapter 7 of this title for open burning regulations; see also
1 section
  7-4-1 of this code.
4-3-6: FORBIDDING SCAVENGING AND DUMPING AT ROLL-OFF BOX SITES:
   A.   Definitions:
   ILLEGAL DUMP OR ILLEGAL DUMPING: The placement of any solid waste (which is
not an approved recyclable) in or around the site of any roll-off container
provided by the county of Christian for recycling activities or any recycling
container approved by the city.
   RECYCLABLE(S): Any of the following: "PETE", "HDPE", aluminum, bimetal cans,
tin/steel cans, newsprint, corrugated cardboard, clear glass and brown glass or
any other recyclable materials approved by the city.
   ROLL-OFF CONTAINER: That container provided by the county of Christian and
the state of Illinois, department of energy and natural resources for the
collection of recyclables and/or any recycling container approved by the city;
and the site upon which it is placed in Taylorville, Illinois.
   SCAVENGE OR SCAVENGING: To collect, obtain, possess or pick up any
recyclable item from within the roll-off containers or from the site of the
roll-off containers.
   SOLID WASTE: All materials other than the recyclables defined herein.
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   Scavenging: It shall be a violation for any person or persons to
scavenge any recyclable or recyclables from the roll-off containers or from the
site of the roll-off container.
      2.   Illegal Dumping: It shall be a violation for any person or persons
to illegally dump in any roll-off container or on the site of any roll-off
container.
      3.   Notice: Those recyclables which are accepted for deposit shall be
clearly marked on or near the roll-off container and "no dumping" signs shall
also be posted.
   C.   Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation of the roll-off container
and site shall be as determined by the Taylorville city council from time to
time. (Ord. 2539, 3-21-1994)
4-3-7: REGULATION OF DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE AT STREET DEPARTMENT
FACILITY:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, and subject to the rules and
regulations set forth in this section, any bona fide City resident is permitted
to deposit such City resident's residential household garbage and refuse in the
designated receptacles located at the street department facility at 205 North
Cherokee Street, in Taylorville, Illinois, from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
three o'clock (3:00) P.M., Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday of each week
during which said street department facility is open for business. Dumping is
not allowed on these days when the trash container is too full as determined by
the attendant on duty or when the trash container has been removed by the
disposal company to empty and return. Contractors shall not be allowed to use
this garbage and refuse service. Any resident wishing to deposit household
garbage and refuse in the designated receptacles located at the street
department facility as otherwise set forth herein, shall pay the following
fees: one dollar ($1.00) for each individual plastic trash bag deposited; and
two dollars ($2.00) for each mattress or box spring or carpet roll deposited;
and five dollars ($5.00) for each item of furniture or large item or large
article deposited.
   B.   Furniture, overstuffed chairs, couches, mattresses, box springs, and
carpet (if rolled and secured) will be accepted for deposit subject to the
aforesaid applicable fee for each such item.
   C.   The following items shall not be accepted for deposit in the dumpsters
and not accepted at the street department facility: televisions, lumber,
drywall, pallets, shingles, bricks, concrete or any other construction or
building materials or waste, paint, used oil, gasoline, petroleum products,
hazardous wastes, tires, or railroad ties.
   D.   Shrubs, vegetation, trees, bushes, large and small twigs, limbs, grass,
leaves, weeds, and small garden or flower plants will be accepted in the yard
waste bin at no charge.
   E.   Scrap metal will be accepted in the scrap metal bin at no charge.
However, no appliances containing or having contained freon, including, but not
limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, etc., will be accepted.
   F.   All residential household garbage and refuse acceptable for deposit
shall be contained within plastic trash bags (securely closed) and no such
loose garbage and refuse shall be accepted.
   G.   Such permitted garbage and refuse shall be deposited by such city
resident in the appropriate designated receptacles at such street department
facility.
   H.   Any person desiring to deposit such permitted garbage and refuse shall
submit proof to the city's attendant at such street department facility that
such person is a city resident. Such proof shall consist of a current driver's
license exhibiting a current city residence, or a current city residential real
estate tax bill.
   I.   There shall be no refunds given to any persons who previously purchased
any garbage and refuse stickers from the city.
   J.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, for
each offense, be punished and fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 3484, 8-30-2010; amd. Ord. 4020, 2-16-2021)
4-3-8: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2539, 3-21-1994)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Nuisances Declared Unlawful
4-4-2: Nuisances Defined, Generally
4-4-3: General Enforcement
4-4-4: Enumeration Not Exclusive
4-4-5: Duty Of City Officers To Investigate; Power Of Entry
4-4-6: Notice To Proper Officials
4-4-7: Foul Odors, Filth
4-4-8: Rubbish, Dry Grass
4-4-9: Petroleum Products, Explosives
4-4-10: Unsafe Buildings
4-4-11: Abandoned Refrigerators
4-4-12: Dust, Cinders
4-4-13: Scaffolding, Ladders
4-4-13-1: Neglected Property
4-4-14: Notice To Abate Nuisance
4-4-15: Duty To Abate; Time Limits
4-4-16: Failure To Abate; Separate And Recurring Offense; Penalty
4-4-17: Abatement By City
4-4-18: Summary Abatement By City; Emergency; Public Property
4-4-19: Costs Of Abatement; Debt Of Owner
4-4-1: NUISANCES DECLARED UNLAWFUL 1 :
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to wilfully
or negligently create, erect, maintain or permit a nuisance to exist anywhere
within the city. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2.
4-4-2: NUISANCES DEFINED, GENERALLY:
Any thing, act, omission, occupation or condition which shall exist or continue
for such a length of time as to:
   A.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the health, safety, peace or
welfare of the public; or
   B.   In any way render the public insecure in life or property; or
   C.   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
   D.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, sidewalk, alley, navigable body or other
public way or place;
is hereby declared a nuisance. (1993 Code)
4-4-3: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT:
Any nuisance declared by statute, this chapter or other provisions of this code
or ordinances of the city shall be enforceable under the provisions of this
chapter as if enumerated specifically herein. (1993 Code)
4-4-4: ENUMERATION NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nuisances enumerated in this chapter shall not be deemed exclusive, but are in
addition to and shall be construed in conjunction with any other nuisances
enumerated in statutes or other provisions of this code or ordinances of the
city. (1993 Code)
4-4-5: DUTY OF CITY OFFICERS TO INVESTIGATE; POWER OF ENTRY:
   A.   For the purpose of discovering nuisances, it shall be the duty of the
police, fire, health and building officers and inspectors to investigate,
confirm and report any nuisances coming to their attention.
   B.   In order to investigate, confirm and report nuisances, said officers
and inspectors shall, upon proper identification, be permitted at any
reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner, to visit and enter into or upon any
premises or property within the city to make an examination thereof, if they
shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance exists. (1993 Code)
4-4-6: NOTICE TO PROPER OFFICIALS:
Whenever any nuisance shall be reported to or investigated and determined by
the police, fire, health or building officers or inspectors, notice shall be
given to the owner or person in control of the property or premises involved,
and to the appropriate city officials whose functions include the abatement of
such nuisances. (1993 Code)
4-4-7: FOUL ODORS, FILTH 1 :
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the health, safety,
welfare, peace and comfort of the city and its residents for any person:
   A.   Businesses: To conduct any business or to use any premises so as to
create an offensive or foul odor which taints the air and renders it nauseous
to persons in the vicinity; or
   B.   Animals 2 : To keep or maintain any animals in an unclean or filthy
manner or surroundings, or to keep or maintain any animals from which emit any
particularly foul or offensive odors; or
   C.   Animal Carcasses, Offal: To cause or permit to be collected or to
remain upon any premises or place any animal carcass or any offal, filth,
excretion or other noisome or noxious animal matter of any kind which is, or is
likely to become, putrid, foul or offensive; or
   D.   Vegetable Matter: To cause or permit to be collected or to remain upon
any premises or place any slop or other vegetable matter of any kind which is
or is likely to become putrid, foul or offensive; or
   E.   Cellars, Vaults, Privies: To cause or permit any cellar, vault,
cistern, drain, privy, yard or other premises whatsoever to become, from any
cause, foul or offensive or injurious to the public health; or
   F.   Stagnant Water: To permit to be collected or to stand upon any premises
any foul or stagnant water of any kind; or
   G.   Pigsties: To locate or maintain, or permit to exist or remain anywhere
within the city any pigsty; or
   H.   Foul Or Noxious Substances: To use, deposit or keep any property,
substance or thing emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous
or noxious odor, effluvia or stench particularly repulsive to the physical
senses and which annoys, discomforts or endangers the welfare, health or safety
of any person. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2.
2 1. See title 5, chapter 3 of this code for animal regulations.
4-4-8: RUBBISH, DRY GRASS:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and health and a nuisance
for any person to cause or permit:
   A.   Rubbish, Rags: The deposit or accumulation of any refuse, oily rags,
rubbish or other materials or substances of any kind, so as to constitute a
fire hazard; or
   B.   Dry Grass, Vegetation: The deposit, accumulation, existence or growth
upon any property of any dry or dead weeds, grass, vegetation or other like
substances of any kind, so as to constitute a fire hazard. (1993 Code)
4-4-9: PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, EXPLOSIVES:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause or permit:
   A.   Petroleum Products: The accumulation or storage, within one hundred
(100) yards of any building occupied as a residence or business, other than a
licensed gasoline service station, of any petroleum, naphtha, benzine, coal
oil, gasoline, kerosene, turpentine or other petroleum products or inflammable
substances of any kind, in quantities greater than fifty (50) gallons, except
for heating oil or propane; or
   B.   Explosives: The deposit, accumulation, storage or presence, within one
hundred (100) yards of any building occupied as a residence or business, of any
powder magazine, nitroglycerin, dynamite or other explosive substance of any
kind. (1993 Code)
4-4-10: UNSAFE BUILDINGS 1 :
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause or permit the existence of any unsafe, dilapidated or otherwise
insecure building, wall, stack, chimney, cornice, sign, awning or other like
structure of any kind which, from manner of construction, age, condition or
other circumstances, is or may become a menace to the safety of persons or
property. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.
4-4-11: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 1 :
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to permit the existence or storage in any place accessible to children
of any abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, ice chest, deep freeze or
other airtight appliance or container of any kind, of a capacity of one and
one- half (11/2) cubic feet or more, from which the lids, doors or other covers
have not been removed, or which cannot be easily opened by a child, by means of
pushing only, from the inside thereof. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 430 ILCS 150/1.
4-4-12: DUST, CINDERS:
   A.   It is hereby declared a menace to the public health and a nuisance for
any person to cause or permit any operations that allow any dirt, sand, gravel,
cinders, ashes, earth or other similar materials to be hauled, moved, rolled,
compacted, scraped, dragged or otherwise disturbed, so as to cause or permit
dust to be raised, blown or stirred through the operation of machinery or
otherwise, to the detriment of any person or property.
   B.   Every person engaged in the hauling of any sand, dirt, cinders, ashes,
earth or other similar materials or substances, or engaged in the moving,
rolling, compacting, scraping, dragging or other disturbance of soil, and the
like, shall make adequate provision as often as is required to arrest and
prevent such dust through the use of salts, oil, chemicals and other materials
used and recommended for retarding or eliminating such dust, subject to the
supervision and approval of the city. (1993 Code)
4-4-13: SCAFFOLDING, LADDERS:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person:
   A.   To erect or use, or to cause or permit to be erected or used, any
insecure or unsafe scaffold or ladder whereby the safety of persons working
thereon or passing thereunder may in any way be endangered.
   B.   To place or leave, or to cause or permit to be placed or left, any
tools or articles on any such scaffold or ladder in such manner that the same
may fall into any street, sidewalk or other public way, whereby the safety of
persons passing thereunder may in any way be endangered. (1993 Code)
4-4-13-1: NEGLECTED PROPERTY:
   A.   It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for
any person to own or occupy or possess or maintain any "neglected" property as
that term is defined under the international property maintenance code (2009
edition).
   B.   Each violation of the international property maintenance code (2009
edition) is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance. (Ord.
3702, 4-6-2015)
4-4-14: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 1 :
   A.   Whenever any health or building official or inspector, or any police or
fire officer determines that a nuisance exists on any private property or
premises, the proper city official shall cause a written notice to be served
personally upon the owner or person in control of the property or premises who
is causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, which notice shall give
the person served five (5) days from the date of service of the notice to abate
the nuisance. Such notice shall be by means of personal service of a copy of
the complaint or by certified or registered mail of a copy of the complaint.
Personal service shall be by the zoning officer, animal control officer or by
any police officer of the police department or any person authorized by law to
make personal service. (1993 Code)
   B.   Such notice shall fairly apprise such person of the nature of the
nuisance, his duty to abate or remove the nuisance within the time provided
therein, the penalty for failure to abate the same, and shall state that, if
said nuisance is abated by the city, liability for necessary expenses to be
incurred shall accrue as provided for in section
4-4-16 of this chapter. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2.
4-4-15: DUTY TO ABATE; TIME LIMITS:
It is hereby declared the duty of any person determined to have created,
caused, erected, maintained or permitted a nuisance to exist within the city to
discontinue and abate such nuisance within five (5) days, or such other time
period as may be specified in the notice, from the time he receives written
notice thereof. (1993 Code)
4-4-16: FAILURE TO ABATE; SEPARATE AND RECURRING OFFENSE; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
neglect, refuse or otherwise fail to remove or abate any nuisance after
expiration of the five (5) days or other specified time period provided by
notice thereof; and each twenty four (24) hours, or fraction thereof, during
which such nuisance continues or exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who shall cause, permit or allow a nuisance to continue or
exist as provided for in subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each such offense. (1993 Code)
4-4-17: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Whenever any nuisance is not abated by the owner, lessee or person in control
of the premises or property affected within the time provided by notice, the
proper city officer shall cause the abatement or removal of such nuisance.
(1993 Code)
4-4-18: SUMMARY ABATEMENT BY CITY; EMERGENCY; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Whenever any nuisance: a) constitutes or is deemed to be an imminent or
immediate danger to the public health or safety, or b) exists on public
property, the proper city officer shall cause such nuisance to be summarily and
immediately abated and removed, regardless of any five (5) days or other time
period specified by notice to the person responsible therefor; provided,
however, that in situation a) in this paragraph, such officer shall have first
applied for and obtained the written permission of the mayor for such summary
abatement. (1993 Code)
4-4-19: COSTS OF ABATEMENT; DEBT OF OWNER:
   A.   Any costs or expenses of abatement reasonably incurred by the city
pursuant to the provisions of sections
4-4-17 and
4-4-18 of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city by the owner, lessee
or person in control of premises upon which such nuisance existed; provided,
that where specifically provided in this code or by statute 1 , such costs and
expenses shall become a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the city attorney to enforce by civil action
any and all such debts or liens as provided in subsection A of this section.
(1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-8, 5/11-20-12, 5/11-31-1.
CHAPTER 4A
ABANDONED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-4A-1: Purpose
4-4A-2: Definitions
4-4A-3: Registration Permit Required
4-4A-4: Registration Permit; Expiration And Fees
4-4A-5: Information Required For Registration Permit
4-4A-6: Enclosure Permit For Abandoned Buildings; Enclosure Permit Fee;
Enclosure Requirements; And Remedies
4-4A-7: Building Plan
4-4A-8: Approval Or Modification Of Building Plan
4-4A-9: Failure To Comply With Building Plan
4-4A-10: Change Of Ownership
4-4A-11: Compliance With Other City Code Provisions Or Applicable Law
4-4A-12: Penalty
4-4A-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by establishing a process for the registration and abatement of
certain abandoned buildings that are hereby declared public nuisances.
   B.   Abandoned buildings are hereby declared a public nuisance that
adversely affects surrounding property values and the public health, safety and
welfare.
   C.   Owners of abandoned buildings are required to register and enclose such
buildings and to implement a building plan for the maintenance of such
buildings and to remedy any Taylorville City Code violations and to prevent
deterioration, unsightly blight, and consequent adverse impact on the value of
nearby property. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABANDONED BUILDING:
   A.   Vacant: Any building that is vacant or not occupied by any individual
for at least ninety (90) days in any one hundred eighty (180) consecutive day
period; or
   B.   Tax Delinquent: Any property upon which the building is situated that
has been tax delinquent for two (2) or more years; or
   C.   Water Bill Outstanding: The bills for water service for the property
upon which the building is situated have been outstanding for two (2) or more
years; or
   D.   Open To Trespass: Any building open to trespass.
   E.   Exceptions: The following building descriptions are exceptions to the
definition of an "abandoned building" and shall not be considered an "abandoned
building" for purposes of this Chapter:
      1.   A building under construction, repair, alteration, or a remodeling
project and which has a valid City building permit for such construction,
repair, alteration, or remodeling work.
      2.   A building owned (and not leased to any other person) by the City or
by the Taylorville community school district or by the State of Illinois or by
any taxing entity or by any political subdivision thereof of any such entity.
      3.   A building that is temporarily or permanently vacant or not occupied
by any individual but is otherwise properly maintained in accordance with and
not in violation of any applicable provisions of this Code relating to
buildings, including, but not limited to, Titles 3, 4, 9, and 10 thereof.
   BUILDING: A structure of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever and used or
not used for any purpose whatsoever, including, but not limited to, for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Health and Building Officer and Animal Control
Officer or his or her designated representative or designee.
   BUILDING OPEN TO TRESPASS: Any building or part thereof which is unoccupied
by any individual and/or that is in such a condition so as to allow entry
without the use of keys or special tools by an unauthorized person, or by
animals or fowl.
   CITY: The City of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
   COMPOSTED: A controlled biological reduction or composting of organic wastes
to humus.
   GARBAGE: Any organic waste material including, but not limited to, unused
food and food residue.
   INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises
of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests.
   LITTER: Any discarded, used or unused substance or waste. "Litter" may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
yard waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or
other packaging material, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a
dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to
injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else of an unsightly
or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned, or otherwise
disposed of improperly.
   MANTRAP: Existing conditions that unreasonably endanger the life or well
being of a firefighter or other authorized personnel in the event he/she is
called on to extinguish a fire or to respond to any other emergency.
   OCCUPANT: Any person legally occupying, living or sleeping in a building or
having possession of a space within a building.
   OWNER: Each and every person, mortgagee, lienholder of record (except the
City), agent, operator, firm, entity or corporation of any kind, nature, or
extent whatsoever having a legal or equitable interest in a property; or
recorded in the official records of the State, County, or City as holding title
to a property; or otherwise having control or possession of the property,
including the guardian of an estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator or legal representative of the estate of a deceased person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court, and a mortgagee of the
property. All such persons and entities shall be jointly and severally deemed
an "owner" for purposes of this Chapter.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, financial institution, mortgagee, lienholder,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity,
guardian of the person and/or estate of a minor or of a disabled person, an
executor, administrator, independent representative of the estate of a deceased
person, the heirs of law of an intestate or testate decedent, or their
respective legal representatives, agents or assigns.
   PREMISES OR PROPERTY: A lot, plot or parcel of land including the building
or structures thereon.
   RUBBISH: Inorganic waste material including, but not limited to, metal and
glass.
   SOLID WASTE OR REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible wastes including, but
not limited to, garbage, rubbish, dead animals, animal offal, animal feces,
human wastes, abandoned vehicles, machinery components, construction or
demolition debris, and yard wastes unless composted.
   WEEDS OR GRASS: Weeds, grass, brush, wildings, second growth, or vegetation
that is not cultivated, growing upon property to a height of eight inches (8")
or greater.
   YARD WASTE: Leaves, grass, clippings, garden debris, and brush. (Ord. 3667,
5-5-2014; amd. Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
4-4A-3: REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   An owner of an abandoned building shall apply for in writing, obtain
and pay for a registration permit and an enclosure permit from the City within
fifteen (15) days after a notice to register is sent by the Building Official
to an owner of the abandoned building.
   B.   The notice to register shall contain at least the following
information:
      1.   The street address of the abandoned building or a description
sufficient for identification.
      2.   A statement requiring an owner to register such abandoned building
with the City within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice to register
and to obtain an enclosure permit and enclose the abandoned building and to
submit a building plan all in compliance with this Chapter.
      3.   A statement requiring an owner to contact the Building Official
prior to the completion of the enclosure in order to schedule an inspection.
      4.   A statement whereby an owner's building plan shall include an
agreement that an owner shall be responsible and liable for maintaining the
property free of any garbage, infestation, litter, refuse, rubbish, solid
waste, brush, weeds and grass that exceed eight inches (8") in height, yard
waste, stumps, roots, or dead or dying trees.
   C.   Service of the notice to register shall be sent by mail to an owner at
an owner's last known address, or to the name of the person(s) in whose name
the real estate was last assessed at the address to which said assessment was
last forwarded. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-4: REGISTRATION PERMIT; EXPIRATION AND FEES:
   A.   The fees for the registration permit for each abandoned building shall
be as follows:
      1.   For the first ninety (90) consecutive days following issuance of the
registration permit, the registration fee shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00) for an abandoned building consisting of less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and six hundred dollars ($600.00) for an abandoned
building consisting of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      2.   For each subsequent ninety (90) consecutive day period, the
registration fee for the same abandoned building shall be seven hundred dollars
($700.00) for an abandoned building consisting of less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for an abandoned
building consisting of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   B.   The initial registration and each subsequent registration shall be
valid for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days provided the applicable
registration fee has been fully paid by an owner.
   C.   The initial registration fee is due and payable by an owner at the time
of the application for the registration permit; and each subsequent
registration fee is due and payable by an owner prior to the expiration of the
previous ninety (90) consecutive day registration period.
   D.   If at the end of any ninety (90) consecutive day registration period
the Building Official determines that such building is no longer an abandoned
building, then an owner will not be required to pay the next registration fee
for such building.
   E.   Before a registration permit or an enclosure permit is issued and from
time to time after a registration permit or an enclosure permit is issued an
inspection or inspections may be conducted by the Building Official and by any
other City official deemed necessary by the Building Official to determine
whether any violations of this Code exist concerning the abandoned building or
the property where it is located. If an owner or occupant of an abandoned
building refuses to allow any inspection or reinspection to be conducted, an
administrative search warrant may be requested from a circuit court of
competent jurisdiction upon a showing of probable cause that a City Code
violation exists concerning the abandoned building or the property where it is
located.
   F.   Once such building has been registered, an owner shall obtain a
certificate of occupancy in the manner set forth in Section
10-9-3 of this Code prior to any occupancy of the registered building.
   G.   After a building has been registered, or required to be registered
hereunder, an owner shall be required to either demolish the abandoned building
or obtain a city permit sufficient to obtain a certificate of occupancy within
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days following issuance of the notice to
register.
   H.   Any owner who does not obtain such certificate of occupancy permit or
fails to demolish such building within said one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive day period shall be subject to fines and penalties as stated in
section
4-4A-12 of this chapter.
   I.   Each abandoned building that has been registered, or is required to be
registered hereunder, under this chapter shall be listed on the city's website,
which listing shall include the address of such building and the name of the
record owner of the property on which such building is located.
   J.   All registration fees are nonrefundable. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-5: INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR REGISTRATION PERMIT:
The registration permit application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address, and telephone number of owner.
   B.   If an owner resides outside of Christian County, Illinois, then as a
condition for issuance of the registration permit, an owner shall provide the
name, address, and telephone number of an authorized agent who shall be a
natural person, twenty one (21) years of age or older, who resides in Christian
County, Illinois, and who has the written authority by the owner to receive all
notices of code violations and service of process of court or administrative
enforcement proceedings on behalf of an owner.
   C.   Name, address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal
interest in the property, building and premises.
   D.   Legal description from the deed of conveyance and the tax parcel
identification number of the premises on which such building is situated.
   E.   The common address of such building.
   F.   Date on which such building became abandoned.
   G.   The building plan proposed by an owner of the abandoned building. (Ord.
3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-6: ENCLOSURE PERMIT FOR ABANDONED BUILDINGS; ENCLOSURE PERMIT FEE;
ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS; AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Subject to subsection
4-4A-8B of this chapter, each abandoned building shall be enclosed by an owner
thereof within thirty (30) days after issuance of the enclosure permit for that
abandoned building; and no person shall enclose any building without first
obtaining an enclosure permit from the city.
   B.   All applications for enclosure permits and any renewals or extensions
of enclosure permits are subject to approval by the building official.
   C.   The fee for an enclosure permit shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00).
   D.   An owner shall enclose an abandoned building in accordance with the
following requirements:
      1.   Unless otherwise approved in writing by the building official or by
his designee in their sole discretion, all windows and doors shall be covered
with minimum of one-half inch (1/2") exterior grade plywood or other similar
material. The covering shall be a single sheet cut to fit each opening and
nailed and screwed from the exterior so that the covering cannot easily be
removed.
      2.   All other exterior openings allowing entry of fowl or animals shall
be covered from the exterior with a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") exterior
grade plywood or a maximum of one-half inch (1/2") mesh screening or other
similar material.
      3.   Unless otherwise approved in writing by the building official or his
designee in their sole discretion, water and gas service to the building shall
be disconnected; and electrical service to the building shall be disconnected
at the pole, transformer, or distribution can.
      4.   Any and all garbage, rubbish, litter, solid waste, and infestation
shall be removed from the interior and exterior of the property.
      5.   All mantraps existing within the building shall be covered or
repaired.
      6.   The storage of any other materials in or on the interior or exterior
of the property shall be in accordance with any and all written specifications
as determined by the building official in his or her sole discretion.
      7.   The property owner shall call the building official prior to
completion of enclosure in order to schedule a compliance inspection.
   E.   If an owner of an abandoned building fails to obtain a registration
permit or fails to obtain an enclosure permit in accordance with this chapter
within fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of the notice to register as
provided in section
4-4A-3 of this chapter, or if the owner of an abandoned building fails to
enclose such abandoned building in accordance with this chapter within thirty
(30) days after issuance of the enclosure permit, then in any such event the
city may file an action with the 4th judicial circuit court in Taylorville,
Illinois, and pursue any and all available remedies as may be provided to the
city under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1 and/or 5/11-31-1.01 and/or
5/11-20-15.1 and/or proceed to take action as authorized without court
intervention under subparagraph (e) of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-
1 and/or subject that owner to the penalty provisions of section
4-4A-12 of this chapter and/or to pursue any and all other applicable remedies
under law. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-7: BUILDING PLAN:
   A.   The building plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   A plan of action to maintain the abandoned building and premises
thereof in conformance with the city code.
      2.   A plan of action to remedy any city code violations.
      3.   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each city code violation.
      4.   If an owner proposes to demolish the abandoned building, then an
owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
      5.   A statement whereby an owner agrees to and shall be responsible and
liable for maintaining the property free of any garbage, infestation, litter,
refuse, rubbish, solid waste, brush, weeds and grass that exceed eight inches
(8") in height, yard waste, stumps, roots, or dead or dying trees.
   B.   An owner shall arrange for an inspection of the building by the
building official upon each date of completion listed in such building plan.
(Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-8: APPROVAL OR MODIFICATION OF BUILDING PLAN:
   A.   The building official shall have the discretion to approve the proposed
building plan. The building official shall have the right to modify the
building plan by altering the dates of performance or the proposed methods of
action. If the building official approves or modifies the building plan, notice
shall be sent to an owner of such abandoned building.
   B.   A building under construction or repair pursuant to such building plan
or any modification thereof each approved in writing by the building official
shall be exempt from such enclosure requirements set forth in the preceding
section
4-4A-6 of this chapter as the building official deems appropriate during the
time period the abandoned building is under construction or during the approved
time period as set forth in such approved building plan or approved
modification thereof. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH BUILDING PLAN:
Failure of an owner to comply with the approved building plan shall constitute
a violation of this chapter subjecting an owner of such building to the
penalties as provided in section
4-4A-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-10: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
   A.   The building plan shall remain in effect notwithstanding a change in
ownership. The new owner shall file a new registration with the building
official and supply the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner
(s).
   B.   The new registration shall be in the same form as the original
registration; provided, however, an additional registration filing fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid by a new owner. The new registration
shall be for the same ninety (90) consecutive day period as then in existence
or remaining for the previous owner. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-11: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CITY CODE PROVISIONS OR APPLICABLE LAW:
   A.   Compliance with this chapter shall not preclude action by the city to
demolish or force rehabilitation or remediation or enclosure of an abandoned
building pursuant to any other provisions of this code or other applicable law.
   B.   All owners of abandoned buildings shall also be subject to and comply
with all other applicable requirements of the city code and with any and all
other applicable law. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-2014)
4-4A-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person in violation of any one or more provisions of this chapter
shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues. In
addition to this penalty, the city may utilize any other statutory or common
law remedies.
   B.   In addition, if an owner of an abandoned building fails to comply with
the notice to register within fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of
the notice to register, the city may file an action with a circuit court in
Taylorville, Illinois, requesting an order ordering the registration of such
abandoned building by an owner.
   C.   In lieu of or in addition to assessing or collecting any penalties
under this section or under other applicable city code provisions or statutory
violations, the city in its sole discretion may, but is under no obligation to,
accept a deed of conveyance from an owner of the abandoned building and upon
such terms and conditions that are acceptable to the city. (Ord. 3667, 5-5-
2014)
CHAPTER 4B
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
SECTION:
4-4B-1: Public Nuisance
4-4B-2: Removal; Exemption
4-4B-3: Notice Of Violation; Remedy
4-4B-4: Penalty
4-4B-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
It is hereby declared a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
to place, maintain, store, or use any "portable storage container" as defined
in section
10-14-2 of this code on any private property or public right of way within the
city in any manner not authorized or permitted by the city under
title 10, chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
4-4B-2: REMOVAL; EXEMPTION:
Any portable storage container which existed lawfully on a parcel or tract of
land at the time of the adoption of an ordinance enacting this chapter shall be
removed by the owner or occupant of the property where such portable storage
container is located, within sixty (60) consecutive calendar days after
adoption of such ordinance, unless such portable storage container is
authorized or permitted under
title 10, chapter 14 of this code. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
4-4B-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REMEDY:
Any portable storage container placed, maintained, stored or used in violation
of this chapter may be removed by the city or its delegates if such owner or
occupant fails to remove such portable storage container(s) within fourteen
(14) consecutive calendar days immediately following the receipt of a notice of
such violation and order to remove such public nuisance issued by the city's
health, building, and zoning enforcement officer. Such notice of violation and
order to remove shall be deemed received by such owner and/or occupant on: a)
the date of personal service of such notice and order; or b) within three (3)
business days of depositing a copy of such notice and order in a United States
post office or post office box in Taylorville, Illinois, in an envelope
addressed to "Owner and/or Occupant" with proper postage for regular mail
prepaid at the address of the property where such portable storage container(s)
are located; or c) if such address is unknown, then the date when a copy of
such notice of violation and order is posted near the main entrance of the
property where any of such portable storage containers are located or on one of
such portable storage containers. Each owner and occupant, jointly and
severally, shall be liable for and pay the city for all costs and expenses
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court and
collection costs, incurred and related to the removal and disposition of such
portable storage container(s) and the collection of such indebtedness; and such
indebtedness shall be recordable as a lien upon the property where such
portable storage container(s) are or were located before such removal. (Ord.
3734, 11-2-2015)
4-4B-4: PENALTY:
In addition to and not in lieu of the remedy provided in section
 4-4B-3 of this chapter, any "person" (as defined under section
1-3-2 of this code) found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be assessed a fine or penalty for each offense
in accordance with the general penalty provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
CHAPTER 5
WEEDS, GRASS, PLANTS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Nuisances Declared
4-5-3: Height
4-5-4: Abatement Procedures
4-5-5: Lien
4-5-6: Penalty
4-5-7: No City Utilities If Delinquent Bill
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   OWNER, OWNERS, OR OWNER'S: Such term or terms shall be deemed to include any
sole owner, any part owner, any joint owner, any tenant in common, any joint
tenant, any tenant by entirety, any contract purchaser, or any lessee or tenant
or occupant of the whole or of any part of any land, lot, or tract of real
estate located within the corporate limits of the city of Taylorville,
Illinois, or any person or entity of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever or
his/her/its assignee who holds a certificate of sale or other appropriate
instrument or document by virtue of the payment, in whole or in part, of
delinquent real estate taxes, or any real estate mortgagee or judgment creditor
or other lienor or their respective assignees who has taken or has actual or
consecutive possession or control of the subject real estate under the terms
and provisions of any mortgage instrument or document or by virtue of any real
estate mortgage foreclosure proceeding or by virtue of any court proceeding
concerning any judgment lien or other lienholder or who is the holder of a
certificate of sale or other appropriate instrument or document by virtue of
any public or private sale of the subject real estate; provided, however and
notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the term or terms owner,
owners, or owner's shall not mean or include the city of Taylorville, Illinois,
a municipal corporation and the city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal
corporation is specifically exempt from complying with any regulations as are
otherwise applicable to the term or terms owner, owners, or owner's as defined
herein and as set forth in this chapter.
   PLANTS: Does not include trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants.
   PROPERTY: Includes the land, lot, or tract of real estate owned, leased,
occupied or being purchased by the "owner" (as that word is defined herein).
   RIGHT OF WAY OR BOULEVARD: Includes the space between any sidewalk adjacent
to the "owner's" property and the adjacent street pavement, and shall include
the space between the owner's property line and the adjacent street pavement if
there is no sidewalk adjacent to the owner's property line.
   WEEDS: Includes, but is not limited to, the following: burdock, ragweed
(giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lamb's
quarters, wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison
hemlock, wild hemp and Johnson grass and all other "noxious weeds" as defined
by the statutes of the state of Illinois; and the word "weeds" shall also
include any grass of a variety exceeding eight inches (8") in height. (Ord.
2511, 10-18-1993; amd. Ord. 3079, 7-15-2002; Ord. 3626, 7-1-2013)
4-5-2: NUISANCES DECLARED:
   A.   Weeds: Any weeds found growing in any land, lot or tract of real estate
in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
   B.   Barberry Bushes: It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit
the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as Berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties within the
city. (Ord. 2511, 10-18-1993)
4-5-3: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit any weeds, grass, or plants to
grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") upon any property or upon any
right of way or boulevard within the corporate limits of the city. Any such
weeds, grass or plants exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (Ord. 2511, 10-18-1993)
4-5-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: The city's health and building officer, or his
authorized representative, may serve or cause to be served a written notice to
abate such nuisance upon an owner of any premises on which such weeds, grass or
plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the following procedures:
      1.   The first notice to abate issued to each such owner during each
calendar year shall give such owner five (5) days from service of such notice
to abate to mow, cut, or trim such weeds, grass or plants to the permissible
height as provided in this chapter. Such weeds, grass or plants shall be mowed,
cut or trimmed by the owner to a height not to exceed eight inches (8") within
five (5) days after such notice has been duly served.
      2.   The second and all subsequent notices to abate issued to each such
owner during each calendar year shall give such owner forty eight (48) hours
from the time service of such notice to abate to mow, cut, or trim such weeds,
grass or plants to the permissible height as provided in this chapter. Such
weeds, grass, or plants shall be mowed, cut or trimmed to a height not to
exceed eight inches (8") within forty eight (48) hours after such notice has
been duly served.
   B.   Service Of Notice: Service of the notice provided for herein may be
effected by handing the same to any owner, or to any member of his or her
household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises or by
mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided
that if the premises is unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
   C.   Abatement By City:
      1.   If the owner so served does not abate the nuisance or fails or
neglects to mow, cut or trim such weeds, grass or plants to the aforesaid
permissible eight inch (8") height within the aforesaid five (5) day or forty
eight (48) hour time period, as the case may be, then, at the expense of the
owner, the city may abate or cause the abatement by others of such nuisance or
may mow, cut or trim such weeds, grass or plants to such permissible eight inch
(8") height or may authorize others to mow, cut, or trim such weeds, grass or
plants on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2511, 10-18-1993)
      2.   In such event and for each such occurrence, the owner shall be
liable for and shall pay the city a sum equal to two dollars ($2.00) per
frontage foot of owner's property or two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever
amount is greater, plus an amount equal to the cost and expense to repair or
replace any city equipment damaged during such abatement of such nuisance or
mowing, trimming, or cutting of weeds, grass, or plants, plus all postage costs
for any and all certified mail and/or regular mail incurred to collect the
amount due, plus an amount equal to the fee charged by the recorder for
Christian County, Illinois, for the city to record any notice of lien under
section
4-5-5 of this chapter and/or 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-
15 or 5/11-20-15.1.
Such costs and expenses, if not timely paid, may be recovered by the city
against such owner in any civil action or ordinance violation proceedings in a
court of competent jurisdiction and/or through a collection agency selected by
the city.
In addition thereto or in lieu thereof, and at the election of the city's
health and building officer or his representative, such owner shall be subject
to the penalty provisions as set forth in section
4-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 3626, 7-1-2013)
4-5-5: LIEN:
   A.   Lien: All costs and expenses incurred for the abatement of any nuisance
or for the mowing, cutting or trimming of such weeds, grass or plants ("removal
activity") shall be a lien upon the owner's property. A bill representing the
removal cost and expense incurred ("removal cost") for the removal activity
shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within thirty (30)
calendar days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien consisting of a sworn
statement setting out the removal cost incurred by the city for the removal
activity may be recorded in the following manner:
      1.   A description of the real estate (or a description of the abandoned
residential property as applicable) that sufficiently identifies the parcel;
      2.   The amount of the removal cost for the removal activity;
      3.   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the city;
and
      4.   In the case of abandoned residential property, a statement that the
lien has been filed pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7(d).
The notice of lien shall be filed in the recorder's office for Christian
County, Illinois, within one year after the removal cost is incurred. (Ord.
3626, 7-1-2013)
   B.   Payment: Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the
property if the owner's address is known or to the person to whom was sent the
tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year.
Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has been filed,
the lien shall be released by the city or owner in whose name the lien has been
filed and the release may be filed of record in the same manner as filing
notice of the lien. All lien and release filing fees shall be paid by the owner
of the property. (Ord. 3132, 7-21-2003)
   C.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for said unpaid costs
and expenses may be foreclosed upon and enforced in accordance with the
Illinois Compiled Statutes in such case made and provided.
   D.   Liability Of Owner: The liability of the owner as set forth in this
chapter shall be joint and several; and the city may proceed against any one or
all owners, but the city shall not be required to proceed against more than one
owner. (Ord. 2511, 10-18-1993)
4-5-6: PENALTY:
Regardless of whether the owner or the city or its representative abates such
nuisance or mows, cuts, or trims such weeds, grass, or plants to the
permissible height as set forth in this chapter, any owner violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine for each offense which
occurs during each calendar year in accordance with the following schedule:
   A.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense;
   B.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the second offense; and
   C.   Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the third offense and for
each subsequent offense thereafter.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
such nuisance or weeds, grass, or plants continues unabated after the aforesaid
five (5) day or forty eight (48) hour notice to abate as applicable has been
served or mailed in accordance with section
4-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 3626, 7-1-2013)
4-5-7: NO CITY UTILITIES IF DELINQUENT BILL:
   A.   City utilities (i.e., water and/or sanitary sewer service) shall not be
provided or turned on to any premises where there remains any unpaid bill or
lien concerning any removal cost incurred for any removal activity under this
chapter.
   B.   The city may turn off or disconnect any water and/or sanitary sewer
service to any premises where there remains any unpaid bill or lien concerning
any removal cost incurred for any removal activity under this chapter. (Ord.
3626, 7-1-2013)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-6-1: Restrictions On Certain Sound Devices
4-6-2: Whistles
4-6-3: Penalty
4-6-1: RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN SOUND DEVICES:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions of terms used in this Section
shall apply. In addition, all definitions of acoustical terminology as
contained in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) section 1.1-1960
"Acoustical Terminology" are incorporated herein by reference thereto and shall
apply to this Section.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: dB(A), in decibels, a frequency weighted sound pressure
level, determined by the use of the metering characteristics and A-weighted
network specified in ANSI section 1.4-1971 (R.1976) "Specification for Sound
Level Meters" and the latest revisions thereof.
   CLASS A LAND: All land with a Residential 1 (R-1) or Residential 2 (R-2)
zoning classification as determined by the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Taylorville, Illinois".
   CLASS B LAND: All land with a Commercial 1 (C-1) or Commercial 2 (C-2)
zoning classification as determined by the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Taylorville, Illinois".
   CLASS C LAND: All land with an Industrial 1 (I-1) or Industrial 2 (I-2)
zoning classification as determined by the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Taylorville, Illinois".
dB(A): See definition of A-Weighted Sound Level.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, firm,
entity, association, or group, or any legal representative, agent, or employee
of any of the foregoing.
   PROPERTY-LINE NOISE SOURCE: Any musical instrument or device, radio,
phonograph, stereo receiving unit, microphone, loudspeaker, amplifier, or any
other similar sound device or equipment, which emits any sound.
   SLOW DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTIC: The dynamic characteristic specified as "Slow"
in ANSI document section 1.4-1971 (R. 1976) "Specification for Sound Level
Meters".
   SOUND: An oscillation in pressure in air.
   SOUND LEVEL: In decibels, a weighted sound pressure level, determined by the
use of metering characteristics and frequency weightings in ANSI section 1.4-
1971 "Specification for Sound Level Meters".
   B.   Sound Emitted To Class A Land:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person shall cause,
permit, or allow the emission of sound during daytime hours (i.e., 7:00 A.M. to
10:00 P.M., local time) from any property-line noise source located on any
Class A, B, or C land to any receiving Class A land, which exceeds, for any
continuous period of thirty (30) seconds or more measured on Slow Dynamic
Characteristic, any allowable dB(A) sound level specified below, when measured
at any point within such receiving Class A land:
 
Class C Land Class B Land Class A Land
61dB(A)      55dB(A)      55dB(A)
 
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no person shall cause,
permit, or allow the emission of sound during nighttime hours (i.e., 10:00 P.M.
to 7:00 A.M., local time) from any property-line noise source located on any
Class A, B, or C land to any receiving Class A land, which exceeds, for any
continuous period of thirty (30) seconds or more measured on Slow Dynamic
Characteristic, any allowable dB(A) sound level specified below, when measured
at any point within such receiving Class A land:
 
Class C Land Class B Land Class A Land
51dB(A)      44dB(A)      44dB(A)
 
   C.   Measurement Of Sound: The measurement of sound shall be made with a
sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4 Type 2 and IEC 651 Standards).
   D.   Exemptions:
      1.   The following situations shall be exempt from the provisions of
subsection B of this Section:
         a.   During any performance of the Taylorville Municipal Band;
         b.   The playing of music during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the Taylorville Square when the same is
requested by the Taylorville Area Merchants' Association or the Greater
Taylorville Chamber of Commerce, and the same is approved by the Mayor upon
written request therefor;
         c.   For auctions performed by any auctioneer who is licensed
according to the applicable provisions of this Code and conducts such auction
pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code; provided, however, such
auction is completed by eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.;
         d.   Public parades or processions, circuses, or wedding processions;
         e.   Sporting events sponsored or authorized by any public or private
school, the Taylorville Park District, Young Men's Christian Association
(YMCA), the Christian County Fair Association or any other duly organized
sporting association, firm, or corporation;
         f.   Special public events sponsored or authorized by the City or the
Taylorville Association of Commerce or the Taylorville Area Merchants'
Association or by any service club or fraternal organization organized and
operating in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois such as the
Sertoma Club, the Kiwanis Club, the Optimist Club, the Lions Club, the Jaycees,
the Moose Club, the Eagles Club, the Knights Of Columbus, VFW, and the American
Legion;
         g.   Any activity performed by or authorized by employees or agents or
contractors of the city when such activity is performed incident to official
public business for the city;
         h.   Any fundraising event sponsored by or authorized by any publicly
recognized charitable, religious, educational, or healthcare provider entity
duly organized and operating in accordance with the laws of the state of
Illinois;
         i.   Any police, fire, ambulance, or emergency rescue activity
performed in the ordinary course of business or for the purpose(s) intended for
such services provided; or
         j.   Special events sponsored or authorized by a private club or
organization on its premises; and such club or organization was duly organized
and is operating in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois; and such
club or organization has an active membership of at least seventy five (75)
members. (Ord. 2853, 6-15-1998)
      2.   Notwithstanding such exemption, no person shall cause, permit, or
allow the emission of any sound(s) during any of such situations which is
unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to any
reasonable person or persons of ordinary sensibilities within the area of
audibility of such sound(s), and such sound(s) shall not extend past ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., of any day.
   E.   Permits For Special Social Events Or Occasions:
      1.   Any adult owner or adult tenant of any class A land may be allowed
to obtain a permit for an exemption from the provisions of subsection B of this
section for a designated time not to exceed a ten (10) hour continuous period
for the date such permit is permitted; provided, however, no more than two (2)
such permits within a twelve (12) month consecutive calendar period may be
issued for the same class A land; and provided further, such exemptions shall
not extend past ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., during any designated time period;
and provided further, no person shall cause, permit, or allow the emission of
any sound(s) which is unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a
nuisance to any reasonable person or persons of ordinary sensibilities within
the area of audibility of such sound(s).
      2.   Written applications for such permits shall be filed with the city
clerk's office at least twenty one (21) days prior to the event, and said
application shall be upon forms provided by the city, setting forth the name
and address of the applicant, the date and designated time period requested for
such permit, the precise location where the property line noise source(s) will
be used, the zoning classification of such location, and such other information
as may be requested on such form.
      3.   If an applicant applies for a sound amplified sound devices permit
and requests to have city of Taylorville streets blocked for the event, the
person filling out the application shall obtain and maintain a one million
dollar ($1,000,000.00) general liability insurance policy to cover the event.
Such general liability insurance coverage shall be an "occurrence" type policy
and not a "claims made" type policy. Furthermore, the insurance policy shall
name as an additional insured the "city of Taylorville, Illinois, municipal
corporation, and its elected and or appointed mayor, city council, officials,
officers, employees, and agents". Such requests to block city of Taylorville
streets shall be approved by the street and sewer committee.
      4.   The fee for the permit as set forth in this section shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00).
      5.   The provisions of subsections C and D of this section shall apply to
all persons for any such prohibited sound outside of the designated time period
set forth in such permit.
      6.   Notwithstanding the above, the city clerk shall refuse to issue any
permit for any such class A land if the city clerk determines that any of the
then existing owners or tenants of such class A land were in violation of any
of the provisions of this section within the twelve (12) months prior to the
date of a pending application for such permit. (Ord. 3481, 8-2-2010)
   F.   City Owned Property Adjacent To Lake Taylorville: Notwithstanding
subsection E of this section, no permit shall be issued to any person for
application at any location on any city owned property adjoining Lake
Taylorville or at any location on any other property adjoining Lake
Taylorville. (Ord. 3109, 1-21-2003)
4-6-2: WHISTLES:
It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown any whistle in the city
except as a signal for starting or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid
injury to persons or property. (1979 Code § 24-4-26)
4-6-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 7
OPEN BURNING 1 , 2
SECTION:
4-7-1: Permitted Fires
4-7-2: Burning Leaves, Vegetation, Weeds, Grass Clippings, And Tree Limbs
4-7-3: Hazardous Fires
4-7-4: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-4-1 of this code for Lake Taylorville provisions.
2 2. See also section
  4-3-5 of this title for prohibited materials.
4-7-1: PERMITTED FIRES:
The following listed types of fires are permitted so long as same are not
situated upon a street or parkway within the city:
   A.   Fires for the purpose of burning leaves, grass clippings and small tree
limbs.
   B.   Burning of wood, charcoal, gasoline and other clean fuels in a
fireplace, grill or the like for cooking and social heating purposes.
   C.   Fires in conjunction with holidays and festive celebrations and for
other special purposes if set and attended by personnel qualified in fire
lighting techniques, fire containment and the use of firefighting equipment.
This type of fire shall be allowed only by special permit issued by the mayor
of the city. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. VI, § 2)
4-7-2: BURNING LEAVES, VEGETATION, WEEDS, GRASS CLIPPINGS, AND TREE LIMBS:
   A.   Restricted Burning: During the months of October, November, December,
January, February, and March of each year, it shall be unlawful to burn leaves,
vegetation, weeds, grass clippings or tree limbs anywhere in the city except
from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until sunset during the first full week and the
third full week of each such month; and for purposes hereof, a "full week"
shall be defined as a Monday through the immediate following Sunday.
   B.   Open Burning: During the months of April, May, June, July, August, and
September of each year, it shall be unlawful to burn leaves, vegetation, weeds,
grass clippings or tree limbs anywhere in the city except between seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and sunset. (Ord. 3142, 9-15-2003)
   C.   Free Disposal: Any resident within the corporate limits of the city may
dispose of leaves, vegetation, weeds and grass clippings at no charge by
hauling them, in yard waste containers or bags, to and depositing them into the
designated receptacle(s) at the city street and sewer department; provided,
however, said yard waste containers or bags shall not be deposited into said
designated receptacle(s) or left at the city street and sewer department
facility.
   D.   "Burning Off" Is Prohibited Generally: It shall be unlawful to "burn
off" leaves, vegetation, weeds, grass, or tree limbs anywhere in the city.
   E.   Burning On City Property: Notwithstanding anything in this section to
the contrary, the city may dispose of and/or burn leaves, vegetation, weeds,
grass clippings, and tree limbs on city owned property at any time(s) and on
any date(s) the city may determine. (Ord. 3071, 4-15-2002)
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense upon conviction thereof, plus
court costs and fees. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed to be a separate offense. Any person issued a citation for an offense
pursuant to this section may pay the fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for such
offense at the city clerk's office within ten (10) days from the date of such
citation. If not so paid within such ten (10) days, then an ordinance violation
complaint may be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction.
   G.   Enforcement: This section shall be enforced by the Taylorville police
department. (Ord. 3213, 12-20-2004)
4-7-3: HAZARDOUS FIRES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to light or maintain any hazardous fire near any
building, structure or flammable material. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. VI, § 3)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire on any street or
sidewalk pavement or so near to any building or other structure as to endanger
such building or structure. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, § 12)
4-7-4: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, for each offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. VI, § 6; amd. 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Fireworks Defined
4-8-2: Sale, Use Or Explosion Of Fireworks Prohibited; Public Displays; Permits
4-8-3: Protected Areas; Fireworks Showers; Transportation Signals Or Fuses
4-8-4: Nitroglycerin And TNT; Storage Of Explosives
4-8-5: Searches And Seizures; Forfeiture; Destruction
4-8-6: Penalty
4-8-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
   A.   The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition,
or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional
nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include
blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of
balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects; provided, however, that the
term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices;
trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick
matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
twenty five hundredths grain or less of explosive compound are used, providing
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when
in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain
less than twenty hundredths grain of explosive mixture; the sale and use of
which shall be permitted at all times. (Ord. 3122, 5-5-2003)
4-8-2: SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; PUBLIC DISPLAYS; PERMITS
1 :
   A.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, copartnership, or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the
city at any time.
   B.   Provided a permit is first obtained from the city, supervised public
displays of fireworks are permitted. Permits may be granted hereunder to any
groups of three (3) or more adult individuals. Applications for such permits
shall be made in writing to the city's fire chief at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on such
application within forty eight (48) hours after such application is made. Such
applications shall be accompanied by a bond signed by the applicants in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned on compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et seq., (state
bar edition) and the regulations of the state fire marshal adopted under such
statute; except that the city shall not be required to file such bond.
   C.   Forms for such application and permit may be obtained from the office
of the state fire marshal. One copy of such permit shall be on file with the
city fire chief, and one copy forwarded to the office of the state fire
marshal.
   D.   After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use,
and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
   E.   No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable; and no permit shall
be required for supervised public displays by state or county fair
associations.
   F.   Every such display shall be handled by a competent individual
designated and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired,
as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
   G.   Such permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display site
by the fire chief or a full time regular member of the city's fire department,
to determine that such display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person or persons.
   H.   Possession by any party holding a certificate of registration under
"the fireworks regulation act of Illinois", filed July 20, 1935 2 , or by any
employee or agent of such party, shall not be a violation, provided such
possession is within the scope of business of the fireworks plant registered
under that act. (Ord. 3122, 5-5-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-4-1 of this code.
2 1. 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq., state bar edition.
4-8-3: PROTECTED AREAS; FIREWORKS SHOWERS; TRANSPORTATION SIGNALS OR FUSES:
   A.   No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited or exploded within six
hundred feet (600') of any hospital, asylum or infirmary in the city.
   B.   The use of what are technically known as fireworks showers or any
mixture containing potassium chlorate, and sulphur in theaters or public halls
is prohibited.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe
operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of
transportation. (Ord. 3122, 5-5-2003)
4-8-4: NITROGLYCERIN AND TNT; STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to keep or store nitroglycerin or the explosive
commonly known as TNT in the city in any quantities, except for medicinal or
laboratory purposes, and for such purposes, no more than one-quarter (1/4)
ounce shall be stored in any one building or premises.
   B.   All such permitted explosives shall be stored or kept in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the office of the state fire marshal, subject
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3122, 5-5-2003)
4-8-5: SEARCHES AND SEIZURES; FORFEITURE; DESTRUCTION:
   A.   The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein 425 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 35/1 (state bar edition) as it relates to the rights, procedures, and
remedies afforded the city for searches and seizures, forfeitures, and
destruction of fireworks or combustibles in violation of this chapter and/or in
violation of 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et seq., (state bar edition);
provided, however, the adoption of such statute shall not prohibit arrest
without warrant or searches without warrant for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 3122, 5-5-2003)
4-8-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm, copartnership, or corporation violating any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, an amount
of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day upon which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. A violation
hereof may be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   A penalty imposed for each violation may include, or consist of, a
requirement that the offending party perform some reasonable public service
work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or
along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. (Ord. 3122, 5-5-
2003)
CHAPTER 9
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definition
4-9-2: Storage and Utilization
4-9-3: Containers
4-9-4: Licensing Provisions for Production
4-9-5: Inspections; Enforcement
4-9-6: Copies of NFPA Pamphlets (Rep. by Ord. 3948, 3-16-2020)
4-9-7: Penalty
4-9-1: DEFINITION:
The term "liquefied petroleum gas", as used in this Chapter, shall be construed
to include any material composed predominantly of propane, propylene, butane
(normal butane iso-butane) and butylene or a mixture of them. (1979 Code Ch.
22, §1)
4-9-2: STORAGE AND UTILIZATION:
It shall be unlawful to produce, store or use liquefied petroleum gas or to
install or maintain any equipment for such production or use, unless such
production, storage and utilization equipment is constructed and maintained in
compliance with the provisions of article 24 of the Fire Prevention Code (1976
Edition) recommended by the American Insurance Association, Engineering and
Safety Service, 85 John Street, New York, New York 10038 and as may hereafter
be revised or supplemented. Three (3) copies of said article 24 of the Fire
Prevention Code shall be and remain on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(1979 Code Ch. 22, §2; 1993 Code)
4-9-3: CONTAINERS:
   A.   Specifications: All containers used for liquefied petroleum gases shall
be constructed to the standards prescribed therefor in the "Standards of the
National Fire Protection Association, for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied
Petroleum Gases", as published in pamphlet form by the National Fire Protection
Association, 2020 Edition (also referred to in this Chapter 9 as “NFPA Pamphlet
No. 58"). One (1) copy of the NFPA Pamphlet No. 58 shall be remain on file in
the office of the Fire Chief.
   B.   Location and Installation: No such container for use in connection with
any building shall be located between the building and the street upon which
the building abuts nor within such building. The installation of such
containers and the location with reference to buildings shall be in accordance
with the standards prescribed in NFPA Pamphlet No. 58. (1979 Code Ch. 22, §4;
1993 Code; amd. Ord. 3948, 3-16-2020)
4-9-4: LICENSE PROVISIONS FOR PRODUCTION:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to operate a plant for the
production of liquefied petroleum gases or for filling containers with such
gases in the Municipality without first having secured a license therefor.
   B.   Application for License; Fee: Applications for such licenses shall be
made, in writing, to the Clerk and shall conform to the general provisions of
the ordinances relating to business licenses. 1  The annual fee for such
licenses shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
   C.   Premises and Equipment: No such license shall be issued unless the
premises and equipment thereon to be used in such activity is in full
compliance with the standards prescribed in NFPA Pamphlet No. 58, and it shall
be unlawful to conduct or operate such activity unless all buildings and
equipment used in connection therewith comply with the standards prescribed in
that bulletin. (1979 Code Ch. 22, §5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code.
4-9-5: INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or such other officer or employee as may
be designated by the Mayor to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to
make such inspections or tests as may be necessary in connection therewith.
Whenever a test is necessary to determine whether any equipment or method
complies with the standards prescribed or referred to in this Chapter, the
enforcing official may accept the results of a test conducted by the State of
Illinois Department of Transportation. (1979 Code Ch. 22, §3)
4-9-6: COPIES OF NFPA PAMPHLETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 3948, 3-16-2020)
4-9-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 10
ADVERTISEMENTS 1
SECTION:
4-10-1: Handbills
4-10-2: Posting Bills
4-10-3: Prohibited Acts
4-10-4: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  7-4-3 of this Code for Lake Taylorville provisions.
4-10-1: HANDBILLS:
It shall be unlawful to distribute handbills and advertising literature of any
kind, unless tied, wrapped or folded, by placing the same in or upon any
residential building or any part thereof, and it shall be unlawful to
distribute any handbills and advertising literature of any kind by placing the
same in or upon any motor vehicle or any part thereof within the City limits of
Taylorville. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. VIII, §1)
4-10-2: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or advertisements on any
public property without the authority of the City Council, and it shall be
unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the written
consent of the owner thereof. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, §20)
4-10-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   Political Advertisements: To fasten any political poster, sticker, card
or other political advertisement to any utility pole, street sign, curb,
sidewalk or on any public property in the City. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV,
§21)
   B.   Unlawful Advertisements: To advertise any unlawful business or articles
in the City.
   C.   Damaging Advertisements: To injure or deface any lawful advertisement
or notice. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, §14)
4-10-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 11
LICENSING OF CHILDREN'S HOSPITALS
SECTION:
4-11-1: License Required
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: Regulations
4-11-4: Application For License
4-11-5: License Fees
4-11-6: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall establish, open, conduct, operate or maintain a children's
hospital without first obtaining a license. (Ord. 2866, 8-3-1998)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
   CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL: A hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children
or any facility within a hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children.
   HOSPITAL: A health care facility as defined in section 3(A) of the Illinois
Hospital Licensing Act 1 . (Ord. 2866, 8-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 5/3.
4-11-3: REGULATIONS:
Any children's hospital licensed under this Chapter shall substantially comply
with all applicable standards and regulations of the Illinois Department of
Public Health as provided in the Illinois Hospital Licensing Act and the
Illinois Department of Public Aid as provided in 305 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/5-5.02 including title 9, chapter 1, section 148.120 and section 148.295 of
the Illinois Administrative Code, which are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein as the applicable standards and regulations of the City. (Ord. 2866, 8-
3-1998)
4-11-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for issuance or renewal of a City children's hospital license shall
be made to the City in the same manner as provided in the Illinois Hospital
Licensing Act for issuance and renewal of a hospital license by the Illinois
Department of Public Health and shall specifically identify any facility within
a hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children for which licensing is
sought pursuant to this Chapter. Said license, if issued, shall run for a term
of one year, to run continuous with the Illinois Department of Public Health's
license, or in the case of facilities within a hospital devoted exclusively to
caring for children, to run continuous with the Illinois Department of Public
Health's license for the hospital. (Ord. 2866, 8-3-1998)
4-11-5: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for issuance or renewal of a children's hospital license shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2866, 8-3-1998)
4-11-6: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Denial, suspension or revocation of a hospital license by the Illinois
Department of Public Health shall be grounds for denial, suspension or
revocation of a children's hospital license by the City.
   B.   The children's hospital shall immediately report to the Clerk of the
City any notice by the Illinois Department of Public Health of substantial
failure to comply with applicable standards, rules or regulations. (Ord. 2866,
8-3-1998)
CHAPTER 12
SOLICITING
SECTION:
4-12-1: Definitions
4-12-2: Solicitations
4-12-3: Exceptions To Solicitations
4-12-4: Permit And Insurance Required
4-12-5: Age And Vest Requirements
4-12-6: Liability
4-12-7: Penalty
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
   HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any property or premises of any kind, nature or extent
whatsoever within the city that is available to or frequented by members of the
general public.
   SOLICITING AGENCY: An organization which has a permit from the city as
provided in section
 4-12-4 of this chapter and is engaged in a statewide fundraising activity and
is registered with the Illinois attorney general as a charitable organization
as provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor", approved July 26, 1963, as amended 1 . (Ord. 2891, 1-
4-1999; amd. Ord. 3633, 8-19-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 460/1.
4-12-2: SOLICITATIONS:
No person shall be on any city highway, street, roadway or public place within
the city for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant or
occupants of any vehicle or from any person or persons except as may be
permitted in section
4-12-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 3633, 8-19-2013)
4-12-3: EXCEPTIONS TO SOLICITATIONS:
Any person wearing a high visibility vest and who is at least sixteen (16)
years of age and who is a member of a "soliciting agency" may solicit
contributions, on behalf of a "soliciting agency", from vehicles at the
intersection of West Main Cross Street and Webster Street between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. on the date or
dates set forth in a permit issued by the city, by standing in the middle of
either of such streets immediately adjacent to such intersection. (Ord. 2891,
1-4-1999)
4-12-4: PERMIT AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Any "soliciting agency" who shall desire to solicit contributions from
occupants of vehicles at the intersection of West Main Cross Street with
Webster Street shall first secure a permit from the city clerk's office.
Applications for such permit shall be in such form as the city clerk's office
shall determine from time to time. Such application shall be accompanied by a
certificate of insurance evidencing that the "soliciting agency" has liability
insurance in an amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate and that such
soliciting agency is engaged in a statewide fundraising activity. No such
permit shall be issued without such certificate of insurance and evidence that
the "soliciting agency" is properly registered with the Illinois attorney
general's office as a charitable organization under 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 460/1 and is engaged in a statewide fundraising activity. Such permit
shall identify the dates and times as to when such solicitation shall be
permitted. The fee for such permit shall be one dollar ($1.00) per day of
solicitation set forth in such permit. No permit will be issued when the city
square is totally blocked for another event or on days of parades. (Ord. 3381,
5-5-2008)
4-12-5: AGE AND VEST REQUIREMENTS:
Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of such "soliciting agency" shall
be sixteen (16) years of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility
vest at the time of such solicitation. No "soliciting agency" shall permit any
person under the age of sixteen (16) years to solicit contributions on its
behalf. No "soliciting agency" shall permit any person to solicit contributions
on its behalf who is not wearing a high visibility vest at the time of such
solicitation. (Ord. 2891, 1-4-1999)
4-12-6: LIABILITY:
The "soliciting agency" shall be liable for any injuries to any person or
property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of
ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent. (Ord. 2891, 1-4-1999)
4-12-7: PENALTY:
Any person and/or "soliciting agency" violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined and/or punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each separate offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed to occur on each day on or during which a violation is deemed to exist
or continues. (Ord. 2891, 1-4-1999)
CHAPTER 13
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
4-13-1: Declaration Of Policy
4-13-2: Definitions
4-13-3: Prohibited Acts
4-13-4: Penalty
4-13-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   In furthering the policy of the state of Illinois as expressed in its
constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the city of Taylorville, Illinois, to assure
equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical disability to live in
decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   B.   It is the policy of the city of Taylorville that no owner, lessee,
sublessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation
having the right to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing
accommodation and/or real property within the city, or any agent of these shall
refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person
or group of persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
of such person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because
of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability
in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities
and/or services in connection therewith.
   C.   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 3362, 12-
17-2007)
4-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms shall have the meanings as described in this section and as used in this
chapter:
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL, STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city of Taylorville,
Illinois. (Ord. 3362, 12-17-2007)
4-13-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real
estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial
institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate
broker or employee thereof, owner or other persons, or financial institution
dealing with housing or real property in the city of Taylorville, Illinois:
   A.   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price,
terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental,
lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the city
or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
   B.   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed or disability of any person.
   C.   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans,
accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing accommodation and/or real property.
   D.   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
   E.   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
   F.   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the
anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or
real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
   G.   For any owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or tenant. (Ord.
3362, 12-17-2007)
4-13-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall in no way
abrogate or impair the right of the city of Taylorville, Christian County,
Illinois, to specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 3362, 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 14
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS 1
SECTION:
4-14-1: Restricted
4-14-2: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
4-14-1: RESTRICTED:
   A.   No driver of any motor vehicle within the city of Taylorville,
Illinois, shall play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated
any radio, stereo receiving or playing system, sound amplifier, tape recorder,
cassette player, CD player, or any other similar sound amplification system or
device for receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound which sound
can be heard outside the motor vehicle from seventy five (75) or more feet when
the motor vehicle is located on or is being operated on any public way in the
city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   B.   This section shall not apply if the sound amplification system or
device is being played, used, or operated to request emergency assistance or
warn of a hazardous situation. In addition, this section shall not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. 3120, 4-21-2003)
   C.   No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or
operated any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, device for receiving
broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound, or any other sound amplification
system if the device is located:
      1.   On the public way; or
      2.   In any motor vehicle on the public way; and the sound can be heard
from seventy five feet (75') or more.
"Public way" means any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards and
rights of way. (Ord. 3323, 2-5-2007)
4-14-2: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, for each
offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3120, 4-21-2003)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-2-1: Deputy Police Chief
5-1-3: Lieutenant Of Police
5-1-3-1: Police Sergeant
5-1-3-2: Police Investigator/Detective
5-1-4: Appointments And Promotions
5-1-5: Duties Of Department Members
5-1-6: Conduct Of Members
5-1-7: Serving Processes
5-1-8: Serve As Witness
5-1-9: Rules And Regulations
5-1-10: Special Policemen
5-1-11: Unauthorized Persons
5-1-12: Police K9 Officer
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the
City. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
members as may be provided, from time to time, by the City Council. (1979 Code
§6-1)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of
Chief of Police. The Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval
of the Council, and he shall be ex officio City Marshal and Superintendent of
Police. (1979 Code §6-2)
   B.   Duties: The Chief of Police shall:
      1.   Keeper Of City Jail 1 : Be the keeper of the City Jail and shall
have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
      2.   Records And Reports: Keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by
the City Council.
      3.   Supervision Of Department: Be responsible for the performance by the
Police Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police. (1979 Code
§6-3)
      4.   Custody Of Stolen Property: Be the custodian of all lost, abandoned
or stolen property in the City. (1979 Code §6-12)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   1-4-4B of this Code.
5-1-2-1: DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of
Deputy Police Chief. As may be requested by the City Council from time to time,
the Deputy Police Chief shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, with the
approval of the City Council (i.e., the City's Corporate Authorities), and such
Deputy Police Chief shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
   B.   Duties: The Deputy Police Chief shall perform such duties and have such
responsibilities as the City Council and the Chief of Police may assign and/or
designate from time to time. (Ord. 3203, 11-15-2004)
5-1-3: LIEUTENANT OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment And Number: There is hereby created the
Office of Lieutenant of Police. There may be two (2) Lieutenants of Police to
be appointed by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. (Ord. 2852, 6-1-
1998)
   B.   Qualifications: No policeman will be eligible for Lieutenant until he
or she has served a minimum of three (3) years with the Taylorville Police
Department.
   C.   Shifts: There shall be no more than one Lieutenant of Police assigned
to each work shift and the Lieutenants shall be in charge of their shifts and
all members of the department serving under them. (Ord. 2456, 3-2-1992)
   D.   Salary: The salary for each such Lieutenant of Police shall be as
established by the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 2786, 4-7-1997)
5-1-3-1: POLICE SERGEANT:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment And Number: There is hereby created the
Office of Police Sergeant. There shall be three (3) Police Sergeants who shall
be appointed by the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. (Ord. 2786, 4-7-
1997)
   B.   Minimum Prior Experience Required: No policeman shall be eligible for
Sergeant until he or she has served a minimum of four (4) years as a police
patrolman/patrolwoman with the Taylorville Police Department. (Ord. 3859, 8-20-
2018)
   C.   Shifts: There shall be no more than one Police Sergeant assigned to
each work shift and the Sergeants shall be under the general supervision of the
Chief of Police and the Lieutenant of Police assigned to his or her work shift;
and the Police Sergeant shall exercise functional supervision over all police
personnel under them who are assigned to his or her respective work shifts of
the Police Department.
   D.   Job Description, Qualifications, Duties And Responsibilities, Etc.: The
job description, qualifications, duties and responsibilities, etc., for such
Police Sergeants shall be as the City Council may determine from time to time,
either prior to or subsequent to such appointment(s) as Police Sergeant. The
current job description, qualifications, duties and responsibilities, etc., for
such Police Sergeants shall be as set forth on exhibit A attached to ordinance
2786 on file in the Clerk's Office and incorporated herein by reference
thereto. (Ord. 2786, 4-7-1997)
   E.   Salary: The salary for such Police Sergeant shall be based on the
amount determined by the collective bargaining agreement. (Ord. 3526, 7-18-
2011)
5-1-3-2: POLICE INVESTIGATOR/DETECTIVE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment And Number: There is hereby created the
Office of Police Investigator/Detective which shall be a special assignment
position rather than a promotion position as of and from January 1, 2018.
Thereafter, there may be at least one Police Investigator/Detective who shall
be appointed by special assignment from time to time by majority vote of the
Aldermen; and the persons so appointed shall not be required to be tested by
the Police and Fire Commissioners. The persons who have been appointed prior to
January 1, 2018 and serve as Police Investigators/Detectives shall maintain
their rank. (Ord. 3860, 8-20-2018)
   B.   Minimum Prior Experience Required: No policeman shall be eligible for
Police Investigator/Detective until he or she has served a minimum of ten (10)
years as a police officer with any entity. The Police Investigator/Detective
"rank" shall be equivalent to that of Police Sergeant.
   C.   Job Description, Qualifications, Duties, And Responsibilities, Etc.:
The job description, qualifications, duties and responsibilities, etc., for
such Police Investigator/Detective shall be as the City Council may determine
from time to time, either prior to or subsequent to such appointment as Police
Investigator/Detective. The current job description, qualifications, duties and
responsibilities, etc., for such Police Investigator/Detective shall be as set
forth on exhibit B on file in the Clerk's Office and incorporated herein by
reference thereto. (Ord. 2786, 4-7-1997; amd. Ord. 3860, 8-20-2018)
   D.   Salary: The salary for such Police Investigator/Detective shall be
based on the amount determined by the collective bargaining agreement. (Ord.
3526, 7-18-2011; amd. Ord. 3860, 8-20-2018)
5-1-4: APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS:
   A.   Appointments to and promotions within the City's Police Department,
except for the Chief of Police, shall be based on ability and qualifications
and made from a list of eligibles certified by the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners of the City of Taylorville, State of Illinois, in accordance with
such board's rules and regulations. (Ord. 3103, 11-18-2002)
5-1-5: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of all of the ordinances of the City and all statutes applicable
herein and to preserve the order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. (1979 Code §6-6)
5-1-6: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct
himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner, at all times, and to
avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey
the orders and directions of his superior. (1979 Code §6-8)
5-1-7: SERVING PROCESSES:
No member of the Police Department except the Chief shall serve any process
except on command of the Chief of the Police Department. (1979 Code §6-7)
5-1-8: SERVE AS WITNESS:
Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any State or
Federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the City is a party, and fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall deposit the
same with the City Treasurer. (1979 Code §6-9)
5-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he shall deem
advisable, and such rules, when approved by the Council, shall be binding on
such members. (1979 Code §6-10)
5-1-10: SPECIAL POLICEMEN:
The Mayor may appoint such special policemen as may be necessary for special
duties, and the employment of any such special policemen may be terminated by
the Mayor at any time. Such special policemen shall obey all the rules of the
Police Department. (1979 Code §6-11)
5-1-11: UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
It shall be and it is hereby declared unlawful for any unauthorized person to
enter into or remain in the Office of the Police Department at any time except
for purposes of official business with the Police Department or concerning
other City business. The penalty for violation of this Section shall be as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code §6-13; amd. 1993 Code)
5-1-12 :POLICE K9 OFFICER:
Upon motion approved by a majority of the alderman holding office from time to
time, the police officer who is assigned duties as a K9 officer may be allowed
from time to time to have the assigned police squad car with him/her at the K9
Officer’s residence for use in emergency call-outs for the services of the K9
dog. (Ord. 3906, 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 2
AUXILIARY POLICE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Auxiliary Police Force Created; Appointment; Number
5-2-2: Qualifications; Fingerprints
5-2-3: Duties; Supervision
5-2-4: Conservators of the Peace
5-2-5: Identification; Carrying Firearms
5-2-6: Training
5-2-7: Death in the Line of Duty
5-2-1: AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; NUMBER:
The City does hereby establish an auxiliary police force for the City. The
Mayor may, with the advice and consent of the City Council, appoint up to four
(4) auxiliary policemen. At this time, the City Council deems a maximum of four
(4) auxiliary policemen to be necessary.
Such auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular Police Department
of the City and shall not supplement members of the regular Police Department
of the City in the performance of their assigned and normal duties, except as
provided for in Section
5-2-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS; FINGERPRINTS:
All auxiliary policemen shall be residents of the City.
Prior to the appointment of any auxiliary policeman, his fingerprints shall be
taken, and no person shall be appointed as such auxiliary policeman if he has
been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord.
2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-3: DUTIES; SUPERVISION:
Auxiliary police members shall only be assigned to perform the following duties
in the City:
   A.   To aid or direct traffic within the City.
   B.   To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters.
   C.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the Chief of Police.
Provided, that in cases which render it impractical for members of the regular
Police Department to perform the normal and regular police duties, the Chief of
Police of the City is hereby authorized to assign auxiliary policemen to
perform such normal and regular police duties.
Such auxiliary policemen shall, at all times during the performance of their
duties, be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police of the
City. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-4: CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
Auxiliary police, when on duty, shall also be conservators of the peace and
shall have the powers as specified in section
3-9-4 of chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-5: IDENTIFICATION; CARRYING FIREARMS:
   A.   Identification: Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary policemen
shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular
Police Department.
   B.   Carrying Firearms: Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms
except with the permission of the Chief of Police and while in uniform and in
the performance of their duties and following completion of the required
training. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-6: TRAINING:
Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive
a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures as shall
be appropriate in the exercise of the powers conferred upon them under chapter
24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, which training and course of study shall
be determined and provided by the City. The City, at this time, deems it
appropriate that auxiliary members be required to complete the same hiring
process as required for full-time officers. The screening process would include
1) background information, 2) oral interview, 3) psychological examination, and
4) medical examination. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
5-2-7: DEATH IN THE LINE OF DUTY:
The "Law Enforcement Officers, Civil Defense Workers, Civil Air Patrol Members,
Paramedics and Firemen Compensation Act", as now or hereafter amended, 1  shall
be applicable to auxiliary policemen upon their death in the line of duty
described herein. (Ord. 2361, 10-16-89)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 48, ¶281 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL 1
SECTION:
5-3-1: Livestock
5-3-2: Dangerous or Vicious Animals
5-3-3: Diseased Animals
5-3-4: Prohibited Acts and Conditions
5-3-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 7, Chapter 5 of this Code for Lake Taylorville provisions.
5-3-1: LIVESTOCK:
   A.   Running at Large Prohibited; Impoundment and Redemption: It shall be
unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at
large in the City. Any such animal running at large in any public place in the
City shall be impounded in the manner provided for dogs in this Chapter. 2
(1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §4)
The owner of any impounded animal may redeem it from the pound upon payment of
the fee as provided in subsection
5-3A-4C of his Chapter for dogs. (1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §5)
   B.   Tying for Grazing: It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any animal
enumerated in subsection A of this Section in the streets of the City for the
purpose of grazing or feeding. (1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §4)
 
Notes
2 2. See Section
  5-3A-4 of this Chapter.
5-3-2: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to
run at large in the City; exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the City Council. (1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §2)
The members of the Police Department and any other person in the City are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection
of any person or property. (1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §6)
5-3-3: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected nor shall such diseased animal be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the
supervision of the Health and Building Officer. 1
The Health and Building Officer shall secure such disposition of any diseased
animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication
or spread of contagion or infection except in cases where the State
Veterinarian is empowered to act. (1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §7)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-3A-7B of this Chapter.
5-3-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Cruelty to Animals: No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the
City in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, overloads, underfeeds or
abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this subsection.
(1979 Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §1)
   B.   Noisy Animals: It shall be unlawful to harbor a dog1 or keep any animal
which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1979
Code Ch. 17, Art. I, §3)
   C.   Unclean Houses: No person shall cause or allow any stable or place
where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome. (1979 Code
Ch. 17, Art. I, §8)
   D.   Hunting: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any
animal, other than as prescribed by law, 2  in the City. (1979 Code Ch. 24,
Art. IV, §8)
 
Notes
  2. S.H.A. ch. 61, ¶1.1 et seq.; see also Sections
2 5-5-2 and
  7-5-6 of this Code.
5-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE A. DOGS 1 /CATS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Definitions
5-3A-2: Vicious Dogs
5-3A-3: Dangerous Dogs
5-3A-4: Dogs/Cats At Large Prohibited; Impoundment And Redemption
5-3A-5: Maximum Number Of Dogs And/Or Cats Permitted
5-3A-6: Rabies Control
5-3A-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5-3A-8: Exemptions From Provisions
5-3A-9: Violations
5-3A-10: Penalties
5-3A-11: Prohibited Animals
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  7-5-5 of this code for Lake Taylorville provisions.
5-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The city's health and building officer and any
police officer employed in the police department of the city, any of whom shall
be authorized to take all actions to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
AT LARGE: Any dog/cat shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the
premises of its owner and is not securely leashed and under the restraint of a
responsible person.
   CAT: All members of the family Feline.
   DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed or
unattended by its owner or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places or upon any private
property other than the property of the owner.
   DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
   ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure.
   IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of the public pound used by the city.
   LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain not over six feet (6') in length which
shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog/cat and shall be
of sufficient strength to keep such dog/cat under control.
   OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a dog/cat, or who keeps or
harbors a dog/cat, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian,
or who knowingly permits a dog/cat to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him or her.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity, any public or private institution, the state of Illinois,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any other
business unit.
   PET OR COMPANION ANIMAL: Any animal kept for the pleasure rather than
utility; an animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or
about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
   RESTRAINT: The securing of an animal by leash or lead.
   RUN LINE: A system of tying a dog in place with either a cord, strap, rope,
or chain having a tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds.
   VICIOUS DOG:
   A.   Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts, bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.
   B.   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety
of human beings or domestic animals.
   C.   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a generally
known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon
human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with
special equipment.
   D.   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation.
   E.   Any individual dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog upon
three (3) separate occasions.
No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks or menaces a trespasser
on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or
abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or guard
duties. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-2: VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Confinement Required; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep or maintain any dog which has been found by the animal control officer
or by any city police officer to be a vicious dog unless such dog is, at all
times, kept in an enclosure or on a run line. The only times that a vicious dog
may be allowed out of the enclosure or off the run line are: 1) if it is
necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious
dog, or 2) to comply with any order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, that said vicious dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain
having a tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three
feet (3') in length and shall be under the direct control and supervision of
the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to
an enclosure or on a run line shall be impounded by the animal control officer,
any city police officer, or by any law enforcement authority having
jurisdiction in such area and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian
for destruction by lethal injection. The vicious dog shall be killed if seizure
or impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death
to any person.
   B.   Sale Prohibited: No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give
away any vicious dog. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-3: DANGEROUS DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found
by the animal control officer or by any city police officer to be a dangerous
dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure or on a run line. The
dangerous dog shall not be permitted to leave the premises of its owner unless
securely muzzled and under control by leash. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-4: DOGS/CATS AT LARGE PROHIBITED; IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:
   A.   Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for a dog/cat to run
at large in any part of the city, at any time.
   B.   Leash Required: It is unlawful for any dog/cat to leave the premises of
its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   C.   Impoundment And Redemption: Such dogs/cats may be apprehended and
impounded by any police officer or the animal control officer and placed in the
pound used by the city. The owner of an impounded dog/cat shall claim the dog/
cat within seven (7) days, and the dog/cat shall be released upon payment to
the city clerk of an impound fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and showing
evidence the dog/cat has a current rabies tag.
   D.   Disposal Of Unclaimed Dogs/Cats: Dogs/cats not so claimed within seven
(7) days may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the animal control
officer shall determine.
   E.   Violation: Regardless of whether the dog/cat is apprehended and
impounded, the police officer or animal control officer may cite the owner of
such dog/cat to answer an ordinance violation charge for violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-5: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS AND/OR CATS PERMITTED:
No household shall keep or harbor at any time within the city more than the
maximum number of four (4) dogs/cats with no more than three (3) of one species
over four (4) months of age in any residentially zoned district.
Example: Three (3) dogs, one cat - total of four (4).
Example: Three (3) cats, one dog - total of four (4). (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-6: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Inoculation And Tag Required: Each calendar year, or at such intervals
as may hereafter be promulgated by the Illinois department of agriculture,
every owner or keeper of a dog/cat four (4) months or more of age shall cause
such dog/cat to be inoculated against rabies. Such owner or keeper of such dog/
cat shall cause a serially numbered tag evidencing such inoculation to be
attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by each dog/cat.
   B.   Quarantine Of Rabies Suspects:
      1.   Inoculated Dogs/Cats: All dogs/cats that have bitten a human being
shall be confined by the owner for a period of ten (10) days in an escape proof
enclosure; provided however, that the dog/cat has a current rabies inoculation.
At the end of ten (10) days, the owner shall have the dog/cat examined by a
licensed veterinarian.
      2.   Dogs/Cats That Have Not Been Inoculated: If a dog/cat does not have
a current rabies tag, the owner shall have such dog/cat confined under the
observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days.
Immediately upon examination by a veterinarian, the owner shall forward a
clinical report to the police chief or animal control officer.
      3.   Responsibility For Costs: All expenses shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the dog/cat. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
possessing a dog/cat to permit such dog/cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway,
boulevard or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of
such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flowerbed,
plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever or to defecate or urinate
thereon. This subsection shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.
   B.   Feces Accumulations: No person shall allow dog/cat feces to accumulate
in any yard, pen or premises in or upon which a dog/cat shall be confined or
kept so that it becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or health
hazard to the residing dog/cat.
   C.   Unlawful Removal Of Muzzles: It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove a muzzle, collar, identification tag, leash, or other restraint from a
dog/cat without the consent of the owner of the dog/cat.
   D.   Dog/Cat Excrement: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog/cat to
allow the dog/cat to defecate or urinate upon any public sidewalk,
thoroughfare, public place, or private property other than the premises owned
and occupied by the owner of the dog/cat; provided, however, no such violation
shall occur if such owner immediately thereafter removes said defecation from
such public sidewalk, thoroughfare, public place, or private property after
same is deposited thereon.
   E.   Confining Dogs/Cats In Heat: The owner of every female dog/cat in heat
shall confine the dog/cat in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner
that the female dog/cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for
planned breeding.
   F.   Interfering With Officer: No person shall resist or molest the police
officer or animal control officer while engaged in the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Noisy Dogs Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or harbor any dog which
by habitually bawling, barking, howling, crowing, or by other annoying noises
shall unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any person. Such dog(s) is/
are declared to be a public nuisance and noisy dog(s).
      2.   Whenever any person shall complain to the animal control officer or
the police department that a dog which habitually bawls, barks, cries, howls,
crows, or makes other annoying noises is being kept by any person in the city,
the animal control officer or the police department shall notify the owner of
the dog that a complaint has been received. Within twenty four (24) hours of
receiving said notice of such complaint, the owner shall take whatever actions
or measures necessary to alleviate such habitual bawling, barking, crying,
howling, crowing, or other annoying noise; provided, however, if the offense
occurs while such dog is on any Lake Taylorville lot or Lake Taylorville
campsite or Lake Taylorville overnight campsite or upon any Lake Taylorville
property then the owner shall immediately take whatever actions or measures
necessary to alleviate such habitual bawling, barking, crying, howling,
crowing, or other annoying noise.
      3.   If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping such a dog,
as set forth above, is ineffective, then a verified complaint signed by the
complaining person may be presented to the animal control officer or to the
police department alleging that such dog is being kept within the city and by
habitually bawling, barking, crying, howling, crowing, or making any other
annoying noise is unreasonably disturbing the peace and quiet of the
complaining person. The animal control officer or the police department shall
inform the owner of the dog that a complaint has been received and shall cite
the owner of the dog for the violation alleged in the complaint.
      4.   Only one warning shall be given to an owner of a noisy dog; and any
subsequent offenses following the issuance of a citation for a noisy dog shall
result, without further warning, in the issuance of a citation upon the
presentation of such verified complaint by a person complaining of such noisy
dog.
   H.   Restraints Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner to restrain
any dog on any Lake Taylorville lot or Lake Taylorville campsite or Lake
Taylorville overnight campsite or upon any Lake Taylorville property by use of
a cord, strap, rope, or chain or other restraining device when such restraint
is attached to any tree, shrubbery, brush or utility pole located on such lake
lot, campsite, overnight campsite or other Lake Taylorville property or when
such restraint is attached to any structure, building, improvement, or any
other property owned by the city and located on any such lake lot, campsite,
overnight campsite or Lake Taylorville property, or when such restraint is
situated so that any such dog by movement while under such restraint causes
damages to any such tree, shrubbery, brush, utility pole, structure, building,
improvement or other city owned property.
   I.   Digging Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to
permit or allow such dog to dig holes more than six inches (6") wide and more
than two inches (2") deep or to make bare spots upon any ground on any Lake
Taylorville lot or Lake Taylorville campsite or Lake Taylorville overnight
campsite or upon any Lake Taylorville property or upon any city owned property.
(Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Guide dogs for the blind and hearing impaired and support dogs for the
physically handicapped are exempt from section
 5-3A-3 and subsection
5-3A-4B of this article; and police owned dogs are exempt from sections
5-3A-2,
5-3A-3,
5-3A-4,
5-3A-5, and subsections
5-3A-7A, B, C, D, and G of this article; provided, any such dog is performing
duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section, each such
guide dog or support dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with subsection
 5-3A-6A of this article. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted
dog to notify the animal control officer of changes of address. The animal
control officer shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized
list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such departments of any
address changes reported to him. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-9: VIOLATIONS:
The animal control officer or the police department may refuse to issue any
citation for any alleged violation of this chapter if a person who witnessed
such alleged violation refuses to sign a verified complaint as to such alleged
violation and refuses to agree to testify in court as to such alleged violation
and such animal control officer or the police department determines that such
testimony would be necessary in the prosecution of such violation. Except as is
otherwise provided in subsection
5-3A-7G of this article, the animal control officer or the police department,
in their discretion, may issue oral or written warnings for any other violation
of this chapter but in no event shall oral or written warnings be given for
second or subsequent violations of a similar nature and citations shall be
issued for such second or subsequent violations. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in accordance with the following schedule:
 
First offense                           $ 75.00
Second similar offense                  100.00
Third similar offense                   125.00
Fourth similar offense and each similar A sum not less than $125.00 nor more
offense thereafter                      than $750.00
 
A separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day which a violation
for the same offense occurs or continues.
The police officer or animal control officer may issue citations for violations
of this article. Any person issued a citation for a first, second, or third
offense pursuant to this article may pay the amount of the aforesaid designated
penalty for such offense at the city clerk's office within ten (10) days from
the date of such citation. If not so paid within such ten (10) days, then an
ordinance violation complaint shall be filed with the appropriate court. (Ord.
3535, 10-3-2011)
5-3A-11: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It is unlawful to harbor, keep, or permit to be kept or harbored any poultry,
cattle, swine, sheep, goats, horses, or similar animals within the city
corporate limits.
Exceptions:
   A.   The above listed animals may be allowed on property zoned AG-1 or AG-
2 within the corporate city limits.
   B.   The above named animals may be allowed on property within the city
corporate limits used for zoological parks, animal exhibitions, educational
institutions, veterinarian hospitals, animal shelters, or pounds.
Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties noted in
section
5-3A-10 of this article. (Ord. 3535, 10-3-2011)
CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Offenses Involving The Person
5-4-1-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-4-1-2: Fighting
5-4-1-3: Disturbing Assemblages
5-4-1-4: Loafing Or Loitering
5-4-2: Offenses Involving Property
5-4-2-1: Theft And Related Offenses
5-4-2-2: Retail Theft
5-4-2-3: Larceny
5-4-2-4: Injury To Public Property
5-4-2-5: Vandalism
5-4-2-6: False Alarms
5-4-3: Offenses Related To Morals And Decency
5-4-3-1: Gambling
5-4-3-2: Indecent Publications
5-4-3-3: Nude Bathing
5-4-3-4: Public Urination
5-4-3-5: Public Indecency
5-4-4: Offenses Related To Public Health And Safety
5-4-4-1: Throwing Missiles
5-4-4-2: Open Wells Or Excavations
5-4-4-3: Overhead Tanks For Storage Of Petroleum Products
5-4-4-4: Skateboarding, Rollerskating, And Rollerblading Prohibited In Certain
Areas
5-4-4-5: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
5-4-4-6: Excessive Noise
5-4-4-7: Horns
5-4-4-8: Disorderly House
5-4-4-9: Presence On Premises Where People Under Twenty One Are Possessing Or
Consuming Alcoholic Beverages
5-4-5: Offenses Involving Liquor
5-4-5-1: Open Containers
5-4-5-2: Consumption In Public
5-4-5-3: Public Intoxication
5-4-5-4: Illegal Possession And Consumption Of Liquor
5-4-5-5: Transportation Or Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor In A Motor Vehicle
5-4-6: Penalty
5-4-7: Cannabis
5-4-1: OFFENSES INVOLVING THE PERSON:
5-4-1-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct, as provided
for in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1. (1993 Code)
   A.   Yelling, Shouting, Singing On Streets, Etc.: No person shall yell,
shout, hoot, whistle or sing on the public streets, particularly between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or at any
time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons
in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity.
      1.   Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection A shall,
for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3325, 2-5-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   7-3-8C of this code.
5-4-1-2: FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight or to fight or
to commit any assault or battery while in or within or at or on or about: a)
any city street, highway, roadway, easement, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, right
of way; or b) Lake Taylorville; or c) any city property; or d) any public place
within the city.
For purposes hereof, "public place" shall mean and include any property or
premises of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever within the city that is
available to or frequented by members of the general public either in person or
while wholly or partly in or within or at or on or about any vehicle or
property of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever. (Ord. 3673, 7-7-2014)
5-4-1-3: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the city. (1979 Code §24-4-7)
5-4-1-4: LOAFING OR LOITERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to be found loafing or
loitering at the corners of streets or in the vicinity of any place of
amusement, hotel or other business place or private premises and to refuse to
disperse or vacate such place when requested to do so by any person in
possession of any portion of the premises who is annoyed or aggrieved thereby
or by any police officer. (1979 Code §24-4-15)
5-4-2: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY:
5-4-2-1: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
No person shall commit theft. A person commits theft when such person
knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains, by deception, control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner; or
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce such
person to believe that the property was stolen; and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
A person convicted of a first offense under this section, without regard to the
value of the property stolen, shall be fined in an amount not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person
convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this section, without regard
to the value of the property stolen, shall be fined in an amount not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
1974, 7-21-1980)
5-4-2-2: RETAIL THEFT:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the words and phrases
defined in this subsection have the meanings ascribed to them herein unless a
contrary meaning is clear from the context:
   CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some
notice of its presence, merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
   FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
   MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
   MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
   MINOR: A person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is
unemancipated and resides with such person's parents or legal guardian.
   PEACE OFFICER: The meaning ascribed to that term in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/2-13.
   PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment and common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such
retail mercantile establishment.
   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
   SHOPPING CART: Pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by
grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile establishments for the
use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and from
such stores to a place outside the store.
   UNDER RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to
reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   B.   Retail Theft Prohibited And Defined: No person shall commit retail
theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft when such person knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
      2.   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container or place in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container or place with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
      4.   Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
      5.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart.
   C.   Presumptions: If any person conceals upon such person or among such
person's belongings unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and removes that merchandise
beyond the last known station for receiving payments for merchandise in that
retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or
transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise.
   D.   Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      1.   To request identification.
      2.   To verify such identification.
      3.   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in such
person's possession unpurchased merchandise and to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise.
      4.   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer.
      5.   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents,
guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
   E.   Affirmative Defense: A detention, as permitted in this section, does
not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-3, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person
so detained. (Ord. 1974, 7-21-1980)
   F.   Penalties: A person convicted of a first offense under this section,
without regard to the retail value thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this
section, without regard to the retail value thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 1974, 7-21-1980)
5-4-2-3: LARCENY:
   A.   Larceny Prohibited: No person shall take personal property, either by
fraud or by stealth, with the intent to deprive another of such property.
   B.   Larceny By False Pretense: No person shall induce or attempt to induce
any person to give up or pay over any money or other thing of value by any
false representation or pretense or in exchange for any false or bogus coin or
check, draft or other false evidence of value or in consideration of refraining
from a lawful or unlawful arrest or in consideration of refraining from
reporting any unlawful act to any public official. (Ord. 1974, 7-21-1980)
5-4-2-4: INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging
to the city without proper authority from the council. (1979 Code Ch. 9, Art.
VI, § 3)
5-4-2-5: VANDALISM:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: Shall include a person appointed guardian of the person or
given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state or any other state
but does not include a person appointed guardian only of the estate of a minor
or appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois juvenile
act 1 .
   MINOR: Shall include a person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but
not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: Shall include the lawful father or mother of a minor child, whether
by birth or adoption.
   PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY: Shall include any real estate, including improvements thereon, and
tangible personalty.
   SUFFERANCE OF AN ACT OF VANDALISM: The failure to interfere, prohibit and
prevent the commission of an act of vandalism by a minor.
   VANDALISM: Shall include any of the following acts:
      1.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly damage, deface or destroy any
property of another person without his consent; or
      2.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly, by means of fire or explosive
device, damage, deface or destroy any property of another person; or
      3.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly start a fire on the land of
another person without his consent; or
      4.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly deposit on the land or in a
building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb, or any
offensive smelling compound and thereby interfere with the use and occupancy by
another of the land or building; or
      5.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly and without authority enter
into any building, housetrailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or any part thereof of
another person without his consent. (Ord. 1882, 9-19-1978; amd. 1993 Code)
   B.   Vandalism Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any
act of vandalism upon either public or private property within the city. Each
separate act of vandalism shall be considered as a separate violation of this
subsection. (Ord. 1882, 9-19-1978)
   C.   Acts Of Vandalism By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
minors to commit any act of vandalism upon either public or private property
within the city. Each separate act of vandalism shall be considered as a
separate violation of this subsection. (Ord. 1882, 9-19-1978; amd. 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
5-4-2-6: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   A "false alarm" is defined as follows: A false alarm occurs when a
security system is activated where there is no emergency, whether it is
activated wilfully, intentionally, negligently, or inadvertently. It also
includes a system activated due to mechanical or electrical malfunction.
A false alarm does not occur when an alarm system is activated by an attempted
or actual illegal entry, theft, or robbery; an observable act of vandalism;
unusually violent conditions of nature; and testing or repairing of telephone
or electrical line or equipment outside the premises, so long as prior notice
of the testing or repair is given to the Taylorville police department.
   B.   Commercial/business alarms and residential alarms shall both be allowed
two (2) false alarms in a quarter at no charge. Commercial/business alarms and
residential alarms shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third
and fourth false alarm in a quarter notwithstanding the fees imposed in
subsection C of this section.
   C.   Notwithstanding the fees charged for false alarms of commercial/
business alarms and residential alarms set forth in subsection B of this
section, fees shall also be imposed for false alarms of commercial/business
alarms and residential alarms based on the number of false alarms in a year in
the amounts as set forth as follows:
 
Number Of False Alarms Fee Imposed (For Each
In A Year              False Alarm)
                       No fee (with the exception that the fees imposed on a
First 4                quarterly basis as set forth in subsection B of this
                       section shall still apply)
5th through 10th       $ 50.00
11th through 15th      100.00
16th and over          175.00
 
(Ord. 3380, 4-21-2008)
5-4-3: OFFENSES RELATED TO MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-4-3-1: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   Gambling Prohibited: To gamble or attend any gambling house or to make
any bet, lottery or gambling hazard or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in
gambling game, arrangement or device unless allowed by the laws of the state.
(1979 Code §24-3-1)
   B.   Gambling Devices: To possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with
the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or
paraphernalia kept with such intent may be confiscated by any member of the
police department. (1979 Code §24-3-2)
   C.   Gambling Houses: To maintain or patronize any establishment maintained
for a gambling house.
   D.   Advertising Gambling: To advertise any gambling house on any street,
alley or other public place in the city. (1979 Code §24-3-4)
   E.   Gambling Activities Allowed: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit or make unlawful the following activities or forms of gambling: 1) the
keeping, possession, ownership, use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a
licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment or licensed veterans' establishment, which is licensed by the
Illinois gaming board to conduct or allow such specific activities under the
video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., and such
establishment has a current and valid city of Taylorville class A-1, class C-1,
class D-1, class I-1, or class J-1 liquor license; 2) a licensee, licensed by
the city, to conduct a raffle in accordance with the raffles act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et seq.; 3) a licensee, licensed by the Illinois
department of revenue, to conduct or allow bingo play in accordance with the
bingo license and tax act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 et seq.; or a
licensee, licensed by the Illinois department of revenue, to conduct or allow
gambling in accordance with the charitable games act, 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 30/1 et seq. (Ord. 3713, 5-18-2015)
5-4-3-2: INDECENT PUBLICATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale or to circulate, pass
from one person to another or expose in any public place or anywhere in view of
a store or place frequented by the public any immoral, indecent or obscene
publication, printed or written matter or picture or other representation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to keep any such publication, printed or written
matter, picture or other representation in any place frequented by or where it
may come into the possession of minors or to disclose or expose any such
material to a minor. (1979 Code §24-4-23)
5-4-3-3: NUDE BATHING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any
place open to the public view unless such persons are adequately garbed in a
bathing suit. (1979 Code §24-4-19)
5-4-3-4: PUBLIC URINATION:
   A.   No person shall urinate or defecate or expose a person's private body
parts on any street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, floor of any public building
or any building where the public gathers, or in any other place commonly open
to the public except in such public place that has been designated as a
restroom.
   B.   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 3078, 6-17-2002)
5-4-3-5: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Offense Committed: A person commits the offense of public indecency if
they knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
      1.   Engage in sexual intercourse;
      2.   Engage in deviate sexual conduct;
      3.   Appear in a state of nudity;
      4.   Make a lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to arouse or
to satisfy the sexual desire of the person; or
      5.   Fondle their own genitals or those of another person.
   B.   Definitions:
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female
breasts with less than a full opaque covering below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered, or that portion of the buttocks which would
be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini bottom.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by a coverage charge or membership
requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets,
and meeting facilities utilized by social, fraternal or similar organizations.
Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in
nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public places shall not include
enclosed single sex public restrooms; enclosed single sex functional showers,
locker and/or dressing room facilities; enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms
designed and intended for sleeping accommodations; doctors' offices; churches,
synagogues or similar places when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar
religious ceremonies; portions of hospitals; and similar places in which nudity
or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home; nor
shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class
operated by a proprietary school licensed by the state or by a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or by a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or a university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.
(Ord. 3204, 11-15-2004)
5-4-4: OFFENSES RELATED TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
5-4-4-1: THROWING MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley
or other public place, and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass,
nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place in the city. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, § 13)
5-4-4-2: OPEN WELLS OR EXCAVATIONS 1 :
It shall be unlawful to permit any well or any other similar excavation to
remain uncovered excepting on premises secured by a fence of at least six feet
(6') in height with all doors on entrances to such premises locked. (1979 Code
Ch. 24, Art. IV, § 28)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 1, article A of this code.
5-4-4-3: OVERHEAD TANKS FOR STORAGE OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain any
overhead tanks for petroleum products of a capacity of over fifty (50) gallons
except in the case of fuel oil, which tanks may be of a capacity not to exceed
six hundred (600) gallons. (1979 Code Ch. 24, Art. IV, § 18)
5-4-4-4: SKATEBOARDING, ROLLERSKATING, AND ROLLERBLADING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN
AREAS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to travel on or use or operate or stand
on or sit on or ride on any skateboard or to travel on or use or operate or
stand on or wear any roller skates or rollerblades at the following locations
within the city:
      1.   On the city public library property or any public sidewalk located
immediately adjacent to the city public library property or on such portion of
Washington Street which is located between Poplar Street and Vine Street;
      2.   On any public street or on any public sidewalk or on any city
property located on or within the Taylorville public square;
      3.   On any public street or alleyway or on any public sidewalk or on any
city property located within the following described square block area: the
square block area bounded on the north by Vine Street, bounded on the south by
Franklin Street, bounded on the east by Walnut Street, and bounded on the west
by Webster Street.
   B.   Any person or persons found to have been in violation of any of the
terms or provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or
punished in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2765, 9-3-1996)
5-4-4-5: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate or allow any vehicle to remain upon any
street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic
thereon.
   B.   No person shall unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay or
unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully
driving or traveling along or upon any street, highway or road within this city
so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic.
   C.   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined an
amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, an amount of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for the second offense, and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
the third offense and any subsequent offenses. (Ord. 3169, 4-19-2004)
5-4-4-6: EXCESSIVE NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle that makes an unreasonably loud
or excessive noise in any of the following ways:
   A.   When the motor vehicle is stopped, the operator accelerates the engine
thereof with the gears of the vehicle in neutral, thereby causing an
unreasonably loud or excessive noise; or
   B.   When the motor vehicle is stopped, the operator accelerates the engine
with the gears of said vehicle in neutral and while so accelerating the engine,
shifts the gears of the vehicle into a forward or reverse movement, thereby
causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise with the wheels or tires of the
vehicle; or
   C.   The operator of a motor vehicle accelerates the engine thereof when
shifting the gears of such vehicle in such a manner as to cause the wheels or
tires of such vehicle to spin rapidly, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or
excessive noise; or
   D.   The operator of a motor vehicle accelerates the vehicle or rapidly
stops the vehicle causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise. (Ord. 2888,
12-21-1998)
5-4-4-7: HORNS:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to ensure safe
operation give audible warning with his or her horn, but shall not otherwise
use such horn when upon a highway. For purposes hereof, the word "highway"
shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular traffic or located on public school property. (Ord. 3157, 12-15-
2003)
5-4-4-8: DISORDERLY HOUSE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   DISORDERLY HOUSE: Shall mean and include any residential dwelling unit that
experiences an unlawful activity in, at, on or about the dwelling unit more
than three (3) times within a twelve (12) month period.
   DWELLING UNIT: Shall mean and include a room or a group of rooms which are
arranged, designed, used or intended for use as living quarters for any person
or persons and shall include, but is not limited to, an attached or detached
single-family or multiple-family house, building, structure, apartment,
condominium, townhouse, duplex, or rooming house. A dwelling unit may be leased
or owner-occupied, and includes the land that is affixed, incidental to or
appurtenant to it.
   OCCUPANT: Shall mean and include any person who has the right to the use of
or to possess, or who is in charge or control or keeper of a dwelling unit,
including, but not limited to, any tenant of the dwelling unit.
   OWNER: Shall mean and include any person who is a landlord or lessor of the
dwelling unit or who is a titleholder, contract purchaser or seller, or
mortgage holder of a dwelling unit or who owns a whole or partial interest in
and to or of a dwelling unit.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any and all persons, firms, corporations,
limited liability companies, trustees, partnerships, or entities of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever.
   UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY: Shall mean and include:
      1.   Any behavior or conduct which is documented by arrest or the
issuance of a city ordinance violation complaint or citation, or the issuance
of a criminal charge, citation, complaint, information or indictment under any
Illinois statute that occurred in, at, on or about the dwelling unit; or
      2.   A residential incident meaning that any law enforcement personnel
(from the Taylorville police department and/or from the Christian County
sheriff's department and/or from the Illinois state police) have arrived at a
dwelling unit in response to any complaint from any person of an alleged
unlawful activity at any dwelling unit; or
      3.   Any boisterous, loud or raucous noise (clearly audible from 20 feet
or more from a dwelling unit) or behavior or disorderly conduct of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever by any person in, at, on or about the dwelling
unit that disturbs the peace of any person within the neighborhood of a
dwelling unit; or
      4.   Any behavior or conduct by any person in, at, on or about the
dwelling unit that alarms or disturbs another so as to create a breach of the
peace; or
      5.   Any behavior or conduct by any person in, at, on or about the
dwelling unit that is dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or
welfare of any person.
   B.   Declaration Of Public Nuisance: Every disorderly house is hereby
declared a public nuisance.
   C.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or occupant to
own or possess or occupy or cause or permit or allow or fail to prohibit any
disorderly house. The liability of an owner is conditioned upon the owner
having received a written notice from a representative of the city's police
department of the dates of the two (2) prior unlawful activities that occurred
at the dwelling unit owned by the owner. A representative of the city's police
department shall mail or deliver an owner a written notice within thirty (30)
days following each such unlawful activity if such owner's residence or
business address is then known to the city's police department.
   D.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
shall be assessed the applicable court costs and court assessed fees for each
offense. (Ord. 3633, 8-19-2013)
5-4-4-9: PRESENCE ON PREMISES WHERE PEOPLE UNDER TWENTY ONE ARE POSSESSING OR
CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   A person who knowingly enters or remains in any house, building, yard
or other premises, other than premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, under
circumstances where the person knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic
liquor is being illegally possessed or consumed by persons under the age of
twenty one (21) years shall be guilty of a petty offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person, to
knowingly permit a person under the age of twenty one (21) years old in his or
her custody to violate the provisions of subsection A of this section. Any
person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be fined not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the possession and dispensing,
or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under twenty one (21) years of
age in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption
by a person under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and
approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of
such person under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a home as
allowed by the Illinois liquor control act 1 . (Ord. 3324, 2-5-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/6-20.
5-4-5: OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR:
5-4-5-1: OPEN CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful to possess alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in opened
containers in any public park, on any public street or sidewalk or in any place
of amusement or area or other place open to the public other than in a public
place licensed to sell such beverages for consumption on the premises or other
than at or within a designated site or location for a specific event for a
specific date or dates as authorized under a class L "special use permit"
license issued under section
3-3-5 of this code. (Ord. 3730, 9-21-2015)
5-4-5-2: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful to serve or consume alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in
any public park, on any public street or sidewalk or in any place of amusement
or area or other place open to the public other than in a public place licensed
to sell such beverages for consumption on the premises or other than at or
within a designated site or location for a specific event for a specific date
or dates as authorized under a class L "special use permit" license issued
under section
3-3-5 of this code. (Ord. 3730, 9-21-2015)
5-4-5-3: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated from alcoholic beverages
and/or from any illegal drugs or contraband in, at, on, or about any city
street, highway, roadway, easement, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, right of way,
or any other public place within the city. For purposes hereof, "public place"
shall mean and include any premises of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever
within the city that is regularly available to or frequented by members of the
general public, except for any premises where alcoholic liquor is served for
consumption on such premises pursuant to a liquor license issued by the city.
(Ord. 3709, 4-20-2015)
5-4-5-4: ILLEGAL POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age
to purchase, accept delivery, possess and/or consume alcoholic liquor.
   B.   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under twenty
one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years
of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or
those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21)
years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this section. (Ord.
3040, 8-20-2001)
   C.   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined an
amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, an amount of not less
than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second offense, and an amount of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for the third offense and any subsequent offenses. (Ord. 3169, 4-19-2004)
5-4-5-5: TRANSPORTATION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN A MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no driver may
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger
area of any motor vehicle upon a highway in this state except in the original
container and with the seal unbroken.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no passenger may
carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within any passenger area of any
motor vehicle upon a highway in this state except in the original container and
with the seal unbroken.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the passengers twenty one (21) years of
age or older in a limousine when it is being used for purposes for which a
limousine is ordinarily used, the passengers twenty one (21) years of age or
older on a chartered bus when it is being used for purposes for which chartered
buses are ordinarily used or on a motor home or mini-motor home as defined in
section 1-145.01 of the Illinois vehicle code. However, the driver of any such
vehicle is prohibited from consuming or having any alcoholic liquor in or about
the driver's area. Any evidence of alcoholic consumption by the driver shall be
prima facie evidence of such driver's failure to obey this section. For the
purposes of this section, a "limousine" is a motor vehicle of the first
division with the passenger compartment enclosed by a partition or dividing
window used in the for hire transportation of passengers and operated by an
individual in possession of a valid Illinois driver's license of the
appropriate classification pursuant to section 6-104 of the Illinois vehicle
code.
   D.   The exemption applicable to chartered buses under subsection C of this
section does not apply to any chartered bus being used for school purposes.
   E.   Any driver who is convicted of violating subsection A of this section
for a second or subsequent time within one year of a similar conviction shall
be subject to suspension of driving privileges as provided in paragraph 23 of
subsection (a) of section 6-206 of the Illinois vehicle code.
   F.   Any driver, who is less than twenty one (21) years of age at the date
of the offense and who is convicted of violating subsection A of this section
or a similar provision of a local ordinance, shall be subject to the loss of
driving privileges as provided in paragraph 13 of subsection (a) of section 6-
205 and paragraph 33 of subsection (a) of section 6-206 of the Illinois vehicle
code. (Ord. 3040, 8-20-2001)
   G.   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined an
amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, an amount of not less
than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second offense, and an amount of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for the third offense and any subsequent offenses. (Ord. 3169, 4-19-2004)
5-4-6: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the following sections of this
chapter shall be fined an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first
offense, an amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second offense, and an
amount of not less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third offense and any subsequent
offenses. Any person found guilty of violating any other provision of this
chapter shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
Sections
 5-4-1-1, "Disorderly Conduct";
5-4-1-2, "Fighting";
 5-4-2-4, "Injury To Public Property";
5-4-4-5, "Traffic Not To Be Obstructed";
 5-4-4-6, "Excessive Noise";
5-4-5-1, "Open Containers";
5-4-5-2, "Consumption In Public"; and
5-4-5-3, "Public Intoxication", of this chapter. (Ord. 3169, 4-19-2004)
5-4-7: CANNABIS:
   A.   Unless authorized by or legal under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), or under the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), it is unlawful for any person knowingly
to possess ten grams (10 g) or less of any substance containing cannabis within
the City of Taylorville.
   B.   Any person violating subsection A of this Section shall be fined, upon
conviction thereof, in accordance with the following schedule:
      1.   Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for the first offense;
      2.   Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the second subsequent offense;
      3.   Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for the third subsequent
offense and each subsequent offense thereafter.
   C.   Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.
   D.   As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:
CANNABIS: Includes marihuana, marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other
entity.
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE: An offense under this Section, the offender of which, prior
to his conviction of the offense, has at any time been convicted under this
Section, or under any laws of the United States, or of any state relating to
cannabis, or any controlled substance as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act 1 . (Ord. 3784, 11-21-2016; amd. Ord. 4106, 5-16-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
ARTICLE A. PROHIBITION OF "BYOB PREMISES"
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Definitions
5-4A-2: Alcoholic Beverages In BYOB Premises
5-4A-3: Prohibited
5-4A-4: Responsible Persons
5-4A-5: Penalty
5-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   BYOB PREMISES: Any licensed premises (including, but not limited to, any
premises licensed under
title 3, chapter 3 of this code) and any unlicensed premises (including, but
not limited to, restaurants, food establishments, clubs, reception halls, but
not including any residential premises of the host) of any kind, nature or
extent whatsoever where members of the public or members or patrons or invitees
or licensees or guests bring or provide their own alcoholic liquor or alcoholic
beverages for consumption on such premises with or without any fees or charges
imposed by any person owning or leasing or managing or in charge of or employed
at such premises for admission to such premises or for a "corking fee" or for
setups, i.e., liquid mixers, cups, glasses, beverage containers, ice, and/or
any other items associated with the consumption of alcoholic liquor or
alcoholic beverages or for any other reason.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, association,
organization, club, limited liability company, corporation, trust, or legal
entity of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever. (Ord. 3657, 1-21-2014)
5-4A-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN BYOB PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or bring or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage into any BYOB premises or to consume any
alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage within any BYOB premises. (Ord. 3657, 1-
21-2014)
5-4A-3: PROHIBITED:
   BYOB premises are prohibited, illegal, and not allowed within the city. It
shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate, manage, or possess any
BYOB premises. (Ord. 3657, 1-21-2014)
5-4A-4: RESPONSIBLE PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, operator, manager, or employee of
any BYOB premises to allow or permit any person to possess or bring or deliver
any alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage into any BYOB premises or to allow
any person to consume any alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage within or on
any BYOB premises. (Ord. 3657, 1-21-2014)
5-4A-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating this article shall, for each offense, be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3657, 1-21-2014)
CHAPTER 5
WEAPONS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Right To Bear Arms
5-5-2: Discharge Of Firearms
5-5-3: Concealed Weapons
5-5-4: Penalty
5-5-1: RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS:
Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every adult person, as defined by
Illinois statute, residing within the limits of the city shall possess the
absolute right to own, possess and maintain a firearm together with necessary
ammunition for the use of such firearm. (Ord. 2059, 8-2-1982)
5-5-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun in the city except in
an indoor firing range that is maintained and operated as a special use
approved by the city council to be located in a C-1 or C-2 zoning district
under section
10-5-6 of this code or to be located in an I-1, I-2, or I-3 zoning district
under section
10-6-2 of this code; and this section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty nor to
any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or
property or to drive away obnoxious birds, with the permission of the mayor and
chief of police. This section shall not apply to Lake Taylorville should there
be a special ordinance for hunting 1 . (Ord. 3741, 3-7-2016)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 5-3-4D of this title and section
  7-5-6 of this code.
5-5-3: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the city in violation of
the laws of this state 1 . (1979 Code §24-4-9)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1.
5-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 6
DOWNTOWN AREA
SECTION:
5-6-1: Trespass On Parking Lots
5-6-2: Curfew For Minors
5-6-3: Penalty
5-6-1: TRESPASS ON PARKING LOTS:
It shall be unlawful as a trespass for any person to enter upon any part of any
city owned parking lot, whether in a vehicle or otherwise, which is located in
the downtown fire district or any other city owned parking lot located within
two (2) blocks in any direction from the Taylorville public square, including
the parking lot across the street in a westerly direction from Harrison's
Motors and the two (2) parking lots across the street in an easterly direction
and southerly direction from the Frisina Hotel at any time when the main
entrance to said parking lots are closed or when a notice is posted or
exhibited at the main entrance of the parking lots stating that the parking
lots are closed to the public. (Ord. 2410, 9-4-1990)
5-6-2: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street, or highway at the following times within the corporate
limits of the city, unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless said person less than
seventeen (17) years of age is engaged in a business or occupation which the
laws of the state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
perform:
Between 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday,
Between 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday,
Between 10:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the
following day. (Ord. 3524, 7-18-2011)
   B.   Responsibility For Minors: It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal
guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control
to violate subsection A of this section. (Ord. 3157, 12-15-2003)
5-6-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of section
5-6-1 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. A notice to appear may be issued by the arresting officer
for an appearance day in court, and the violator may pay his fine on or before
said appearance date at the office of the circuit clerk of Christian County,
Illinois.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of section
5-6-2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code, except that neither a person who has been made a ward of
the court under the juvenile court act of 1987 1 , nor that person's legal
guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or instead of the fine
imposed by this subsection, the court may order a parent, legal guardian, or
other person convicted of a violation of subsection
5-6-2B of this chapter to perform community service as determined by the court,
except that the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the
court under said juvenile court act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform
community service. The dates and times established for the performance of
community service by the parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted of a
violation of subsection 5-6-2B of this chapter shall not conflict with the
dates and times that the person is employed in his or her regular occupation.
(Ord. 3157, 12-15-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 7
HALLOWEEN TRICK-OR-TREATING
SECTION:
5-7-1: Definition
5-7-2: Restrictions
5-7-3: Violation; Penalty
5-7-1: DEFINITION:
"Halloween trick-or-treating" means the solicitation by any person, in costume
or not, on another person's private property for candy, treats, food, or other
tangible items of personal property which solicitation is traditionally engaged
in during the month of October of each year. (Ord. 2737, 1-2-1996)
5-7-2: RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall engage, within the corporate limits of the City, in what is
traditionally known as "Halloween trick-or- treating" unless such person is
younger than the age of thirteen (13) years and engages in "Halloween trick-or-
treating" between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. Central Standard Time on October 30 and/or October 31 of each year and
such "Halloween trick-or- treating" is limited to such residences where an
exterior light is on. (Ord. 3857, 8-20-2018)
5-7-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in an amount of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each separate offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2737, 1-2-1996)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
6-1-1: Incorporation Of State Law Provisions
6-1-2: Vehicle Size, Weight And Load
6-1-3: Signs Posted
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.
6-1-1: INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS:
All the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, entitled "Motor
Vehicles", are incorporated herein as part of this title. Three (3) copies of
said provisions shall be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk.
(1979 Code Ch. 15, Art. IX, § 1; amd. 1993 Code)
6-1-2: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Width, Length And Height:
      1.   The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not
exceed the limits expressed in the state traffic law 1 .
      2.   No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a
load extending beyond the left side of a vehicle nor extending more than six
inches (6") beyond the right side of any vehicle.
      3.   No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two
feet (42') extreme over all dimension. No combination of vehicles coupled
together shall consist of more than two (2) units, and no such combination of
vehicles, unladen or with load, shall exceed a total length of fifty feet
(50'), but such length limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in the
daytime when transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects which cannot
be readily dismembered nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public
utility when engaged in emergency repair work, but such loads carried at night
shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of
the load.
      4.   No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet
(3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (1979 Code Ch. 15,
Art. VII, § 5)
   B.   Weight 3 :
      1.   It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a
weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by the state traffic law
for driving on improved highways or with a weight distributed in a manner not
conforming to such law 3 . (1979 Code Ch. 15, Art. VII, § 10)
      2.   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the
city except State Routes 104, 29, 48 and Federal Aid Routes 65 and 25, when the
gross weight on the surface of the road exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds, except for the purpose of making delivery in the city or picking up a
load within the city, in which case, such vehicle may be driven on such street
for not more than the minimum distances necessary for that purpose. (Ord. 3143,
9-15-2003)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.
3 3. See also section
  6-4-7 of this title.
3 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-111.
6-1-3: SIGNS POSTED:
Signs in the type and description as required by statute 1  shall be installed
at the appropriate places advising motorists of the restrictions contained in
this title. (1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-301 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Arrests
6-2-2: Traffic Tickets
6-2-3: Parking Violations
6-2-3-1: Fines
6-2-3-2: Operation Of An Administrative Adjudication System (Rep. by Ord. 3435,
8-3-2009)
6-2-3-3: Issuance Of Hang On Parking Violation Notice
6-2-3-4: Action By Recipient Of Citation (Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-5: Failure To Appear; Service Of Additional Notices (Rep. by Ord. 3435,
8-3-2009)
6-2-3-6: Final Determination Of Parking Liability; Petition To Set Aside (Rep.
by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-7: Administrative Adjudication Of Parking Violations (Rep. by Ord. 3435,
8-3-2009)
6-2-3-8: Certified Report; Contesting Certified Report (Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-
2009)
6-2-3-9: Procedure For Nonresidents (Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-10: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
6-2-3-11: Prosecutions Continued
6-2-4: Penalties
6-2-1: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by statute 1 . The police
officer in command at the station may prescribe the amount of bail or bond in
each instance; provided, that any arrested person may, at his request, have the
amount of such bond set by a judge or circuit clerk as provided by statute.
(1979 Code § 15-10-2)
 
Notes
1 1. ILCS S. Ct. Rule 526.
6-2-2: TRAFFIC TICKETS:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police
officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and name of
the offender where possible), may issue a traffic violation ticket notifying
the offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing such cases.
If the offender desires to plead guilty at or prior to the initial court
appearance, the prescribed penalty for all city offenses in this title, except
parking violations listed in sections
6-2-3-1 through
6-2-3-11 of this chapter, shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00), including
costs, for each such offense and is payable at the office of the circuit clerk
of Christian County. Such officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a
warrant if the offender does not appear at the time and place so specified.
(Ord. 2734, 12-18-1995)
6-2-3: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
6-2-3-1: FINES:
   A.   Fines Established: In addition to the towing and impoundment provisions
of this code relating to parking violations, the following penalties will be
applicable to the owner or operator who is issued a traffic violation notice
for violating any of the provisions listed below, providing the amount listed
is paid to the city treasurer within fourteen (14) days beginning on the first
day after the issuance of the notice or as specified below. Payments received
by mail shall be credited as paid on the date of postmark.
Blocking alley                                   $ 10.00
Double parking                                   10.00
Improper parking                                 10.00
No parking zone                                  10.00
Overtime parking in limited parking zone or area 10.00
Parking by a fire hydrant                        10.00
Parking in a handicapped parking space           250.00
Parking in fire zone                             10.00
Parking on wrong side of street                  10.00
All other traffic violations not listed          15.00
 
   B.   Late Payment Of Fines: If the violation notice is not paid within
fourteen (14) days, beginning on the day after issuance of the notice, the
person may avoid prosecution for violating a parking provision only by paying
the following amounts:
Blocking alley                                   $ 15.00
Double parking                                   15.00
Improper parking                                 15.00
No parking zone                                  15.00
Overtime parking in limited parking zone or area 15.00
Parking by a fire hydrant                        15.00
Parking in a handicapped parking space           350.00
Parking in fire zone                             30.00
Parking on wrong side of street                  15.00
All other traffic violations not listed          30.00
 
(Ord. 3146, 10-20-2003; amd. Ord. 3394, 8-4-2008)
   C.   Failure To Pay Fines: The owner or operator of any vehicle or
pedestrian cited for violation of any parking or pedestrian restriction of this
section who shall fail to pay the sums provided above to avoid prosecution for
the offense, shall be prosecuted for violating this section and upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) for overtime parking, and not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) for
all other violations, excluding the fine for parking in handicapped parking
spaces. All fines are exclusive of court costs. No fine shall be more than
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for any single offense. (Ord. 3414, 1-20-
2009)
   D.   Payment Of Fines; Receipt; Disposition Of Funds: The sum as herein
provided shall be paid to the municipality by inserting such sum in the
envelope type notice of such violation attached to the illegally parked vehicle
and depositing the same in any of the courtesy boxes conspicuously located in
the city square, such box being plainly marked for such purpose, or by
delivering the sum specified on such notice of violation to the office of the
city treasurer in the city hall.
A receipt shall be issued for all money so received in person by the city
treasurer's office and such money shall be deposited by the city treasurer to
be used in the manner provided for the disposition of fines for traffic
violations. Upon payment of such sums as herein provided, the members of the
police department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a
prosecution for the alleged offense involved.
   E.   Responsibility: In all cases of parking violations except as provided
in subsection F of this section, the persons in whose name the vehicle is
registered shall be responsible for the violation, as well as the person in
whose actual possession the vehicle was, at the time of the violation.
   F.   Information Provided: Every person in whose name a vehicle is
registered pursuant to law and who leases the vehicle to others after receiving
written notice of a violation of this traffic code or any ordinance restricting
or prohibiting parking involving the vehicle, shall, upon written request by
the city, provide the city with the name, address, and other identifying
material of the lessee at the time of the offense, and the identifying number
upon the registration sticker or stickers of the vehicle. (Ord. 2733, 12-18-
1995)
   G.   Prosecution: The city may prosecute in a court of law any person
receiving parking violations as defined in this title and/or refer any one or
more of said parking violations to a collection agency to collect the amount
due the city. (Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-2: OPERATION OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-3: ISSUANCE OF HANG ON PARKING VIOLATION NOTICE:
   A.   Any employee of the city authorized to issue vehicular parking and
standing citations and who detects a violation of any section of this title
restricting or prohibiting parking or standing of motor vehicles shall issue a
hang on parking violation notice by either affixing it to an unlawfully parked
vehicle or handing it to the operator of such vehicle if he or she is present.
   B.   Meter maids, traffic wardens and police officers shall be authorized to
issue hang on parking violation citations in accordance with the provisions set
forth in this chapter. Said persons shall certify as to the correctness of the
facts entered on the citation by signing his or her name to the citation at the
time of service, or in the case of a notice produced by computerized device, by
signing a single certificate to be kept by the traffic compliance
administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while it was under his or her control. The original or a facsimile of
the citation or notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance
administrator, shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business, and
shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice or copy shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. (Ord. 2733,
12-18-1995)
6-2-3-4: ACTION BY RECIPIENT OF CITATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-5: FAILURE TO APPEAR; SERVICE OF ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-6: FINAL DETERMINATION OF PARKING LIABILITY; PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-7: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING VIOLATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-8: CERTIFIED REPORT; CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-9: PROCEDURE FOR NONRESIDENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 3435, 8-3-2009)
6-2-3-10: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
Fines and penalties for motor vehicle parking and standing violations shall be
set in accordance with the schedule provided in section
6-2-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2733, 12-18-1995)
6-2-3-11: PROSECUTIONS CONTINUED:
Prosecution for any violation occurring before the effective date of this
chapter is not affected or abated by the enactment of this chapter, and any
fine levied as a result of the prosecution shall be governed by the ordinance
in effect at the time of the violation. (Ord. 2733, 12-18-1995)
6-2-4: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provisions of this title,
except parking violations, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code § 15-10-1; amd. 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: No Parking On Sidewalks Or Parkways; Exception
6-3-2: General Parking Restrictions
6-3-3: Time Limit Parking
6-3-4: Loading Zones
6-3-5: Emergency Snow Routes
6-3-6: City Parking Lots
6-3-7: Off Street Parking (Truck And Truck-Tractor/Semitrailer Units)
6-3-8: No Parking/Blocking Alleyway Behind City Hall
6-3-9: Additional Parking Restrictions
6-3-1: NO PARKING ON SIDEWALKS OR PARKWAYS; EXCEPTION:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand on any sidewalk, parkway or
boulevard; provided, however, that upon written request of either an owner or
person in possession of the premises located adjacent thereto requesting an
exception to the application of this provision and with approval of a majority
of the council, such provision shall not apply during the period such owner or
other person is in possession of the premises or until the council, by majority
vote, shall decide to the contrary, whichever event occurs first. (1979 Code §
15-5-1)
6-3-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   All Night Parking:
      1.   No person shall park a motor truck of the gross vehicular weight in
excess of one ton on any street between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day except for utility companies or
emergency vehicles. (1979 Code § 15-5-5)
   B.   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1979 Code § 15-5-6)
   C.   Cabstands And Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab on
duty shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cabstand, and no
vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus
loading zone 1
   D.   Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any
street for the purpose of displaying it for sale. (1979 Code § 15-5-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 6-4-3-5B of this title.
6-3-3: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a
longer consecutive period of time than that designated by the city council on
such streets as are established by ordinance as such during the hours indicated
on such posted signs 2 . (1979 Code § 15-5-8)
 
Notes
2 2. See section
  6-4-3-3 of this title.
6-3-4: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to park any
freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load,
unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place
designated by the council as a loading zone and marked as a loading zone 1
 
Notes
1 3. See section 6-4-3-5 of this title.
6-3-5: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES 4 :
   A.   Purpose: It is hereby found and declared to be necessary, desirable and
in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare to enhance the safer
and more expeditious movement of police, fire, emergency and other vehicles
within the city that emergency snow routes be designated and the movement or
parking of vehicles thereon be regulated to facilitate the removal of snow from
the snow routes.
   B.   Declaration Of Snow Emergency: The superintendent of streets and sewers
2  is hereby authorized and directed to cause or provide for, either by such
person or by one of those employees of the city designated and authorized by
said superintendent, the declaration of a snow emergency when it is determined,
in the opinion of the declarer of said emergency, that new snow has accumulated
in, on or along any emergency snow route in the city to a depth of two (2) or
more inches and further to declare such emergency to be ended when it is
reasonably deemed the same has then exhausted its purposes.
Such declaration shall be in writing over the signature of the declarer and
shall be endorsed with the time and date thereof along with a statement of the
manner, means and extent the same was or was attempted to be communicated to
the news media and the public and which shall be, as soon as practicable, filed
with the city clerk who is authorized and directed to receive and preserve the
same for public inspection in some appropriate manner for a period of not less
than two (2) years and by the same method and manner the ending of said
emergency shall be declared. (Ord. 2128, 2-6-1984; amd. 1993 Code)
   C.   Parking Restricted: When appropriate signs or markings giving notice
thereof have been provided, in addition to other regulations applicable
thereto, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in the roadway of
an emergency snow route in the city at any time during the period commencing
one hour after a snow emergency has been declared and extending to the hour at
which such emergency has been declared to be ended. (Ord. 2986, 9-18-2000)
   D.   Towing Illegally Parked Vehicles: Any peace officer may cause any
vehicle found to be parked or left standing in violation of the provisions
hereof to be towed away and impounded, whereafter, the same may be held until
all towing and storage charges relating thereto are paid by the person seeking
to obtain the release thereof.
   E.   Prima Facie Proof: Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked or left
standing in violation of any provisions hereof, any person or entity named as
registered owner thereof shall be prima facie responsible for such violation
and subject to the penalty therefor.
   F.   Rules And Regulations: The superintendent of streets and sewers is
hereby authorized and directed to promulgate such rules and regulations and
take such actions as may be deemed by him to be reasonable and desirable to
carry out the intent and purpose of this section.
   G.   Violation; Penalty: Any person or entity parking or leaving standing
any vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section or causing the same,
shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2128, 2-6-1984; amd. 1993 Code)
 
Notes
4 4. See also section
  6-4-8 of this title.
2 5. See title 1, chapter 9, article E of this code.
6-3-6: CITY PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall apply
to every parking lot maintained by the city. (1979 Code § 9-4-1)
   B.   Manner Of Parking:
      1.   Vehicles parking in such parking lots shall be parked in accordance
with the painted lines or markers indicating position of vehicles in such lots.
(1979 Code § 9-4-2)
      2.   No vehicle shall be backed into and parked in any parking space in a
city parking lot. (1979 Code § 15-5-10)
   C.   Parking Time Limits: Any person desiring to park any vehicle upon and
within the limits of a city parking lot shall, upon parking such vehicle in the
designated space, deposit appropriate coin or coins in the meter in such
parking space and in the amount determined by the parking time desired. (1979
Code § 9-4-3)
   D.   Vehicle Restrictions: The parking of motor vehicles in the parking lot
created shall be limited to passenger automobiles and station wagons designated
and used for the carrying of not more than seven (7) persons; vehicles which
are designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and also those vehicles
or motorcars which are designated and used for the carrying of more than seven
(7) persons are prohibited from parking in the city parking lot. (1979 Code §
9-4-4)
   E.   Violations: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any such
parking lot excepting in the place and manner designated for such lot, or
without paying the parking fee prescribed. (1979 Code § 9-4-5)
   F.   Penalty: All persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1979 Code § 9-4-6; amd. 1993 Code)
   G.   Do Not Enter: Entry of vehicles into the south end of the city's
parking lot located adjacent to East Main Street is hereby prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle into the south end of
said city's parking lot located adjacent to East Main Street. (Ord. 2674, 11-
21-1994)
   H.   Parking For Christian County Employees: During the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Mondays through Fridays,
except New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth Of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day, the two (2) eastern rows of parking spaces on the city
parking lot located one block east of the southeast corner of the public square
and situated off the northeast corner of the intersection of Walnut Street with
Market Street is restricted to parking of vehicles used by Christian County,
Illinois, employees who regularly work at the Christian County Courthouse on
the public square. It shall be unlawful for any other person to park any
vehicle in said two (2) eastern rows of parking spaces on said parking lot
during said times and days of the week; and any illegally parked vehicles may
be towed. Any appropriate sign or signs shall be posted at said city parking
lot. (Ord. 2752, 5-20-1996)
6-3-7: OFF STREET PARKING (TRUCK AND TRUCK-TRACTOR/SEMITRAILER UNITS):
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
6-3-2A of this chapter, and subsections
 6-1-2B and
 6-4-7A of this title, but subject to the off street parking requirements in
title 10, chapter 8 of this code and subject to any restrictive covenants of
record applicable to the hereinafter mentioned primary residential property, a
person who owns or leases or regularly uses a truck-tractor unit may drive such
unit, without a semitrailer unit attached thereto, on city streets for not more
than the minimum distance necessary to travel from the point of first entry
into the corporate limits of the city or from the point of disconnecting the
semitrailer attached thereto within the city's corporate limits to such
person's primary residential property for the sole purpose of parking such
truck-tractor unit, without a semitrailer unit attached thereto, upon such
person's primary residential property in an off street parking space located
thereon as required by
title 10, chapter 8 of this code.
   B.   For purposes hereof, the term "primary residential property" shall mean
and include only property located within the corporate limits of the city which
is zoned with an R-1 or R-2 (residence district) zoning classification and upon
which the person operating such unit regularly resides in the dwelling thereon
as his or her primary residence; and such property shall further mean and
include the immediate lot or tract of land upon which such person's primary
residential dwelling is located thereon; but such property shall not mean or
include any adjacent or nearby lot or tract of land even though the same may be
also owned or leased by such person.
   C.   Only one such truck-tractor unit (excluding any semitrailer) may be
parked upon said primary residential property at any one time; and such one
truck-tractor unit must be owned or leased or regularly used by a resident at
said primary residential property.
   D.   At no time shall any person permit or allow the engine on such truck-
tractor unit to idle for any continuous period of time in excess of ten (10)
minutes within a twenty four (24) hour period when such truck-tractor unit is
located on said primary residential property.
   E.   No person shall otherwise park any truck-tractor unit or any
semitrailer unit or any truck-tractor/semitrailer unit combination upon any
property within the city which has an R-1 or R-2 (residence district) zoning
classification. (Ord. 2835, 3-16-1998)
   F.   1. For purposes of this subsection F, "truck" shall mean and include
any truck or truck-tractor unit or any semitrailer unit or any truck-tractor/
semitrailer combination unit regardless of weight or whether such truck, truck-
tractor unit, semitrailer unit, or truck-tractor/semitrailer combination unit
is loaded or unloaded or running or idling.
      2.   For purposes of this subsection F, "downtown historic district"
shall mean and include an eight (8) square block area bordered by Poplar Street
on the north, Clay Street on the west, Main Cross Street on the south, and
Walnut Street on the east; and a fifteen (15) square block bordered by Main
Cross Street on the north, Clay Street on the west, Adams Street on the south,
and Pawnee Street on the east.
      3.   Except for the sole purpose of making a delivery or picking up a
load for a period of time that is necessary to load, unload and deliver goods,
materials, or personal property not to exceed forty five (45) minutes, it shall
be otherwise unlawful for any person to park any truck on any portion of any
private property or on any portion of any city street, public parking lot,
alleyway, boulevard, right of way, or sidewalk which is located within the
"downtown historic district".
      4.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, it shall not be
unlawful to park any truck in a fully enclosed garage, warehouse, building, or
structure on private property. (Ord. 3695, 12-1-2014)
   G.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   SEMITRAILER: Shall mean and include every vehicle, without motive power,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests
upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR: Shall mean and include every motor vehicle designed and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load
other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any term or provision of
this section. Any person found to be in violation with any term or provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) but no more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed to occur on
each day on which such violation occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. 2835, 3-
16-1998)
6-3-8: NO PARKING/BLOCKING ALLEYWAY BEHIND CITY HALL:
No person shall park any vehicle within or otherwise stop or stand any vehicle
within or otherwise block the following described area of the alleyway bounded
on the east by North Main Street and bounded on the west by North Washington
Street, and which alleyway is also situated between West Vine Street and West
Main Cross Street:
The entire width of said alleyway from the east right of way line of North
Washington Street to the white line placed on said alleyway approximately sixty
three feet (63') from the west right of way line of North Main Street. (Ord.
2859, 7-20-1998)
6-3-9: ADDITIONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic signal:
      1.   In any intersection.
      2.   In a crosswalk.
      3.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto.
      4.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty feet
(20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
      5.   Within ten feet (10') of any intersection or crosswalk; or as
designated by meters or proper marking.
      6.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon, or a through
street sign on the approaching side.
      7.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
      8.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      9.   At any place where the vehicle would be parked along a street or
roadway where any portion of such vehicle is parked directly across from a
driveway or where any portion of such vehicle is parked within eight feet (8')
adjacent to either side of the entrance to a driveway.
      10.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
      11.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance.
      12.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      13.   At any place where a City sign or signs are posted that indicate
"Cemetery Visitor Parking Only" unless either the driver and/or any passenger
(s) of said parked vehicle have left the vehicle and are actually visiting the
City Cemetery between the hours of five o’clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o’clock (9:
00) P.M.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to stop or park any vehicle with the left side of
such vehicle next to the curb or edge of the roadway.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to stand, stop, or park any vehicle in a street
other than parallel with the curb or edge of the roadway and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the curb line or edge
of the roadway, except that upon those streets that have been marked for
diagonal parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated
by such marks. (Ord. 2888, 12-21-1998; amd. Ord. 3898, 6-3-2019; Ord. 4033, 5-
3-2021)
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Stop Streets
6-4-2: Yield Right Of Way Streets
6-4-3: Parking Restrictions And Prohibitions
6-4-3-1: Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets And Places
6-4-3-1-1: Parking In Violation Of Signs
6-4-3-1-2: No Stopping On Pavement
6-4-3-2: Parking Prohibited During Certain Times
6-4-3-3: Time Limit Parking
6-4-3-4: Parking For Handicapped Persons; City Officials
6-4-3-5: Loading Zones
6-4-3-6: Van Parking Only
6-4-3-7: Hershey Towers Residents Pick Up And Drop Off (Rep. by Ord. 3406, 10-
20-2008)
6-4-3-8: Semitrailer And Tractor Trailer Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets
6-4-3-9: Therapy Services/Specialty Clinic Patient Parking Only
6-4-4: Speed Limits
6-4-5: One-Way Streets
6-4-6: No Turns
6-4-7: Vehicle Weight And Load Limits
6-4-8: Emergency Snow Routes
6-4-9: Traffic Restricted On Certain Streets
6-4-1: STOP STREETS:
The following are designated stop intersections:
Traffic Traveling On Stops At Type Of Stop Or Placement Of Signs Or Ord. #
                              Direction Of Traffic
                                                                                                          Type Of Stop Or
                                                                                                          Placement Of      Ord.
Traffic Traveling On                                      Stops At                                        Signs Or          #
                                                                                                          Direction Of
                                                                                                          Traffic
North Abby Street                                         West Elm Street                                 One-way,          3691
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                          Cheney Street                                   Eastbound and     3225
                                                                                                          west-bound
                                                          Houston Street                                  NE and SW         1504
Adams Street                                              Main Street                                                      903
                                                          Washington Street                               NE                1139
                                                          South Washington Street                         Eastbound         903
                                                          T-intersection of Dairy Lane                    Eastbound         3059
                                                          Moore Street                                    Eastbound and     2537
East Adams Street                                                                                         west-bound
                                                          Walnut Street                                   Eastbound and     3030
                                                                                                          west-bound
                                                          Henrietta Street                                One-way,          2793
West Adams Street                                                                                         westbound
                                                          South Webster Street                            Four-way          2433
Airlawn Avenue                                            Spresser Street South                           Westbound         2937
Anderson Street                                           Thompson Street                                 Four-way          3684
South Anderson Street                                     East Adams Street                               Northbound and    3056
                                                                                                          southbound
Arlington Street                                          West Vandeveer Street                           Northbound        3351
                                                          Long Street                                     Northbound and    1396
Ash Street                                                                                                southbound
                                                          Shawnee Street                                  Four-way          3256
Austin Street                                             Adams Street                                    Northbound and    3207
                                                                                                          southbound
Bidwell Street                                            Cherokee Street                                 NE and SW         1504
                                                          Snodgrass Street                                One-way           3670
Big Bend Road or Elm    Street                         Briarcliff Road                                 Four-way          3117
                                                          Adams Street                                    Northbound and    3225
Cheney Street                                                                                             southbound
                                                          West Main Cross Street                                           1098
                                                          Prairie Street                                  Four-way          2268
South Cheney Street                                       West Franklin Street                            Four-way          2443
Cherokee Street                                           Cleveland Street                                Northbound and    1332
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                         Elm Street                                      NW and SE         1783
                                                         Main Cross Street                                                903
                                                         East Main Cross Street                          Four-way          1510
                                                         Virginia Avenue                                 Four-way          2308
Chestnut Street                                           Cleveland Street                                Four-way          3824
                                                         Poplar Street                                                    1253
                                                          Adams Street                                                     903
                                                          Main Cross Street                                                903
Clay Street                                               West Poplar Street                              North and south   1200
                                                                                                          sides
                                                          Second Street                                   SE and NW         1152
                                                          Vine Street                                                      903
South Clay Street                                         West Market Street                              Four-way          2684
Clearing Avenue                                           Spresser Street South                           Westbound         2937
Cleveland Street                                          Cherokee Street                                 NE                1525
                                                          Chestnut Street                                 Four-way          3824
Coral Street                                              Bidwell Street                                  NW                1602
Dairy Lane                                                East Franklin Street                            Northbound and    3041
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                                                                          Stop southbound
                                                          E 1100 North Road                               at northwest      4116
                                                                                                          corner of 1100 N.
N. 1500 East Road                                                                                         1500 East Road
                                                                                                          Stop northbound
                                                          E 1100 North Road                               at southwest      4116
                                                                                                          corner of 1100 N.
                                                                                                          1500 East Road
                                                          Cherokee Street                                                  1086
Elm Street                                                Pine Street                                     NW and SE         1504
                                                          Wilkinson Street                                SE and NW         1568
East Elm Street                                           Pawnee Street                                                    2485
Elm Tree Court                                            West Elm Street                                                  2082
West Elm Street                                           N. Lawn Avenue                                  Eastbound and     4144
                                                                                                          westbound
England Street                                            Cheney Street                                   Two-way           1896
                                                          Powers Street                                   Four-way          3668
                                                         Shumway Street                                  Eastbound         3757
                                                          Cherokee Street                                                  1257
Esther Street                                             Long Street                                     Four-way          2408
                                                          Shawnee Street                                  Two-way           1852
Esther Street (extended    with reference to Park Glen North Webster Street                                             2115
Apartments)
Esther Street or Shawnee Street                           Intersection of Esther Street    and Shawnee Four-way          3516
                                                          Street
East Esther Street                                        Pawnee Street                                                    2488
                                                                                                          One-way stop
                                                                                                          westbound at
                                                                                                          first
                                                                                                          intersection on
Fairview Trailer Ct.                                      Fairview Trailer Ct.                            Fairview Trailer  3981
                                                                                                          Ct./Fairview
                                                                                                          Trailer Ct. west
                                                                                                          of N. Houston
                                                                                                          Street
Florence Street                                           Palmer Street                                   Northbound        903
                                                          Houston Street                                  NE                1504
                                                          Main Street                                                      1254
Franklin Street                                           Shumway Street                                                   904
                                                          Washington Street                                                1240
                                                          Webster Street                                  NE and SW         1593
                                                          Moore Street                                    Eastbound and     2537
                                                                                                          westbound
East Franklin Street                                      South Cherokee Street                           Westbound and     1428
                                                                                                          eastbound
                                                          South Walnut Street                             Four-way          2914
West Franklin Street                                      Madison Street                                  Four-way          1997
Gensler Road                                              East Lake Shore Drive                           NW                2444
Glenda Lane                                               Park Avenue                                     NW                1835
Grand Boulevard Apartment complex located on Grand
Boulevard at Fairway Avenue and Grand Boulevard           Fairway Avenue and Grand Boulevard extensions                    2112
extensions
Grand Street                                              Pershing Street                                 NE                1602
Haner Avenue                                              Maxwell Street                                  Four-way          3575
                                                         Taft Street                                     Four-way          3575
Heights Avenue                                            Sandy Duncan Drive                              Eastbound and     3229
                                                                                                          westbound
Henrietta Street                                          Vandeveer Street                                One-way           2195
Houston Street                                            Main Cross Street                               NW and SE         1783
Illini Drive                                              West Main Cross Street                                           1968
Jayne Street                                              Vandeveer Street                                One-way,          2741
                                                                                                          southbound
Jayne Street or Franklin Street                           Intersection of Jayne Street    and Franklin Four-way          3515
                                                          Street
Knute Rockne Drive                                        Western Avenue                                  Northbound and    4211
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                          Road running east and west along the south side
Lake Taylorville, access road running north and south on  of section 36, township 13 north, range two
the west side of the lake leading into the boat dock area west of the third principal meridian, to                         1396
                                                          control southbound traffic along said north and
                                                          south road
Lawn Avenue                                               Elm Street                                      NW and SE         1543
N. Lawn Avenue                                            West Elm Street                                 Northbound and    4144
                                                                                                          southbound
Lincoln Avenue                                            Western Avenue                                  Both sides        2415
                                                          Elm Street                                      NE and SW         1152
Long Street                                               Poplar Street                                                    1330
                                                          East Stevenson Street                           Both sides        2453
Long Street or Oak Street                                 Intersection of Long Street                     Four-way          3137
                                                          and Oak Street
                                                          Maple Street                                    Northbound and    2759
Madison Street                                                                                            southbound
                                                          Poplar Street                                   Northbound and    2986
                                                                                                          southbound
South Madison Street                                      West Market Street                              Northbound and    2684
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                          Cheney Street                                   Four-way          1152
Main Street                                               Franklin Street                                                  1254
                                                          Market Street                                   Northbound        903
                                                          Shumway Street                                  Four-way          1152
North Main Street                                         Pleasant Street                                 Three-way         2269
                                                          Cheney Street                                   NE and SW         1783
Main Cross Street                                         Cherokee Street                                                  1243
                                                          Main Street                                     Westbound         903
                                                          Webster Street                                                   1240
East Main Cross Street                                    Walnut Street                                   Four-way          2095
Maple Street                                              Madison Street                                  Eastbound and     2759
                                                                                                          westbound
Marfell Drive                                             West Lake Shore Drive                           NE                1620
                                                          Cheney Street                                   Eastbound and     2728
                                                                                                          westbound
                                                          Cherokee Street                                                  1086
Market Street                                             Paw Paw Street                                  One-way,          3225
                                                                                                          eastbound
                                                          Shumway Street                                                   903
                                                          Washington Street                               Eastbound         903
                                                          Webster Street                                                   1240
West Market Street                                        South Clay Street                               Four-way          2684
Maxwell Street                                            Hawley Avenue                                                    1236
                                                          Memorial School is hereby authorized, by their designated agents,
                                                          to place portable, double faced stop signs facing northbound and
                                                          southbound traffic on South Walnut Street at its intersection
                                                          with East Franklin Street and facing eastbound and westbound
                                                          traffic on East Franklin Street at its intersection with South
Memorial School                                           Walnut Street. Said stop signs must conform to the provisions of  2678
                                                          subsection
                                                          9-8-8E of this Code concerning portable signs, as well as any
                                                          other relevant provisions of this Code, and may only be displayed
                                                          during times children are present on said school's playground and
                                                          during times when children are coming to and from school prior
                                                          to, during, or after school hours.
                                                          Memorial School is hereby authorized, by their designated agents,
                                                          to place portable, double faced stop signs facing northbound and
                                                          southbound traffic on South Walnut Street at its intersection
                                                          with East Adams Street and facing eastbound and westbound traffic
                                                          on East Adams Street at its intersection with South Walnut
                                                         Street. Said stop signs must conform to the provisions of         2728
                                                          subsection
                                                          9-8-8E of this Code concerning portable signs, as well as any
                                                          other relevant provisions of this Code, and may only be displayed
                                                          during times children are present on said school's playground and
                                                          during times when children are coming to and from school prior
                                                          to, during, or after school hours.
                                                          Memorial School is hereby authorized, by their designated agents,
                                                          to place portable, double faced stop signs facing northbound and
                                                          southbound traffic at the marked crosswalk on South Walnut
                                                          Street, said marked crosswalk being located between East Adams
                                                          Street and East Franklin Street. Said stop signs must conform to
                                                         the provisions of subsection                                      2728
                                                          9-8-8E of this Code concerning portable signs, as well as any
                                                          other relevant provisions of this Code, and may only be displayed
                                                          during times children are present on said school's playground and
                                                          during times when children are coming to and from school prior
                                                          to, during, or after school hours.
                                                          East Adams Street                               Northbound and    2537
Moore Street                                                                                              southbound
                                                          East Franklin Street                            Northbound and    2537
                                                                                                          southbound    
                                                          West Adams Street                               Northbound and    3115
Morton Street                                                                                             southbound
                                                          England Street                                  Two-way           3757
                                                          West England Street                             Both sides        2487
                                                                                                          Two-way traffic
North Street                                              North Main Street                               in both           2067
                                                                                                          directions
Oak Street                                                Long Street                                     SW and NE         1552
                                                          Shawnee Street                                                   1247
East Ash Street                                           North Snodgrass Street                          Four-way          4000
East Oak Street                                           North Snodgrass Street                          Four-way          4000
Palmer Street                                             Cherokee Street                                 Eastbound         903
Park Avenue                                               Pine Street                                     Westbound         3101
West Park Boulevard                                       Cheney Street                                   NE and SW         1587
Pauline Street                                            Taylorville Boulevard                           SW and NE         1545
                                                                                                          Two-way stop
West Pauline Street                                       North Silver Street                             (eastbound and    3925
                                                                                                          westbound)
Paw Paw Street                                            East Franklin Street                            Southbound        3192
                                                          East Franklin Street                            Northbound and    3257
Pawnee Street                                                                                             southbound
                                                          Pleasant Street                                                  2071
Pine Street                                               Park Avenue                                     Northbound        3101
Pine Tree Drive                                           Bristle Drive                                   Northbound        4321
                                                         Eastwood Drive                                  Westbound         4321
Pleasant Street                                           Main Cross Street                               Westbound         2092
                                                          Cheney Street                                   NE and SW         1587
Poplar Street                                             Washington Street                                                903
                                                          Webster Street                                                   903
                                                          Cheyenne Street                                                  1265
East Poplar Street                                        Shawnee Street                                  Both sides        2385
                                                          Walnut Street                                                    1217
West Poplar Street                                        Shumway Street                                                   1203
Powers Street                                             West Adams Street                               Northbound and    3115
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                         England Street                                  Four-way          3668
                                                          West England Street                             Both sides        2486
                                                          West Main Street                                SE and NW         1587
                                                                                                          One-way stop
                                                                                                          northbound at
                                                                                                          southeast corner
North Powers Street                                       West Pauline Street                             of intersection   4099
                                                                                                          of North Powers
                                                                                                          Street and West
                                                                                                          Pauline Street
North Powers Street                                       West Vine Street                                Northbound and    4231
                                                                                                          southbound
Prairie Street                                            Houston Street                                  Westbound         2728
Rich Street                                               Cheney Street                                   Eastbound and     2963
                                                                                                          westbound
                                                          Elm Street                                      SE                1543
Ridge Avenue                                              West Elm Street                                 SE and NW; two-   1833
                                                                                                          way
                                                          Park Avenue                                     SE                1834
Ridgeview Court                                           East Lake Shore Drive                           Eastbound         3022
                                                          St. Mary's Catholic Church and Parochial School is hereby
                                                          authorized, by their designated agents, to place a portable,
                                                          double faced stop sign, facing northbound and southbound traffic
                                                          on South Main Street in Taylorville, Illinois, within a clearly
                                                          marked crosswalk on South Main Street, just south of the
St. Mary's Catholic Church and Parochial School           intersection of South Main Street and Adams Street. Said stop     2526
                                                          sign must conform to the provisions of subsection
                                                          9-8-8E of this Code concerning portable signs, as well as any
                                                          other relevant provisions of this Code, and may only be displayed
                                                          when children from said church and school are present on the
                                                          church playground
Sandy Duncan Drive                                        Bidwell Street                                  Southbound        3684
                                                         Heights Avenue                                  Northbound        3229
                                                          South Main Street                               One-way eastbound 3718
Second Street                                             Shumway Street                                  SE                1783
                                                          Webster Street                                  Four-way          3684
Shawnee Street                                            Ash Street                                      Four-way          3256
                                                          Elm Street                                                       1098
Sherman Street                                            Cheney Street                                                    1874
                                                          Houston Street                                                   1874
                                                          Adams Street                                                     1229
                                                          Franklin Street                                 NW and SE         1783
Shumway Street                                            Kenton Boulevard                                Northbound        3338
                                                          Main Cross Street                               SE                903
                                                          Second Street                                                    1139
North Snodgrass Street                                    East Ash Street                                 Four-way          4000
North Snodgrass Street                                    East Oak Street                                 Four-way          4000
South Shumway Street                                      West Adams Street                               Four-way          2160
Silver Street                                             Elm Street                                      NW and SE         1543
                                                          Park Avenue                                     NW and SE         1543
Silver Street, West School                                Poplar Street                                   Eastbound         1420
North Silver Street                                       Pauline Street                                  Northbound and    3185
                                                                                                             southbound
Simpson Street                                            Second Street                                   Northbound and    3137
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                                                                          Two-way
                                                          Ash Street                                      (northbound       3824
Snodgrass Street                                                                                          and southbound)
                                                          Elm Street                                      Four-way          2261
                                                          Oak Street                                      Northbound and    2800
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                          South School is hereby authorized, by their designated agents, to
                                                          place portable, double faced stop signs facing northbound and
                                                          southbound traffic on Silver Street at its intersection with West
                                                          Prairie Street; and facing eastbound and westbound traffic on
                                                          West Prairie Street at its intersection with Silver Street. Said
South School                                              stop signs must conform to the provisions of subsection           2728
                                                          9-8-8E of this Code concerning portable signs, as well as any
                                                          other relevant provisions of this Code, and may only be displayed
                                                          during times children are present on said school's playground and
                                                          during times when children are coming to and from school prior
                                                          to, during, or after school hours
Sportsman Drive                                           Western Avenue                                  Northbound and    2557
                                                                                                          southbound
Stevenson Street                                          Shawnee Street                                  Eastbound and     3447
                                                                                                          westbound
Sweeney's Drive                                           Lake Taylorville beach entrance                 SW                1620
                                                          West Lake Shore Drive                           NE                1620
                                                          Elm Street                                      SW and NE         1543
                                                          West Elm Street                                 Northbound and    2809
Taylorville Boulevard                                                                                     southbound
                                                          Park Avenue                                     NW and SE         1543
                                                          Pauline Street                                  NE                1543
Taylorville Junior High School                            Bidwell Street                                  Northbound        1487
Taylorville YMCA, Inc., along and upon the street         McAdam Street                                   Northbound        2032
presently provided as an entrance and exit to the YMCA
Third Street                                              Webster Street                                  Eastbound and     3229
                                                                                                          westbound
                                                          Anderson Street                                 Four-way          3684
Thompson Street                                           Shawnee Street                                  Westbound; NE     2026
                                                                                                          corner
Vandeveer Street                                          Houston Street                                  NE and SW         1788
                                                                                                          Four-way;
                                                          Intersection of Vandeveer Street and Silver     eastbound and
Vandeveer Street or Silver Street                         Street                                          westbound,        3237
                                                                                                          northbound and
                                                                                                          southbound
West Vandeveer Street                                     South Cheney Street                             Four-way          2148
                                                          Cheney Street                                   NE and SW         1587
                                                          Main Street                                     Eastbound         903
Vine Street                                               Shumway Street                                  East and west     1202
                                                                                                          sides
                                                          Washington Street                               SW and NE         1587
                                                          Webster Street                                                   903
East Vine Street                                          Walnut Street                                   Eastbound         1460
West Vine Street                                          North Powers Street                             Eastbound and     4231
                                                                                                          westbound
Virginia Avenue                                           Sandy Duncan Drive                                               2071
                                                          East Adams Street                               SE                1295
                                                          East Main Cross Street                                           903
Walnut Street                                             Market Street                                                    903
                                                          Pleasant Street                                 One-way           3868
                                                                                                          (northbound)
South Walnut Street                                       East Franklin Street                            Four-way          2914
                                                          Franklin Street                                                  1240
Washington Street                                         Main Cross Street                               Southbound        903
                                                          Second Street                                   Southbound        903
                                                          Bidwell Street                                  Northbound        3496
                                                          Esther Street                                   Northbound and    3496
North Washington Street                                                                                   southbound
                                                          HTW, Associates' Shopping Center                Southbound        3496
                                                          Wilson Street                                   Northbound and    3496
                                                                                                          southbound
                                                          Adams Street                                    NW and SE         1139
Webster Street                                            Franklin Street                                 NW and SE         1589
                                                          Main Cross Street                                                903
                                                          Second Street                                   Four-way          3684
West Avenue                                               West Elm Street                                 Three-way         3246
West Elm Street                                           West Avenue                                     Three-way         3246
Western Avenue                                            Knute Rockne Drive                              Westbound         4211
                                                          Lincoln Avenue                                  Four-way          2045;
Western Avenue                                                                                                              2415
                                                          Sportsman Drive                                 Westbound         2557
White Avenue                                              Elm Street                                      NW and SE         1543
West Wood Drive                                           West Sunset Drive                               SW                1620
                                                          East Market Street                              Two-way           1911
Wyandotte Street                                          Franklin Street                                 Northbound and    3243
                                                                                                          southbound
 
6-4-2: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS:
The following are designated yield right-of-way intersections:
Traffic Traveling On Yields To Placement Of Signs Or Direction Of Ord. #
                               Traffic
Traffic Traveling On Yields To               Placement Of Signs Or   Ord. #
                                             Direction Of Traffic
East Adams Street    Cherokee Street         Both directions         1957
Allied Avenue        Virginia Avenue                                 2122
Anderson Street      Franklin Street         SE                      1752
Austin Street        Franklin Street         SE                      1752
Bristle Drive        Eastwood Drive          West                    3443
                     East Lake Shore Drive   East                    3443
Camp Street          Florence Street         NE                      1752
                     South Wyandotte Street  Eastbound               2675
Captain's Lane       Marfell Drive           NE                      1620
Cheney Street        Vine Street                                     1252
Chestnut Street      Esther Street           SE and NW               1594
                     Stevenson Street        NW and SE               1752
Clay Street          Franklin Street         Northbound and          1428
                                             southbound
Cleveland Street     Long Street             Eastbound and           2561
                                             westbound
                     Shawnee Street          NW and SE               1752
Cottage Avenue       East Elm Street                                 2149
Curve Street         West Elm Street         Northbound              3088
Elevator Street      West Adams Street       Northbound and          2570
                                             southbound
                     Prairie Street          NW and SE               1752
                     Rich Street             NW and SE               1752
                     Vine Street             NW and SE               1752
South Elevator       West England Street     Northbound and          2914
Street                                       southbound
England Street       Houston Street          Eastbound and           3757
                                             westbound
Esther Street        Shawnee Street          NE and SW               1705
                     Snodgrass Street        NE and SW               1752
First Street         South Wyandotte Street  Westbound               2675
Henrietta Street     Franklin Street         SE                      1752
Lake Taylorville     East Lake Shore                                 2122
entranceway          Drive
Lawrence Street      Western Street          SE and NW               1752
Lewis Street         South Wyandotte Street  Westbound               2675
Lincoln Street       Western Street          SE and NW               1752
Long Street          Esther Street           NW and SE               1694
Madison Street       West Adams Street                               2071
                     West Main Cross         Both directions         1988
                     Street
                     Market Street           SE and NW               1620
                     Vine Street                                     2211
South Madison Street West Franklin Street    NW and SE               1783
Maple Street         Clay Street             E and W                 2309
                     Webster Street          E and W                 2310
Market Street        Cheney Street                                   1262
Moore Street         Thompson Street         Northbound and          2788
                                             southbound
Morton Street        West Franklin Street                            1845
                     West Market Street                              2491
                     West Poplar Street      Southbound and          4307
                                             northbound
                     Powers Street           North and south sides   2283
                     Prairie Street          NW                      1752
                     Rich Street                                     2205
                     Vine Street             Southbound and          3899
                                             Northbound
North Street         North Washington Street                         2149
Oak Street           Wilkinson Street        SW                      1752
Othelle Street       Main Cross Street       SE                      1752
Pauline Street       Kenton Boulevard        Southbound              3876
Paw Paw Street       Franklin Street         NW                      1752
                     Stevenson Street        Both directions         3530
Pawnee Street        Market Street           NW and SE               1752
Poplar Street        North Cherokee Street   Eastbound and westbound 1487
East Poplar Street   North Main Street                               1370
Powers Street        Elm Street              N                       2311
                     England Street          North and south sides   2283
                     West Franklin Street    Northbound and          1473
                                             southbound
                     Kenton Street           NE                      1752
                     Market Street           Northbound and          2728
                                             southbound
                     Poplar Street           Both directions         3494
Shawnee Street       East Adams Street                               2218
Silver Street        Adams Street            NW and SE               1637
                     England Street          NW and SE               1650
                     Rich Street             Northbound and          3002
                                             southbound
                     West Vine Street                                2166
Simpson Street       Adams Street            Northbound and          3342
                                             southbound
                     First Street            Northbound and          3137
                                             southbound
                     Franklin Street         SE and NW               1620
                     Maple Street            Northbound and          3137
                                             southbound
Snodgrass Street     Oak Street                                      2149
Stevenson Street     North Cherokee Street   Eastbound and westbound 1486
                     Snodgrass Street        SW                      1752
Sunset Drive         Eastwood Drive          Westbound               2952, 4260
East Sunset Drive    East Lake Shore Drive   Eastbound and westbound 2952, 4260
Taft Street          Hawley Street           NW                      1752
Veterans Avenue      Main Cross Street       NW                      1752
East Vine Street     Chestnut Street         Eastbound and westbound 2521
West Vine Street     Cheney Street           SW and NE               1508
Virginia Avenue      Sandy Duncan Drive                              1820
Walnut Street        Franklin Street         SE and NW               1505
                     Palmer Street           NW and SE               1752
Wyandotte Street     Palmer Street                                   1323
 
6-4-3: PARKING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
6-4-3-1: PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS AND PLACES:
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets and at the following
places in the city. "No parking" for the purposes of this section shall mean
the following:
   A.   No parking of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area.
   B.   No operation of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area
for the purpose of pick up or delivery of any person or thing.
   C.   No operation of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area
for the purpose of waiting for the pick up or delivery of any person or thing.
   D.   No stopping of any motor vehicle within the designated area.
   E.   No parking whether attended or unattended of any motor vehicle of any
kind within the designated area. (Ord. 3258, 11-21-2005)
Street Side From To Ord. #
Street           Side             From             To                Ord. #
Adams Street     North            Walnut Street    Main Street       1308
                                  Washington
                                  Street east curb
                South            line, easterly                    2217
                                  for a distance
                                  of 100'
East Adams       North and south  Cherokee Street  130' east of      3405
Street                                             Cherokee Street
                South, 200 block                                  1677
West Bidwell     South, 200 block Mt. Auburn Road  North Washington  3258; 3495
Street                                             Street
                                  Illinois Route   West end of 1300
Burnett Drive    Both, 1300 block 29               block of Burnett  3501
                                                   Drive
                                  The northeast
                                  corner of the
                                  alley            The intersection
                                  immediately      of Camp Street
Camp Street      South            south of Camp    with Florence     2703
                                  Street, thence   Street
                                  west along the
                                  south side of
                                  Camp Street
Cheney Street    Both             Park Boulevard   Spresser Street   1700
North Cheney     Both             Springfield      City limits       1966
Street                            Road, north
Cherokee Street  Both             Second Street    Route 48          2326
                                  South line of    A point 200'
                Both             the alley south  north from the    1700
                                  from Adams       north street line
                                  Street           of Adams Street
                 East, north of
                Main Cross                                        1462
                 Street
                                                   Franklin Street,
                West             Market Street    except during the 884
                                                   months of June,
                                                   July and August
                 West, south of
                Main Cross                                        1462
                 Street
South Cherokee   East             East Market      East Main Cross   1199
Street                            Street           Street
                                                   The north side of
                                                   the driveway
Cheyenne Street  West             The alley        approach on the   3022
                                                   west side of
                                                   Cheyenne Street
Cindy Lane       West                                              2049
Clay Street      East             West Main Cross  Franklin Street   2963
                                  Street
                East             West Adams       Clay Street       4164
                                  Street           alleyway
                West             Vine Street      West Main Cross   2963
                                                   Street
Cottage Street   West             Pleasant Street  Esther Street     3531
Dairy Lane       West             Thompson Street  Adams Street      1707
Street
West England     Both             Houston Street,  City limits       2005
Street                            west
Esther Street    South            South Side of                     4169
                                  the 300 block
East Esther      North            Snodgrass Street Wilkinson Street  1981
Street
                South            N. Snodgrass     N. Wilkinson      4144
                                  Street           Street
Federal Aid
Route 25 within                                                   1381
city limits
Florence Street  East             Camp Street      Palmer Street     2741
                                  200' west from
                                  the centerline   A point 200' east
                                  of the           from the
Franklin Street  Both             southbound track centerline of the 1700
                                  of the Norfolk   southbound track
                                  and Western
                                  Railroad
                South            Walnut Street    Cherokee Street   1553
                                  A point 83' east A point 140' east
West Franklin    South, 400 block of Madison       of Madison Street 3406
                                  Street
                                  First three parking spaces along
West Franklin                     the south side of the 100 block of
Street           South            West Franklin Street from the
                                  intersection of South Main Street
                                  and West Franklin Street
                                                   East right of way
Greenview Street Both             Fairway Avenue   line of Federal   1738
                                                   Aid Route 65
                                                   (Jaycee Drive)
                                                   A point located
                                                   at the
                                                   intersection of
Haner Avenue     Southwest        Maxwell Street   Haner Avenue with 1931, 3581
                                                   the west property
                                                   line of 923 Haner
                                                   Avenue
West Heights     South            South side of                     2466
Avenue                            the 100 block
Knute Rockne                      South street
Drive            West             line of Northern 560' south        1674
                                  Avenue
East Lake Shore                   The east side of A point 700' east
Drive            North            the Lake         of the Lake       3715
                                  Spillway Bridge  Spillway Bridge
                                                   40' past the
Lincoln Land Way South            Spresser Street  entrance to       3800
                                                   Lincoln Land
                                                   Community College
                                                   North of such
                                                   intersection to
                                  Intersection     the northern
Madison Street   West             with West Poplar boundary line of  3198
                                  Street           the property
                                                   located at 501 W.
                                                   Poplar Street
                West             Market Street    Franklin Street   1362
North Madison    East             Poplar Street    Spresser Street   3108
Street
Main Cross       Pavement and shoulders and anywhere within the
Street           street right of way located within the limits of    2425
improvement      the improvement
                                  3 spaces in the 200 block near the
East Main Cross                   present Eagles Club so that the
Street           North            Eagles Club can have an entrance   2416
                                  to and exit from East Main Cross
                                  Street
West Main Cross  North            A point 50' east Intersection with 2344
Street                            of Clay Street   Webster Street
                                                   South property
Main Street      East             Adams Street     line of U.S. post 1308
                                                   office building
                                  East Main Street to East Vine
                                  Street commencing on the south
North Main                        side of the alley between East
Street           East             Vine Street and East Main Street   1329
                                  and running from the south side of
                                  said alley for a distance of 20'
                                  south
                                  Park Street,
                East             extending south                   1553
                                  for a distance
                                  of 85'
                                  The north line   70' north on the
                East             of East Poplar   east side of the  2564
                                  Street           300 block of
                                                   North Main Street
                West, 300 block  Poplar Street    Park Street       3385
West Market      South            30' west of the intersection with  2347
Street                            South Webster Street
North Street     South            Main Street      Walnut Street     2330
                South            Washington       Webster Street    1698
                                  Street
West 1/2 of      South            North Washington North Main Street 2091
North Street
Northern Avenue  North            Knute Rockne     Sportsman Drive   1674
                                  Drive
Palmer Street    North            Cherokee         Railroad tracks   2876
                North            Walnut Street    Cherokee Street   1754
Park Street      Both             Washington       Webster Street    1698
                                  Street
Park Street -
Cherokee Street                                                   1724
improvement
Park Street,                                                      884
paved portion
West Park Avenue South                            1600 Block        4064
West Park Street South            Shumway Street   Cheney Street     2421
                                                   The point of
                                                   intersection of
                                  Midpoint of the  the west side of
                                  intersection     said Pawnee
Pawnee Street    West             with East Elm    Street with the   2559
                                  Street, north    south boundary of
                                                   Taylorville
                                                   Junior High
                                                   School
                                  Excluding: The 4 parking spaces on
                                  the west side of Pawnee Street
                                  within said restricted area. Such
                                parking spaces to be determined
                                  and marked by the City's
                                  Superintendent of Streets and
                                  Sewers.
North Pawnee     Both             Bidwell Street   Esther Street     3158
Street
Pleasant Street  North            North Pawnee     North Cherokee    1848
                                  Street           Street
                North            North Walnut     North Pawnee      1843
                                  Street           Street
                South            Cherokee Street  Cottage Street    4099
                South            Walnut Street    Pawnee Street     2741
Poplar Street    North            Webster Street   Washington Street 1268
East Poplar                       100 block of
Street           Both             East Poplar                       3350
                                  Street
                South, 500 block 150' east from                    1602
                                  Cherokee Street
West Poplar      South            Shumway Street   Cheney Street     1689
Street
                                  Intersection of  Intersection of
                South, 400 block North Clay       North Madison     3892
                                  Street           Street
                                  A space 8' wide in front of each
Public Square    Both             of the outer doors of the          695
                                  courthouse
Sandy Duncan     East             Virginia Avenue  Bidwell Street    1910
Drive
Second Street    North            South Washington Main Street       1307
                                  Street
                North            South Washington South Webster     1309
                                  Street           Street
                                  Northwest corner
                                  of the alley     75' north along
Shawnee Street   East             located between  the east side of  2914
                                  East Park Street Shawnee Street
                                  and East Ash
                                  Street
                                  195' north from
                                  the north street
Shumway Street   Both             line of Poplar   Spresser Street   1700
                                  Street thence
                                  northerly
                East             Curve Street,    State Route 48    1504
                                  south
                East             Poplar Street    70' south of      3404
                                                   Poplar Street
                                  Franklin Street,
                West             north a distance                  1504
                                  of 40'
                West             Park Street,     State Route 48    1504
                                  north
Silver Street    West             Spresser Street  North 100'        2287
Simpson Street   East             Market Street    Franklin Street   1362
                                  South street
Sportsman Drive  West             line of Northern 560' south        1674
                                  Avenue
Spresser Street  Both             Cheney Street    Webster Street    1709
Spresser Street
and Webster
Street                                                            1897
intersection
improvement
Spresser Street                                                   2052; 2107
improvement
Springfield Road
improvement                      Illinois Route   John Street       1837
within City                       104
limits
TR 1400 North                     Northern edge of Southern edge of
(Boyd Dappert    East/west        guardrail        guardrail         3031
Bridge)
                                  Beginning at the Ending at the
West Vandeveer   North            entrance to Don  railroad tracks   3341
Street                            Bragg's Sports   west of the
                                  Complex          complex
Vine Street      North            Webster Street   Clay Street       1255
                                  The "handicap approach parking
                                  space" located on the north side
                                  of City Hall in the south side of
                South            Vine Street which is located west  2821
                                  from the southwest corner of the
                                  intersection of Vine Street and
                                  North Main Street in Taylorville,
                                  Illinois
                                                   Alley between
Walnut Street    Both             North Street     Park Street and   1722
                                                   Poplar Street
North Walnut     East             East Vine Street Pleasant Street   2460
Street
                                                   Alley lying in
Washington       East             Poplar Street    between Poplar    553
Street                                             Street and Vine
                                                   Street
                West             Park Street      North Street      1699
North Washington East             200 block of     Bidwell Street    3527
1                                 North Washington
                West             400 block of     Bidwell Street    3527
                                  North Washington
                                  First parking place south of the
South Washington East             alley on east side of the 200      3451
Street                            block of South Washington (by the
                                  building at 210 S. Washington)
                                  Second Street,
                East             north for a                       1307
                                  distance of 100'
                                  South line of
                                  the alley north
Webster Street   Both             from Poplar      Park Street       1700
                                  Street,
                                  northerly
                East             Main Cross       Park Street       1238
                                  Street
                                  Franklin Street
                                  and extending a
                East             distance of 30'                   1577
                                  north along the
                                  east side of
                                  Webster Street
North Webster                    City limits on   State Route 48 on 884
Street                            the north        the south
                East             Bryant Street    Bidwell Street    1738
                West             Taft Street      Bryant Street     1620
                West, 200 block  Vine Street      Poplar Street     2815
South Webster    West, 200 block  North edge of    A point 36' north 2348
Street                            the alley
                                  At a point 30'
                                  from the
                West, 200 block  intersection                      2348
                                  with West Market
                                  Street
Wilkinson Street Both             Esther Street    Ash Street        2383
                West             E. Elm Street    E. Esther Street  4144
                                  On the north side of West Wilson
West Wilson                       Street from and including 311 West
Street           North            Wilson Street thence west to the   3979
                                  curve at the corner of Hawley
                                  Street
South Wyandotte  Both             Camp Street      First Street      2675
Street
 
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  6-4-3-4 of this Chapter, exception for handicapped persons.
6-4-3-1-1: PARKING IN VIOLATION OF SIGNS:
The operator of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle upon any street in
violation of the sign where parking has heretofore or shall hereafter be
prohibited or limited by order of the chief of police or his authorized
representative; and where signs have heretofore or may hereafter be erected,
indicating that parking is prohibited during designated hours, or at all times
as the case may be. (Ord. 3318, 12-4-2006)
6-4-3-1-2: NO STOPPING ON PAVEMENT:
Stopping on pavements of streets and roads in the city of Taylorville shall be
prohibited on the following streets and at the following places in the city:
 
Street                      SideFrom              To                Ord. #
1075 E Road (also known as Both  1,225' north of   1,525' north of   3553
Broaddus Road)                   Langleyville Road Langleyville Road
 
6-4-3-2: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN TIMES:
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets or in the following places
in the city during the following times. "No parking" for the purposes of this
section shall mean the following:
   A.   No parking of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area;
   B.   No operation of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area
for the purpose of pick up or delivery of any person or thing;
   C.   No operation of a motor vehicle of any kind within the designated area
for the purpose of waiting for the pick up or delivery of any person or thing;
   D.   No stopping of any motor vehicle within the designated area;
   E.   No parking whether attended or unattended of any motor vehicle of any
kind within the designated area. (Ord. 3254, 10-17-2005)
   F.   No vehicle with a motor vehicle license higher than class D shall be
allowed to park on any city street in a residential area within the city of
Taylorville with the exception of emergency vehicles.
A fine for a first offense of this subsection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
A second offense shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A
third offense shall result in a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). A
two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine will be imposed on the fourth offense
and all subsequent offenses within a twelve (12) month period of time of the
first offense. (Ord. 3296, 6-19-2006)
   Between 7:00 A.M. And 9:00 A.M.
 
Street Side    Fr   To                                             Ord. #
At and from the corner of Northwestern Avenue and Sportsman Drive and on
both sides of Northwestern Avenue from such corner easterly to Lawrence  2522
Avenue.
 
   Between 7:00 A.M. And 4:00 P.M.
 
Street Side    Fr   To                                            Ord. #
The area between the entrance and exit of the circle drive on the east
side of North School and the west outside line of Cherokee Street on    3245
which traffic flows in a southerly direction when school is in session.
 
   Between 8:00 A.M. And 5:00 P.M.
 
Street        Side     From        To                             Ord. #
Poplar Street South Webster Street Washington Street                    1487
On the north side of Adams Street between Main Street and Walnut Street 2679
except during the months of June, July and August in each year.
On the 2 parking places on the east side of South Main Street in front
of Memorial School, on which traffic flows in a northerly direction,    3254
while school is in session.
 
   Between 8:00 A.M. And 3:00 P.M.
   Monday Through Friday When School Is In Session
 
Street          Side    From              To                     Ord. #
Lincoln Street       Northwestern Avenue  Western Street               3391
Northwestern         Lincoln Avenue       Sportsman Drive              3391
Avenue
                     The intersection of  The intersection of
Sportsman Drive East Sportsman Drive with Sportsman Drive with         3391
                     Western Avenue       Northern Avenue
                     The intersection of  The intersection of
Western Avenue  Both Western Avenue with  Western Avenue with          3391
                     Sportsman Drive      Lawrence Avenue
In the 1100 and 1200 blocks of Lawrence Avenue, Taylorville, Illinois. 3391
 
   Between 8:00 A.M. And 4:00 P.M.
   Monday Through Friday
 
Street                     Side    From    To      Ord. #
East Elm Street, 300 block Both Alley west Pawnee Street 3316
 
   Between 6:00 A.M. And 10:00 A.M.
   Saturday During The Months Of April Through October
 
Street Side    Fr   To                                             Ord. #
All parking spaces on the Taylorville Square that are located on the
west side of South Main Street and adjacent to the east side of the
Christian County Courthouse lawn; and, except for the handicap parking   3767
space, all other parking spaces on the Taylorville Square that are
located on the north side of West Market Street and adjacent to the east
half of the south side of the Christian County Courthouse lawn.
 
6-4-3-3: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   Fifteen Minute Parking:
   15 Minute Parking At Any Time
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than 15 minutes in
the following places in the city:
     Str SideLocation Ord. #
     Street         Side           Location                         Ord. #
South Clay Street      East, 200 block  3 spaces near Bob's Auto Supply  2352
                                        Second parking space west of the
Main Cross Street      North            northwest corner of the          2967
                                        intersection of North Main
                                        Street and Main Cross Street
                                        Space closest to the
                       North            intersection with Washington     2263
                                        Street
                                        Parking space west of the "no
                                        parking" space on the north side
                                        of the 100 block of East Main
East Main              North, 100 block Cross Street, said "no parking"  3434
Cross Street                            space being located at the
                                        northwest corner of the
                                        intersection of East Main Cross
                                        Street and Walnut Street
West Main Cross Street South            Easterly from Clay Street for a  2344
                                        distance of 100'
                       South, 200 block 1 space in front of Harrison     2382
                                        Motor Sales
Main Street            East             Space closest to the             2263
                                        intersection with Market Street
                                        The second parking space north
                                        of the northeast corner of the
                       East             intersection of Main Street and  3022
                                        Market Street (in front of
                                        Advanced Title Insurance
                                        Company)
                                        First 2 spaces beginning at the
                                        alleyway which intersects Main
                                        Street between Franklin Street
                                        and Adams Street and proceeding
                                        south for 40' along the west
                       West             side of Main Street, legally     264
                                        described as the 2 parking
                                        spaces on Main Street lying east
                                        of the north 40' of lot 12 of
                                        block 27 in the original town,
                                        now city, of Taylorville
Market Street          South            Space closest to the             2263
                                        intersection with Main Street
                                        The second parking space east of
                                        the southeast corner of the
                       South            intersection of Washington       3022
                                        Street and Main Cross Street (in
                                        front of Betty Rose's Furniture)
West Vine Street       North            3 parking spaces in front of     3371
                                        library
                                        15-minute parking sign in front
                       n/a              of the first parking space in    3371
                                        the parking lot on the west side
                                        of the library building
                                        First 2 parking spaces north of
South Walnut           East, 100 block  where the alley intersects with  2881
                                        the west side of the 100 block
                                        of South Walnut Street
                                        Space closest to the
Washington Street      West             intersection with Main Cross     2263
                                        Street
                                        The second parking space south
                                        of the southwest corner of the
                       West             intersection of Washington       3022
                                        Street and Main Cross Street (in
                                        front of Morton's Pharmacy)
 
   8:00 A.M. To 4:30 P.M. On Certain Days
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle longer than fifteen (15) minutes in
all parking spaces located in front of the east entrance to the city hall on
the west side of Main Street with the exception of the one handicapped parking
spot from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Monday
through Friday. (Ord. 3281, 3-20-2006)
   9:00 A.M. To 5:00 P.M. On Certain Days
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle longer than fifteen (15) minutes in
the following places in the city between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. daily except Sundays and legal holidays:
 
     Street         SideLocation                                 Ord. #
West Main Cross Street South From Clay Street, easterly a distance of 2206
                             100'
                       North From Clay Street, easterly a distance of 2206
                             50'
 
   B.      One Hour Parking:
   1 Hour Parking At Any Time
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for longer than one hour at any of the
following places in the city between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
three o'clock (3:00) P.M. each day except Sundays:
 
     StreeSide     From                                To      Ord. #
Market Street South Walnut Street, east a distance of 150'               1102
Walnut Street East  Franklin Street                        Market Street 1102
 
   C.      Two Hour Parking:
   2 Hour Parking At Any Time
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than two (2) hours
in the following places in the city:
 
     Street      Side    Fr   To                               Ord. #
                     South, 100 block, 2 spaces, beginning at Washington
West Franklin Street Street at Ethel's Flower Shop, 118 West Franklin    2381
                     Street
 
   9:00 A.M. To 5:00 P.M. And 9:00 A.M. To 9:00 P.M. On Certain Days
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than two (2) hours
in the following limited parking areas, as designated by sign, between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Mondays
through Thursdays and Saturdays and between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Fridays except Sundays and New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
(Ord. 1230, 7-1-1957; amd. Ord. 2230, 12-1-1986; 1993 Code)
     StrSide    Fr   Ord. #
     Street    Side     From                To               Ord. #
Clay Street        West  Market Street          Franklin Street        1114
Franklin Street    South Main Street            Washington Street      1043
East Main Cross    South South Cherokee Street  100' east of Wyandotte 1199
Street                                          Street
Market Street      South Main Street            Walnut Street          884
                   South Webster Street         Washington Street      884
West Market Street       Madison Street         Simpson Street         1189
                         On the public square and one block off of the
                         public square in all directions, except as
                         otherwise marked; provided, however, such two
                         (2) hour parking restrictions shall not apply
                         to the following persons: 1) to any person
                         who is serving on jury duty in the Christian
                         County courthouse during such time said
                         person is so serving on jury duty; 2) to any
Public square            police officer who is on official police      2722
                         business; and 3) to any physically
                         handicapped person who has parked his or her
                         motor vehicle, which vehicle displays a
                         special decal or device or registration
                         plates which designates the driver of such
                         vehicle as a disabled person and same is
                         issued by the state pursuant to law in such
                         case made and provided
Vine Street        Both  North Walnut Street    North Main Street      1234
Walnut Street      Both  East Main Cross Street Vine Street            1160
Washington Street  East  Main Cross Street      Vine Street            884
                         150' north of the north side of the alley
Webster Street     West  which extends north and south between Main    1145
                         Street and Market Street
 
   8:00 A.M. To 6:00 P.M. On Certain Days
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than two (2) hours
in the following places in the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. each day except Sundays and holidays:
 
     Street         Side    From          To               Ord. #
West North Street       Both North Washington Dead end of West North 1492
                             Street, west     Street                  
North Washington Street Both Park Street      West North Street      1492
 
   D.   Parking Restrictions For Recreation Vehicles:
      1.   No person or entity shall cause a trailer of any kind, boat (on a
trailer or otherwise), fifth-wheeler, or a motor home to be parked on any city
of Taylorville street for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   The prohibition as set forth in this subsection shall apply
regardless of whether the trailer, boat, fifth-wheeler, or motor home is
connected to a towing vehicle or towing piece of equipment.
      3.   The fine for a first offense of this subsection shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). A second offense shall result in a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). A third offense shall result in a fine of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). A two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine will be imposed on
the fourth offense and all subsequent offenses within a twelve (12) month
period of time of the first offense. (Ord. 3282, 3-20-2006)
6-4-3-4: PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS; CITY OFFICIALS:
   A.   Handicapped Persons: No person shall park his vehicle in any of the
following places in the city unless the vehicle is transporting a handicapped
person:
Street  Location Ord. #
Street                             Location                              Ord. #
                                   South side of 100 block, the parking
                                   space beginning 22' west of driveway
                                   approach to the priest's house (also
West Adams Street                 described as the parking space        3050
                                   beginning 25' east of the most east
                                   existing "No Parking" sign and
                                   running 22')
                                   700 block, the 3 parking spaces in
                                   front of the senior citizens' center
                                   and located as the next 3 parking
                                   spaces on the north side of West
                                 Adams Street situated immediately     3579
                                   west of the second parking space
                                   located immediately west of the
                                   northwest corner of the intersection
                                   of West Adams and Shumway Street
                                   South side of 100 block, the parking
West Franklin Street              space beginning 47' from the west     3050
                                   curb line of South Main Street
                                   North side, the first parking space
Main Cross Street                 west of the northwest corner of the   2963
                                   intersection of North Main Street and
                                   Main Cross Street
East Main Cross Street            North side of East Main Cross Street  3353
                                   at 217 East Main Cross Street
                                   100 block, the first parking space
                                   from the corner of East Main Cross
                                   and North Main Streets, and which is
                                 located in front of the veterans'     2551
                                   affairs office on the north side of
                                   East Main Cross Street, at
                                   approximately 105 East Main Cross
                                   Street
                                   100 block, the first parking space
                                 north of the door opening on the west 2362
                                   side of Mary Gilpin's commercial
                                   building into the city parking lot
                                   East side, the first parking space
                                   north of the northeast corner of the
Main Street                       intersection of Main Street and       3022
                                   Market Street (in front of Advanced
                                   Title Insurance Company)
                                 First space on the west side in front 2312
                                   of the east entrance to city hall
                                   The east side of South Main Street in
                                   the 300 block, the first parking
                                   space south of the southeast corner
South Main Street                 of the intersection of South Main     4326
                                   Street and East Franklin Street, that
                                   is adjacent to the United States Post
                                   Service building
                                   South side, the first parking space
                                   east of the southeast corner of the
Market Street                     intersection of Washington Street and 3022
                                   Main Cross Street (in front of Betty
                                   Rose's Furniture)
                                   South side 300 block, the first
West Market Street                parking space from the southeast      2881
                                   corner of West Market Street and Clay
                                   Street
South side of Taylorville square  First parking stall east of the south 2449
                                   walk to the courthouse
                                   2 parking spaces, indicated by the
                                   placement of 2 appropriate handicap
East Vine Street                  signs approximately 20' apart,        2900
                                   located in front of the AME Church at
                                   600 East Vine Street
                                   2 spaces in front of the Knights Of
South Walnut Street               Columbus Hall in the 400 block of     3567
                                   South Walnut Street
                                   West side, the first parking space
                                   south of the southwest corner of the
Washington Street                 intersection of Washington Street and 3022
                                   Main Cross Street (in front of
                                   Morton's Pharmacy)
                                   40' area commencing 24' south of the
                                   south side of North Street and
North Washington Street           extending in a southerly direction    1782
                                   along the west side of North
                                   Washington Street a distance of 40'
 
   B.   City Officials:
 
Place                Location                                          Ord. #
                     4 parking spots located on the north side of the
                     municipal building, west of Main Street and south
Municipal building  of Vine Street, shall be designated for the       3331
                     exclusive use of the mayor, city treasurer, city
                     clerk, and Taylorville police department
 
6-4-3-5: LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Alley: Except as hereinafter provided, parking of all motor vehicles is
prohibited upon and along the east-west alleyway located between North
Washington Street and North Main Street and between West Main Cross Street and
West Vine Street in the city. This subsection is to be strictly construed and,
thereby, does, in particular, prohibit parking of any part of any motor
vehicle, including such part thereof as may overhang or otherwise extend beyond
the vehicle wheels, upon any part or portion of said alleyway. The city
authorities shall establish a demarcation line in marking the boundary between
the south line of the alleyway and adjacent private property for purposes of
enforcement of the provisions of this subsection.
Parking in said east-west alleyway is permitted for purposes of loading and
unloading motor vehicles to the extent reasonably required in servicing the
needs of the residents and business establishments adjacent thereto; provided,
however, that in no event shall a motor vehicle be permitted to block or
otherwise obstruct ingress and egress to and travel through said alleyway.
(Ord. 2164, 1-21-1985)
   B.   Bus Loading: A space in the street parallel with the curb and thirty
five feet (35') in length from the property line of the intersecting street is
hereby designated and reserved as a place for buses being operated to stop for
the purpose of loading and unloading passengers without interfering with the
regular street traffic at each of the following places:
 
Street            Side  Intersection
Main Street       West  Market Street
Market Street     South Main Street
                  North Washington Street
Washington Street West  Market Street
 
(Ord. 758, 1-4-1926)
   C.   Additional Loading Zone Parking Places: The following are designated
loading zone parking places:
 
Street            Side Location                  Ord. #
                       Commencing 158' north
                       of the north line of East
                       Poplar Street and then
North Main Street East proceeding to the south   2564
                       side of the alleyway be-
                       tween East Poplar Street
                       and Park Street
 
6-4-3-6: VAN PARKING ONLY:
"Van parking only" consisting of two (2) parking spaces shall be established at
the senior citizens' center in the 700 block of West Adams Street in the City.
The parking spaces shall be located on the north side of West Adams Street and
shall be the first two (2) parking spaces immediately west of the northwest
corner of the intersection of West Adams Street and Shumway Street. Such spaces
shall be clearly marked "Van Parking Only". No person shall park his vehicle on
said "van parking only" areas unless said person is driving a senior citizens'
van or other vehicle which transports senior citizens to and from the senior
citizens' center. (Ord. 3578, 8-20-2012)
6-4-3-7: HERSHEY TOWERS RESIDENTS PICK UP AND DROP OFF:
(Rep. by Ord. 3406, 10-20-2008)
6-4-3-8: SEMITRAILER AND TRACTOR TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
The parking of "semitrailer" units and/or "truck-tractor" units as defined in
subsection
6-3-7G of this Title, shall be prohibited on Lincoln Land Way and on Central
Avenue. (Ord. 3800, 4-3-2017)
6-4-3-9: THERAPY SERVICES/SPECIALTY CLINIC PATIENT PARKING ONLY:
"Hospital therapy services/specialty clinic patient parking only" consisting of
four (4) parking spaces along the west side of Pawnee Street between St.
Vincent Memorial Hospital's auditorium entrance and the St. Vincent Memorial
Hospital's emergency room entrance are hereby established. The specific
location of such parking spaces shall be designated by appropriate signage at
the location of such parking spaces. Such parking spaces are hereby reserved
for patients utilizing the services of St. Vincent Memorial Hospital's therapy
services department or specialty clinic department. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park his or her vehicle in any such designated parking space
unless the driver or any occupant(s) of such vehicle is a patient receiving
services at St. Vincent Memorial Hospital's therapy services department and/or
specialty clinic department; and in that event such permitted parking time
shall be limited to the actual time period in which such patient is receiving
such services and the time reasonably necessary to go to and from such parked
vehicle to such department(s) for such services. (Ord. 3167, 4-19-2004)
6-4-4: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Speed Limit Categories: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate any motor vehicle upon the following public streets in the City in
excess of the following speed limits:
   30 MILES PER HOUR
      Cheney Street
      (Ord. 1508, 7-21-1969)
   35 MILES PER HOUR
Lake Taylorville access road running north and south on the west side of the
lake leading into the boat dock area
      (Ord. 1396, 8-16-1965)
   45 MILES PER HOUR
Country Club Lane Street, from its intersection with State Route 48, continuing
in an easterly direction on Country Club Lane Street to the corporate limits as
they now exist and as they are extended in the future in an easterly direction
along said Country Club Lane Street
      (Ord. 1706, 11-18-1974)
      Langley Road in the City limits
      (Ord. 2033, 12-21-1981)
   B.   School Speed Zones:
      1.   In accordance with the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-605, the following school speed zones are hereby established:
Street Limit Location Ord. #
Street            Limit  Location                                     Ord. #
Bidwell Street    20 mph Between Webster Street and Cherokee Street   2239
Cheney Street     20 mph Between Spresser Street and West Main Street 2239
                 20 mph Between Prairie Street and Sherman Street    2239
Cherokee Street   20 mph Between Bidwell Street and Esther Street     2239
Houston Street    20 mph Between Spresser Street and West Main Street 2239
South Main Street 20 mph Between Adams Street and Powell Street       2527
Prairie Street    20 mph Between Houston Street and Shumway Street    2242
 
      2.   Slow signs for the protection for school children between eight
thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., twenty minutes after
eleven o'clock (11:20) A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) P.M., and twenty minutes
after three o'clock (3:20) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., except on
Saturdays and Sundays, and except during the months of June, July and August,
shall be placed and established as follows, and the driver of every vehicle
approaching a school slow sign as designated in this subsection B2 shall
proceed with utmost caution before entering the intersection of said streets:
Street Intersection With
Street          Intersection With
Adams Street    Walnut Street
               Washington Street
Elm Street      Shawnee Street
Franklin Street Main Street
               Walnut Street
Main Street     Adams Street
Market Street   Madison Street
Park Street     Shawnee Street
Shumway Street  Market Street
Walnut Street   Franklin Street
 
   C.   Slow Streets: Slow signs shall be placed upon the following streets in
the City, and said streets shall be designated and established as streets where
the driver must proceed with utmost caution:
Street Direction Intersection With
Street               Direction                 Intersection With
Adams Street         West                      Walnut Street
                    West                      South Washington Street
Cheney Street                                 West Main Street
                                             Vine Street
Clay Street                                   Poplar Street
Franklin Street                               Main Street
                                               From both sides of the street
East Lakeshore Drive Both sides                adjacent to the property located
                                               at 3900 East Lake Shore Drive
Main Street          East                      Walnut Street
                    West                      Webster Street
Pine Tree Drive      Eastbound                 Eastwood Drive
                    Southbound                Bristle Drive
Second Street                                 Webster Street
Shawnee Street       Northbound and southbound Stevenson Street
Shumway Street                                Adams Street
Stevenson Street     Eastbound and westbound   Shawnee Street
Vine Street          West                      Main Street
Walnut Street        South                     Adams Street
Washington Street                             Vine Street
                    South                     Adams Street
Webster Street       South                     Adams Street
West Main Cross      Both sides                800 Block of West Main Cross
 
(Ord. 903, 10-17-1938; amd. Ord. 2732, 12-18-1995; Ord. 3980, 8-3-2020; Ord.
3995, 9-21-2020; Ord. 4321, 8-4-2025)
 
6-4-5: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The following streets in the city are designated as one-way streets, and
vehicular traffic shall proceed in the direction indicated only:
Street  From  To  Ord. #
Street                   From                  To                        Ord. #
North Street, westerly   North Main Street at  North Walnut Street at    2067
direction                the west end          the east end
                         Vehicles being driven along any side of the
Public square            square shall be driven with the left side       884
                         thereof toward the courthouse
Taylorville Boulevard
in the city park
addition, traffic        West North Street     Park Avenue               1577
traveling north on the
east lane
Taylorville Boulevard
in the city park
addition, traffic        Park Avenue           West North Street         1577
traveling south on the
west lane
Washington Street        Park Street           North Street              1993
East-west alleyway
located between          East-end point of     West-end point of egress  2745
Elevator Street and      ingress
Houston Street
East-west alleyway
located between North
Washington Street and    West-end point of
North Main Street and    ingress               East-end point of egress  2164
between West Main Cross
Street and West Vine
Street
 
6-4-6: NO TURNS:
   A.   No Left Turns: There shall be no left turns at the following
intersections in the city:
 
     Street  Direction Of Traffic  Intersection With  Ord. #
Adams Street     Eastbound             Cherokee Street    1644
Cherokee Street  Northbound            Adams Street       3522
 
   B.      No Right Turns: There shall be no right turns at the following
intersections in the city:
 
Street           Direction Of Traffic  Intersection With  Ord. #
Cherokee Street  Southbound            Adams Street       1644
 
   C.   There shall be no left turns into Circle Drive from seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and from two o'clock (2:00) P.M. to four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days when school is in session. (Ord. 4287, 12-16-2024)
6-4-7: VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITS:
   A.   Load Limits: It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle with a
weight, including load, in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds on any of
the following streets: Cherokee Street, Walnut Street, Main Street, Washington
Street, Webster Street from Park Street south, Vine Street, Main Cross Street,
Vandeveer Street, Market Street, Franklin Street, Shumway Street between Second
Street north to Park Boulevard, the alley between Vine Street and Main Cross
Street and the alley between Market Street and Franklin Street. (Ord. 884, 10-
7-1935)
   B.   Semitrucks: Unless the city's police chief, or his designee from time
to time or the mayor, personally gives his express prior consent under
extenuating or emergency circumstances, to be determined in his sole
discretion, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this title, it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any "truck-tractor" and/or
"semitrailer" (as defined in subsection
6-3-7G of this title) on, upon, over, or across any part of the following
streets in the city:
Location  Ord. #
Location                                                                 Ord. #
East Ash Street from the point of intersection with Cherokee Street      3143
east to the point of its intersection with Wilkinson Street
East Bidwell Street from the point of intersection with Pawnee Street    3143
east to the point of its intersection with Snodgrass Street
Cherokee Street from the point of intersection with Park Street north    3143
to its intersection with Heights Avenue
Chestnut Street from the point of intersection with East Park Street     3143
south to its intersection with East Vine Street
East Cleveland Street from the point of intersection with Cherokee       3143
Street east to the point of its intersection with Snodgrass Street
East Elm Street from the point of intersection with Pawnee Street east   3143
to the pint of its intersection with Wilkinson Street
East Esther Street from the point of intersection with Pawnee Street     3143
east to the point of its intersection with Wilkinson Street
Heights Avenue from the point of intersection with Allied Street east    3143
to the point of its intersection with Snodgrass Street
Heights Avenue from the point of intersection with Sandy Duncan Drive    3143
east to the end of the cul-de-sac on Heights Avenue
Heights Avenue from the point of intersection with Sandy Duncan Drive    3143
west to the end of the cul-de-sac on Heights Avenue
Long Street from the point of intersection with Bidwell Street south to  3143
its intersection with East Main Cross Street
North Street from the point of intersection with North Main Street east  3143
to its intersection with North Walnut Street
East Oak Street from the point of intersection with Cherokee Street      3143
east to the point of its intersection with Wilkinson Street
East Pleasant Street from the point of intersection with Pawnee Street   3143
east to its intersection with Cherokee Street
Sandy Duncan Drive from a point 150' north of its intersection with      3143
Virginia Avenue north to its intersection with Heights Avenue
Shawnee Street from the point of intersection with Park Street north to  3143
its intersection with Bidwell Street
Snodgrass Street from its intersection with Heights Avenue south past
the intersection with Ash Street south to the dead end on Snodgrass      3143
Street
East Stevenson Street from the point of intersection with Cherokee       3143
Street east to the point of its intersection with Snodgrass Street
Virginia Avenue from the point of intersection with Sandy Duncan Drive   3143
east to the point of its intersection with Snodgrass Street
 
6-4-8: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES 1 :
The roadways and those portions of the following streets are hereby designated
as emergency snow routes:
Street     Fro   To
Street                      From                    To
Bidwell Street           Snodgrass Street           Webster Street
Cheney Street            Sherman Street             Spresser Street
Cherokee Street          Bidwell Street             Jaycee Drive
East Elm Street          Cherokee Street            Wilkinson Street
West Elm Street          Shumway Street to and including Big Bend Road
East Franklin Street     South Main Street          Dairy Lane
West Franklin Street     South Main Street          Jayne Street
Hawley Street            Springfield Road to and including Wilson Street
Houston Road             Spresser Street            Russell Street
Kenton Street            Shumway Street             Pauline Street
East Lake Shore Drive    Middle of Spillway Bridge  To the end of East Lake
                                                    Shore Drive
West Lake Shore Drive    Middle of Spillway Bridge  West Sunset Drive
Langley Road             Cheney Street              Broaddus Road
East Main Cross Street   Main Street                Long Street
West Main Cross Street   Main Street                Jayne Street
North Main Street        Main Cross Street          Pleasant Street
South Main Street        Main Cross Street          Palmer Street
East Market Street       South Main Street          South Walnut Street
West Market Street       South Main Street          South Webster Street
Palmer Street            South Main Street          Cherokee Street
Pauline Street           Kenton Street              Cheney Street
Pawnee Street            Pleasant Street            Bidwell Street
West Prairie Street      South Shumway Street       South Houston Street
Sandy Duncan Street      Bidwell Street             Heights Street
Second Street            Shumway Street             Main Street
Shumway Street           Third Street               Kenton Street
Sportsman Drive          Springfield Road           Northern Avenue
Vandeveer Street         Shumway Street             Henrietta Street
Virginia Avenue          Sandy Duncan Street        Snodgrass Street
Walnut Street            Powell Street              Pleasant Street
North Washington Street  West Main Cross Street     West Vine Street
South Washington Street  West Main Cross Street     West Franklin Street
Webster Street           Adams Street               Spresser Street
Western Street           Webster Street             Sportsman Street
Wilson Street            North Webster              Taylorville Memorial
                                                    Hospital
 
(Ord. 2129, 2-6-1984; amd. Ord. 2450, 11-18-1991; Ord. 2465, 6-15-1992; 1993
Code; Ord. 2490, 2-1-1993; Ord. 2741, 2-20-1996; Ord. 2986, 9-18-2000; Ord.
3056, 12-17-2001; Ord. 3506, 3-7-2011; Ord. 3662, 3-17-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-3-5 of this title.
6-4-9: TRAFFIC RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   South Walnut Street between Franklin Street and Adams Street in the
City is hereby declared to be a congested area between the hours of eleven
thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. and one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. on days on which
Memorial School is in session, and vehicular traffic thereon between those
hours is hereby restricted to all such traffic, except as to such as is
necessary to go to and from residences and buildings thereon and necessary in
the proper performance of business functions, on each day except Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays and except during the months of June, July and
August in each year.
   B.   Vehicular traffic on the west half of the 200 block of East Franklin
Street is hereby restricted between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30)
A.M. and one o'clock (1:00) P.M., on each day that Memorial Elementary School
is in session. Said west half of the 200 block of East Franklin Street shall be
closed to vehicles and marked with barricades to block through traffic during
such days and hours. (Ord. 2692, 4-17-95)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED, DAMAGED, INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Abandonment Of Vehicles
6-5-3: Maintenance Or Storage Declared Nuisance
6-5-4: Owner(s) Required To Abate Nuisance
6-5-4-1: Right To A Hearing (Rep. by Ord. 3436, 8-3-2009)
6-5-4-2: Prosecution Of Violators
6-5-5: Sale Of Vehicle
6-5-6: Nonliability Of City, Etc.
6-5-7: Penalties
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is left at any place for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned.
   DAMAGED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or non-motor vehicle that has been
wrecked, stripped, junked, prepared for demolition derby, prepared for racing,
or disabled. "Damaged vehicle" shall not include: a) a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations not to exceed thirty
(30) days; b) any motor or non-motor vehicle that is kept within a completely
enclosed building when not in use; c) operable and licensed historic vehicles
over twenty five (25) years of age; d) a vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in wrecking, salvage, or junking of vehicles and such premises
is properly zoned and duly licensed and operating such place of business; e) a
motor or non-motor vehicle on the premises which is properly zoned to permit,
and which is regularly and customarily engaged in a commercial business
involving the commercial sale or repair of vehicles; f) one unlicensed operable
vehicle with a "For Sale" sign affixed thereto, for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days in any twelve (12) calendar month period; and g) any
stationary vehicle used for advertising purposes which is located on
commercially zoned property and which advertisement on such vehicle solely
advertises the business property being operated on such commercially zoned
property; provided, the owner of such property obtains a permit from the city
to locate such vehicle on such property for such purpose, which permit may be
denied in the city's sole discretion.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least
seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power; or any non-motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7)
days, the wheels or other parts have been removed or so altered, damaged, or
otherwise treated that such vehicle is incapable of being moved in its ordinary
mode of travel. "Inoperable vehicle" shall not include: a) a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations not to exceed
thirty (30) days; b) any motor or non-motor vehicle that is kept within a
completely enclosed building when not in use; c) operable and licensed historic
vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age; d) a vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in wrecking, salvage, or junking of vehicles and such
premises is properly zoned and duly licensed and operating such place of
business; e) a motor or non-motor vehicle on the premises which is properly
zoned to permit, and which is regularly and customarily engaged in a commercial
business involving the commercial sale or repair of vehicles; and f) one
unlicensed operable vehicle with a "For Sale" sign affixed thereto, for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any twelve (12) calendar month period.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power, other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides
and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
   OCCUPANT: Any adult person occupying the private property where any motor or
non-motor vehicle is found.
   OWNER: Any person, or persons, who is an owner, lessee, bailee or possessor
of any motor or non-motor vehicle.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or entity of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real private property within the corporate limits of
the city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real public property within the corporate limits of the
city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which does not have a current
Illinois license and registration sticker affixed to same. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-
2002; amd. Ord. 3572, 7-16-2012)
6-5-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city on public or private
property, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city on
public or private property for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. All said
abandoned vehicles are hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002)
6-5-3: MAINTENANCE OR STORAGE DECLARED NUISANCE:
   A.   No person shall maintain, store, or permit the storage on any public
property for a period of seven (7) or more days, of any unlicensed motor
vehicle or damaged vehicle or abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle. Such
maintenance or storage is hereby declared a nuisance.
   B.   No person shall maintain, store, or permit the storage on any private
property, for a period of fifteen (15) or more days, of any unlicensed motor
vehicle or damaged vehicle or abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle. Such
maintenance or storage is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002)
6-5-4: OWNER(S) REQUIRED TO ABATE NUISANCE:
   A.   Nuisance Found On Private Property: Whenever a member of the city's
police department or the city's health, zoning and building officer finds any
inoperable vehicle, damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle
on private property, he or she shall issue a written order to the "known" or
"unknown" owner of such vehicle directing such owner to abate such nuisance,
within ten (10) days, in one of the following ways: 1) transfer to and store
such vehicle in a completely enclosed building; or 2) permanently remove said
vehicle to a location outside the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 3105, 12-
2-2002)
This order shall include the vehicle's vehicle identification number (VIN) to
the extent it is ascertainable from the vehicle by the officer; the date of the
notice; the date by which the vehicle must be removed or enclosed; and the
possible penalties for failing to abate the nuisance. The order shall be
effective until said vehicle is placed within a completely enclosed building or
removed from the city's corporate limits. Notice of such order shall be placed
on such vehicle, and copies of the notice shall be served on any adult occupant
of the private property on which such vehicle is located, and also on the owner
of the vehicle, if his or her name and whereabouts be known. If no occupant of
such private property or owner of such vehicle can be found, such notice
affixed to any building on such private property shall constitute notice to the
owner and occupant of such private property and notice to the owner of such
vehicle. If there is no building on such private property, the notice may be
affixed elsewhere on such private property and same shall constitute the notice
to the occupant of such private property and notice to the owner of such
vehicle. If such vehicle is not removed within ten (10) days pursuant to the
order and notice, and if the order is not stayed by the issuing officer
pursuant to a written request showing good cause for a permanent or temporary
stay, the police department and/or health, zoning and building officer shall
cause such vehicle to be removed by a junk or salvage yard or wrecker service;
and all costs and expenses of the removal of said vehicle, the storage of said
vehicle, and the disposal and/or sales charges shall be paid by and recoverable
from the owner(s) of said vehicle, jointly and severally, in a suit at law. The
vehicle shall not be removed from private property without a warrant issued by
a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 3436, 8-3-
2009)
   B.   Nuisance Found On Public Property: Whenever a member of the city's
police department or the city's health, zoning and building officer finds any
inoperable vehicle, damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle
on public property, he or she shall issue a written order to the "known" or
"unknown" owner of such vehicle directing such owner to abate such nuisance,
within seven (7) days, in one of the following ways: 1) transfer to and store
such vehicle in a completely enclosed building; or 2) permanently remove said
vehicle to a location outside the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 3105, 12-
2-2002)
This order shall include the vehicle's vehicle identification number (VIN) to
the extent it is ascertainable from the vehicle by the officer; the date of the
notice; the date by which the vehicle must be removed or enclosed; and the
possible penalties for failing to abate the nuisance. Notice of such order
shall be placed on said vehicle. If said vehicle is not removed within seven
(7) days pursuant to the order and notice, the police department and/or health,
zoning and building officer shall cause said vehicle to be removed by a junk or
salvage yard or wrecker service; and costs and expenses of the removal of said
vehicle, the storage of said vehicle and the disposal and/or sales charges
shall be paid and recoverable from the owner(s) of said vehicle, jointly and
severally, in a suit at law. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 3436, 8-3-2009)
6-5-4-1: RIGHT TO A HEARING:
(Rep. by Ord. 3436, 8-3-2009)
6-5-4-2: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATORS:
If the owner(s) of an inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or unlicensed
vehicle or abandoned vehicle fails to abate the nuisance after having been
served with a written order pursuant to section
6-5-4 of this chapter then the city may file a complaint with a court of
competent jurisdiction seeking an order granting the following relief: (Ord.
3436, 8-3-2009)
   A.   The issuance of an administrative search and seizure warrant to remove
the vehicle from the property where it may be located.
   B.   A declaration that the owner(s) of the inoperable vehicle or damaged
vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle is in violation of section
6-5-2 and/or
 6-5-3 and/or
6-5-4 of this chapter.
   C.   A declaration that any search and seizure of an inoperable vehicle or
damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle performed pursuant
to an administrative search and seizure warrant was proper and in compliance
with all applicable laws.
   D.   A fine for the owner(s) of any inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or
unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle pursuant to section
6-5-7 of this chapter and section
1-4-1 of this code.
   E.   Authorizing the sale of the inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or
unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle pursuant to section
6-5-5 of this chapter unless the owner(s) pays all towing, removal, and storage
charges.
   F.   Requiring the Illinois secretary of state to issue a certificate of
title for the vehicle to the purchaser of the inoperable vehicle or damaged
vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or abandoned vehicle.
   G.   For such other, further or different relief favorable to the city of
Taylorville. (Ord. 3140, 8-18-2003)
6-5-5: SALE OF VEHICLE:
In the event said inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle
or abandoned vehicle is removed from private property of the owner(s) of the
vehicle and placed in storage by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the
city's police department and/or the city's health, zoning, and building
officer, the city shall send notice to the owner(s) containing the following:
   A.   The date of the towing.
   B.   The name, address and telephone number of the entity that towed the
vehicle.
   C.   The address where the vehicle is being stored.
   D.   The amount of the towing, removal, and storage charges, including any
per diem charges.
   E.   A statement that the vehicle shall be sold by private or public sale or
may be sold to the entity that towed said vehicle for the amount of the towing,
removal, and storage charges, as the city shall decide in its sole discretion
unless the owner(s) pays all applicable towing, removal, and storage charges
within fifteen (15) days from the date the notice is mailed to the last known
address of the owner(s).
Said notice shall be mailed by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the last known
address of the owner(s) of the vehicle. If the owner(s) of the vehicle does not
pay all applicable towing, removal, and storage charges within fifteen (15)
days after the date the notice is mailed, then said vehicle may be sold by the
city at any time thereafter at public or private sale or may be sold to the
entity that towed said vehicle for the cost of the towing, removal, and any
applicable storage charges, as the city shall determine in its sole discretion.
If the sale proceeds are insufficient to pay the costs of sale, removal and
storage expenses, then the owner(s) of said vehicle shall be jointly and
severally liable to the city for the balance of such costs and expenses and to
be recoverable in a suit at law. If the sale proceeds are sufficient to pay
said costs of sale, towing, removal, storage expenses, ordinance violation
fines, court costs, and/or expenses then the balance shall be deposited with
the city treasurer and shall be paid to any one or more of the owner(s) of such
vehicle, if known and located as the city shall determine. The city shall have
the right to deduct from said balance an amount equal to any ordinance
violation fine(s), court costs and/or expenses assessed against the previous
owner(s) of said inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or
abandoned vehicle before making a distribution to said former owner(s) of said
vehicle.
If the said inoperable vehicle or damaged vehicle or unlicensed vehicle or
abandoned vehicle is removed from public property or from private property of
some person or entity other than the owner(s) of said vehicle, then said
vehicle shall be disposed of by the entity that towed the vehicle pursuant to
article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code 1  as now enacted or
hereafter amended or pursuant to any subsequent statutory provisions. (Ord.
3140, 8-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
6-5-6: NONLIABILITY OF CITY, ETC.:
The city, its elected and/or appointed officers, agents, employees, mayor, city
council, the city's police department and the members thereof, the city's
health, zoning and building officer and the towing service owner or storage
service owner, operator, agent or employee shall not be liable for damages in
any action brought by any owner or former owner or the owner's legal and/or
personal representative, successors or assigns, lien holder or any other person
legally entitled to the possession of any vehicle when said vehicle was
processed or disposed of according to this chapter. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002)
6-5-7: PENALTIES:
In addition to and not in lieu of any of the other penalties or provisions set
forth in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each separate offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed to occur on each day on or during which a violation is deemed to exist
or continues. (Ord. 3105, 12-2-2002)
CHAPTER 6
DISABLED (HANDICAPPED) PERSON PARKING ENFORCEMENT VOLUNTEER PROGRAM
SECTION:
6-6-1: Program Implementation
6-6-2: Program Appointments
6-6-3: Volunteer Qualifications
6-6-4: Violation Notices
6-6-5: Adoption Of Liability Provisions
6-6-6: Further Provisions
6-6-1: PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION:
As requested by the current Taylorville chief of police ("chief of police"),
the chief of police is hereby authorized to implement a program in accordance
with this chapter through the use of volunteers to assist the city's police
department in the enforcement of parking violations for violations of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 (state bar edition) or city ordinances
dealing with parking privileges for persons with disabilities or handicaps.
(Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
6-6-2: PROGRAM APPOINTMENTS:
Pursuant to and under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
1301.7 (state bar edition) the chief of police is authorized to appoint
volunteers, from time to time, to issue parking violation notices within the
city of Taylorville, on public and private property, for violations of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 (state bar edition) or under this code
dealing with parking privileges for persons with disabilities or handicaps;
provided, however, the maximum number of volunteers at any one time shall not
exceed six (6) volunteers and each prospective volunteer must first submit a
written application to the chief of police, on a form approved by him from time
to time, and such prospective volunteer must satisfy the qualifications set
forth in section
6-6-3 of this chapter prior to such appointment. Each such appointed volunteer
shall be known as a "disabled parking enforcement volunteer". The term of such
appointment shall be at the pleasure of the chief of police who shall have the
right to terminate the appointment of any disabled parking enforcement
volunteer at any time and with or without any reason whatsoever. The chief of
police shall inform the mayor, aldermen, city clerk, and treasurer as to the
names of each disabled parking enforcement volunteer at the time of each such
appointment from time to time. (Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
6-6-3: VOLUNTEER QUALIFICATIONS:
A disabled parking enforcement volunteer must:
   A.   Be a United States citizen;
   B.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
   C.   Have a high school diploma or GED;
   D.   Be able to acquire the knowledge to understand and apply disabled
parking laws, be able to communicate effectively and professionally with
individuals, and be able to maintain a cool and calm demeanor under stressful
and heated emotional conditions;
   E.   Be capable of identifying an appropriately marked disabled
(handicapped) parking space, be capable of identifying a vehicle that is
eligible to park in a designated disabled (handicapped) parking space, and be
capable of writing correct and legible traffic violation notices and of placing
a traffic violation notice on the windshield of a vehicle in a place that will
not fall off;
   F.   Have a valid Illinois driver's license and his or her own vehicle, or
be able to obtain an alternate form of transportation;
   G.   Pass a background investigation and fingerprinting conducted by the
Taylorville police department and sign a form, as approved by the chief of
police from time to time, authorizing such background investigation;
   H.   Pass a training course conducted in person by the chief of police;
   I.   Sign a liability release and waiver, on a form approved from time to
time by the chief of police, releasing the city and its elected and/or
appointed officials, officers, employees, and agents from any and all liability
for any personal injuries or death or property damages to such disabled parking
enforcement volunteer and acknowledging that he or she is not covered under any
workers' compensation insurance or laws while acting as such disabled parking
enforcement volunteer; and
   J.   Satisfy all other qualifications as established and required, from time
to time, by the chief of police that he deems desirable. (Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
6-6-4: VIOLATION NOTICES:
A parking violation notice issued by a disabled parking enforcement volunteer
shall have the same force and effect as a parking violation notice issued by a
police officer for the same offense. All funds collected as a result of the
payment of the parking violation notices shall go to the city and shall be
earmarked by the city treasurer for "public disabled person (handicapped)
accessible parking". (Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
6-6-5: ADOPTION OF LIABILITY PROVISIONS:
The provisions of subparagraphs (e), (f), and (g) of 626 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1307.1 (state bar edition) relating to issues of liability and
indemnification are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference; and
the term "appointed volunteer" as used therein shall mean and include a
disabled parking enforcement volunteer. (Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
6-6-6: FURTHER PROVISIONS:
   A.   A disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall not be deemed a peace
officer or police officer, nor receive any compensation from the city of
Taylorville while acting in the capacity of a disabled parking enforcement
volunteer. No disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall be required to
complete training as a peace officer.
   B.   No disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall have the power or
authority to enforce other traffic, civil, or criminal laws.
   C.   No disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall possess or carry
firearms or other weapons for the purpose of or while acting as a disabled
parking enforcement volunteer.
   D.   No disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall be entitled to any
indemnification from the state of Illinois, county of Christian, or the city of
Taylorville for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of
enforcement activities. Each disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall
specifically acknowledge that such disabled parking enforcement volunteer has
no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from disabled
parking enforcement activities.
   E.   Each disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall be responsible for
his or her own costs incurred for transportation and any vehicle used must be
properly licensed and insured.
   F.   Each disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall be issued a photo
identification badge approved by the chief of police that shall be worn on the
outer garment at all times while acting as a disabled parking enforcement
volunteer. A disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall not use their status
as a disabled parking enforcement volunteer to solicit employment, business,
sales, or any other related endeavor.
   G.   Each disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall contact the chief of
police and the city's police dispatcher on duty each time and prior to engaging
in any patrolling and enforcement activities and inform the chief of police and
dispatcher the time periods during which such disabled parking enforcement
volunteer will be patrolling the disabled and/or handicapped parking areas.
   H.   Each disabled parking enforcement volunteer shall submit a written
report to the chief of police by the fifth day of each month listing for the
previous month the number of parking violation notices issued and the number of
voided parking violation notices and the reasons for the void. The chief of
police shall deliver a copy of each such report to all city officials at the
time he receives such report. The city shall provide the parking violation
books and void stamps for the disabled parking enforcement volunteers to use
while acting as a disabled parking enforcement volunteer.
   I.   If called to do so, a disabled parking enforcement volunteer must
attend and testify, without compensation, at all court or administrative
proceedings regarding parking violation notices issued by such disabled parking
enforcement volunteer.
   J.   No government, agency, department, official, officer, employee, or
agent of the state of Illinois, county of Christian, or city of Taylorville
shall be liable for or accountable for any act(s) or omission(s) of any
disabled parking enforcement volunteer issuing disabled (handicapped) parking
violation notices pursuant to city ordinance. Each disabled parking enforcement
volunteer shall agree to and shall assume, and specifically hold harmless and
fully indemnify the city of Taylorville and its elected and/or appointed
officials and officers, employees, and agents from any and all liability for
any and all such act(s) or omission(s) by such disabled parking enforcement
volunteer. (Ord. 3094, 9-16-2002)
CHAPTER 7
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Use Restricted
6-7-3: Signs
6-7-4: Operation Of Golf Carts Permitted
6-7-5: Governmental Immunity
6-7-6: Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY: The City of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
   CITY ROADWAY: A street, road, highway, or alleyway located within the
corporate limits of the City and under the jurisdiction of the City, excluding
those streets and roads identified in Section
7-7-6 of this Code; and further excluding the following streets, roadways, and
highways (except for intersection crossings as permitted in subsection
6-7-4F of this Chapter), to-wit: Such part of Lincoln Trail that is west of its
intersection with Woodbine Street; Park Street; IL Rt. 29; W. Springfield Road;
such part of W. Spresser Street that is west of the railroad tracks; S.
Spresser Street; IL. Rt. 48; such part of N. Webster Street that is south of
its intersection with W. Bidwell Street; and IL. Rt. 104.
   GOLF CART: A gasoline or electric propelled vehicle specifically designed
and intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their
golf clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf,
supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a
public or private golf course; and such golf cart can attain a speed of at
least twenty (20) mph but not more than thirty (30) mph.
   ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., and
all amendments thereto. (Ord. 3816, 9-5-2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
6-7-2: USE RESTRICTED:
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, it is
unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart upon any City roadway.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate upon any City roadway
any all-terrain vehicle 1 , any off-highway motorcycle 2 , or any recreational
off-highway vehicle 3 . (Ord. 3816, 9-5-2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined by §1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
2 2. As defined by §1-153.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
3 3. As defined by §1-168.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
6-7-3: SIGNS:
The City's Street and Sewer Superintendent shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted on those City roadways where golf carts are prohibited as set forth in
this Chapter. (Ord. 3816, 9-5-2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
6-7-4: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED:
The operation of golf carts on the aforesaid designated City roadways is
permitted subject to the following rules and regulations:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway unless he or she is of the age of sixteen (16) or more years and
has a valid driver's license issued in his or her name issued by the Illinois
Secretary of State or by a foreign jurisdiction, and all passengers in the golf
cart are at least eight (8) years of age.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway unless, at a minimum, such golf cart has the following equipment
thereon:
      1.   Brakes, a steering apparatus, four (4) tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem, as
required of other vehicles in Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, on
the rear of the golf cart, two (2) headlights that each emit a white light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, two (2) tail
lamps that each emit a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100')
from the rear, brake lights on the rear of the golf cart, horn, windshield,
seatbelts, and turn signals.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway without the headlight and tail lamps lighted at all times on the
golf cart.
   D.   A person who drives or operates or is in actual physical control of a
golf-cart on a City roadway while under the influence is subject to Sections
11-501 through 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 . It is unlawful for any
person to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of a golf cart on a
City roadway in violation of any one or more of said Sections of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway without having the mandatory insurance coverage as required under
Article VI of Chapter 7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and which insures all
drivers and operators of the golf cart.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway where the posted speed limit is more than thirty five (35) miles
per hour; provided, however, a golf cart may make a direct crossing at an
intersection where the roadway has a posted speed limit of more than thirty
five (35) miles per hour, except upon or across any tollroad, interstate
highway, or controlled access highway.
   G.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
sidewalk or boulevard within the City.
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway in violation of any traffic regulation or regulations under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or under this Code.
   I.   Any person driving or operating a golf cart on a City roadway shall
travel on the City roadway in the same direction as traffic and as near to the
right side of the City roadway as possible.
   J.   Golf cart inspections and annual golf cart permits required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway unless it has been satisfactorily inspected and the owner(s) of
the golf cart has been issued an annual golf cart permit from the City. Such
annual golf cart permit shall be issued for a time period that commences on
April 1 and terminates on March 31 of the following year unless sooner revoked
by the City for non-compliance of the equipment requirements for such golf cart
or for any violation of this Chapter; provided, however, the first annual golf
cart permit issued after the effective date of this Chapter shall terminate on
March 31, 2019.
      2.   Such owner(s) obtaining such annual golf cart permit shall pay the
City a non-prorated fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   Applications for an annual golf cart permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the City, and shall be executed by the applicant(s), and shall
contain the following information and attachments:
         a.   Name, residence address, phone number, driver's license number,
and date of birth of each applicant; and a copy of each applicant's valid
driver's license issued by the State of Illinois or another state.
         b.   Name and address of liability insurance carrier and policy
number.
         c.   A certificate of the aforesaid mandatory insurance coverage that
covers the term of the annual golf cart permit.
         d.   The serial number, make, model, color, number of seats, and
description of the golf cart.
         e.   Such other information as the City may require from time to time.
      4.   Until the City Council determines otherwise, authorized
representatives of Coker Family, Inc., d/b/a Battery Specialists Plus Golf Cars
("Coker"), with its offices located at 800 W. Springfield Rd, Taylorville,
Illinois 62568 shall perform such inspections, and collect and remit, on a
monthly basis, to the City the aforesaid inspection reports and permit fees.
Coker shall issue the City's annual golf cart permits and affix the City
approved reflective adhesive annual golf cart permit stickers on the subject
approved golf carts. For such services, the City will pay Coker an inspection
fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each such golf cart inspection. If Coker
hereafter fails or refuses to perform such tasks for the City, then the City's
Chief of Police and/or his designee shall perform such tasks for the City. All
such inspections and annual golf cart permits shall be completed and signed on
such forms as the City Council shall determine from time to time.
      5.   An annual golf cart permit shall only be issued if such golf cart
has been inspected and meets the equipment requirements as set forth in
subsection B of this Section, and proof has been submitted by the owner(s) of
the golf cart that the mandatory insurance coverage is in force as required by
subsection E of this Section for the entire term of the annual golf cart permit
and each owner of the golf cart exhibits his/her valid driver's license and
provides a copy thereof to the inspector.
   K.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway unless such annual golf cart permit (reflective adhesive sticker
form) is affixed and openly displayed on the driver's side left front fender of
the golf cart.
   L.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway unless the driver and all passengers thereon are seated, with
seatbelts engaged, in the golf cart installed passenger seats.
   M.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a golf cart on any
City roadway with more passengers in the golf cart than there is golf cart
installed passenger seats and seatbelts. (Ord. 3816, 9-5-2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
 
Notes
1 4. 625 ILCS 5/11-501 - 625 ILCS 5/11-502.
6-7-5: GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY:
No action by the City under this Chapter or under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1426.1 designates the operation of a golf cart as an intended or
permitted use of property with respect to Section 3-102 of the Local
Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act 1 . (Ord. 3816, 9-5-
2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.
6-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, for each
offense, be fined and punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each separate offense. Each day upon which a violation
occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition thereto,
and not in lieu thereof, the Mayor or any member of the City's Police
Department may suspend or revoke any annual golf cart permit upon a finding
that there is evidence of any violation of this Chapter or that the permittee
cannot safely operate the golf cart on the designated permitted roadways. (Ord.
3816, 9-5-2017, eff. 10-31-2017)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND PROCEDURES FOR IMPOUNDING VEHICLES
FOR SPECIFIED VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Administrative Fees and Procedures For Impounding Vehicles For Specified
Violations
6-8-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND PROCEDURES FOR IMPOUNDING VEHICLES FOR SPECIFIED
VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7, the city may, consistent with such
statute, provide for procedures for the release of properly impounded vehicles
and for the imposition of a reasonable administrative fee related to its
administrative and processing costs associated with the investigation, arrest,
and detention of an offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release
of the vehicle. The administrative fee imposed by the city may be and is in
addition to any fees charged for the towing and storage of an impounded
vehicle. Such administrative fee will be waived by the city upon verifiable
proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded.
   B.   The city hereby establishes an administrative fee in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) plus such additional amount that is charged by third
parties associated with the towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter
sufficient to cover the city's administrative and processing costs associated
with the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of each such vehicle.
   C.   Such administrative fee for the release of properly impounded vehicles
under this chapter may only be imposed for the following violations:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012;
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      6.   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing;
      7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year;
      9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
      10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code;
      11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      12.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, when so provided by local
ordinance; or
      13.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503
of the Illinois Vehicle Code:
         a.   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
         b.   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
   D.   The following shall apply to any administrative fees imposed pursuant
to subsection C.:
      1.   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that
owner.
      2.   The fees shall be in addition to (i) any other penalties that may be
assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; and (ii) any towing
or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
      3.   The fees shall be uniform for all similarly situated vehicles.
      4.   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the city.
      5.   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid
to the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
      6.   The administrative fee shall be waived by the city upon verifiable
proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded.
   E.   This chapter hereby establishes procedures for the release of properly
impounded vehicles under this chapter and provides for an opportunity for a
hearing, as provided in subdivision (b)(4) of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 which
statutory subdivision is incorporated herein by reference; and further
establishes procedures for the release of the vehicle to the owner of record,
lessee, or a lienholder of record upon payment of all administrative fees and
towing and storage fees.
   F.   The following provisions concerning notice of impoundment shall apply
for the impoundment and release of vehicles under this chapter:
      1.   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the city.
      2.   At the time the vehicle is towed, the city shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself
or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to
be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of
the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative
hearing.
      3.   The city shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the city a bond
equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and pays for all
towing and storage charges.
   G.   The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of
record shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice shall:
      1.   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's
address as registered with the Secretary of State;
      2.   Be served upon interested parties within ten (10) days after a
vehicle is impounded by the city; and
      3.   Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing.
An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty-five
(45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
   H.   In addition to the requirements contained in the aforesaid subdivision
(b)(4) of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 relating to administrative hearings, the
following requirements shall also apply concerning any such administrative
hearings:
      1.   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who
is an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three
(3) years;
      2.   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment;
      3.   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the city;
      4.   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to direct appeal to the Circuit Court of the Fourth Judicial Circuit,
in Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois having jurisdiction over the city,
if such appeal is made in writing within thirty (30) calendar days following
issuance of the final decision of the administrative hearing officer;
      5.   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for
the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid; and
      6.   If the administrative hearing officer finds that the city exceeded
its authority under this chapter, the city shall be liable to the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle for the cost of storage fees and reasonable
attorney's fees.
   I.   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility
within thirty-five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   J.   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty,
or administrative fee imposed under this chapter which remains unpaid in whole
or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review
pursuant to the above subparagraph H.4. of this Section
6-8-1 may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3905, 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 9
UTVs
SECTION:
6-9-1: Definitions
6-9-2: Use Restricted
6-9-3: Signs
6-9-4: Operation Of UTVs Permitted
6-9-5: Governmental Immunity
6-9-6: Penalty
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The City of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
CITY ROADWAY: A street, road, highway, or alleyway located within the corporate
limits of the City and under the jurisdiction of the City, and also including
those streets and roads identified in Section
7-7-6 of the Taylorville City Code; but excluding the following streets,
roadways, and highways (except for intersection crossings as permitted in
subparagraph F. of Section
6-9-4), to-wit: Such part of Lincoln Trail that is west of its intersection
with Woodbine Street; Park Street; IL Rt. 29; W. Springfield Road; such part of
W. Spresser Street that is west of the railroad tracks; S. Spresser Street; IL.
Rt. 48; such part of N. Webster Street that is south of its intersection with
W. Bidwell Street; and IL. Rt. 104.
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., and all amendments thereto.
UTV: A motorized off-highway vehicle designed to primarily travel off-highway,
sixty-four (64) inches or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of
two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or more non-highway
tires, designed with a non-straddle sear and a steering wheel for steering
control, except equipment such as lawnmowers. Also referred to and defined as a
recreational off-highway vehicle in 625 ILCS 5/1-168.8.
(Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020; amd. Ord. 4174, 7-3-2023)
6-9-2: USE RESTRICTED:
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter 9, it is
unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV upon any City roadway.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate upon any City roadway
any all-terrain vehicle (as defined by Section 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code) or any off-highway motorcycle (as defined by Section 1-153.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code). (Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020)
6-9-3: SIGNS:
The City's Street and Sewer Superintendent shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted on those City roadways where UTVs are prohibited as set forth in this
Chapter 9. (Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020)
6-9-4: OPERATION OF UTVS PERMITTED:
The operation of UTVs on the aforesaid designated City roadways is permitted
subject to the following rules and regulations:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway unless he or she is of the age of twenty-one (21) or more years and has
a valid driver's license issued in his or her name issued by the Illinois
Secretary of State or by a foreign jurisdiction, and all passengers in the UTV
are at least eight (8) years of age.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway unless, at a minimum, such UTV has the following equipment thereon:
      1.   Brakes, a steering apparatus, four tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem (as
required of other vehicles in Section 12- 709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code) on
the rear of the UTV, two headlights that each emit a white light visible from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front, two tail lamps that each emit
a red light visible from at least one hundred (100) feet from the rear, brake
lights on the rear of the UTV, horn, windshield, seatbelts, and turn signals.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway without the headlight and tail lamps lighted at all times on the UTV.
   D.   A person who drives or operates or is in actual physical control of a
UTV on a City roadway while under the influence is subject to Sections 11-500
through 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 625 ILCS
5/11-502). It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual
physical control of a UTV on a City roadway in violation of any one or more of
said Sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway without having the mandatory insurance coverage as required under
Article VI of Chapter 7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and which insures all
drivers and operators of the UTV.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway where the posted speed limit is more than thirty-five (35) miles per
hour; provided, however, a UTV may make a direct crossing at an intersection
where the roadway has a posted speed limit of more than thirty-five (35) miles
per hour, except upon or across any tollroad, interstate highway, or controlled
access highway.
   G.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any sidewalk
or boulevard within the City.
   H.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway in violation of any traffic regulation or regulations under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or under the Taylorville City Code.
   I.   Any person driving or operating a UTV on a City roadway shall travel on
the City roadway in the same direction as traffic and as near to the right side
of the City roadway as possible.
   J.   UTV Inspections and Annual UTV Permits Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway unless it has been satisfactorily inspected and the owner(s) of the UTV
has been issued an annual UTV permit from the City. Such annual UTV permit
shall be issued for a time period that commences on April 1 and terminates on
March 31 of the following year unless sooner revoked by the City for non-
compliance of the equipment requirements for such UTV or for any violation of
this Chapter 9 or upon the adoption of any City ordinance that rescinds or
amends this Chapter 9. The number of UTV permits allowed to be issued and in
effect at any time annually (i.e. April 1 to the following March 31) are
unlimited.
      2.   Such owner(s) obtaining such annual UTV permit shall pay the City a
non-prorated fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   Applicants for an annual UTV permit shall be made on a form supplied
by the City, and shall be executed by the applicant(s), and shall contain the
following information and attachments:
         a.   Name, residence address, phone number, driver's license number,
and date of birth of each applicant; and a copy of each applicant's valid
driver's license issued by the State of Illinois or another State.
         b.   Name and address of liability insurance carrier and policy
number.
         c.   A certificate of the aforesaid mandatory insurance coverage that
covers the term of the annual UTV permit.
         d.   The serial number, make, model, color, number of seats, and
description of the UTV.
         e.   Such other information as the City may require from time to time.
      4.   Until the City Council determines otherwise, authorized
representatives of Route 29 Kustoms Collision Center ("Kustoms"), with its
offices currently located at 1110 N. Cheney St, Taylorville, Illinois 62568
shall perform such inspections, and collect and remit, on a monthly basis, to
the City the aforesaid inspection reports and permit fees. Kustoms shall issue
the City's annual UTV permits and affix the City approved reflective adhesive
annual UTV permit stickers on the subject approved UTVs. For such services, the
City will pay Kustoms an inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each such
UTV inspection. If Kustoms hereafter fails or refuses to perform such tasks for
the City, then the City's Chief of Police and/or his designee shall perform
such tasks for the City. All such inspections and annual UTV permits shall be
completed and signed on such forms as the City Council shall determine from
time to time.
      5.   An annual UTV permit shall only be issued if such UTV has been
inspected and meets the equipment requirements as set forth in subparagraph B.
of this Section
6-9-4, and proof has been submitted by the owner(s) of the UTV that the
mandatory insurance coverage is in force as required by subparagraph H. of
Section
6-9-4 of this Chapter 9 for the entire term of the annual UTV permit and each
owner of the UTV exhibits his/her valid driver's license and provides a copy
thereof to the inspector.
   K.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway unless such annual UTV permit (reflective adhesive sticker form) is
affixed and openly displayed on the driver's side left front fender of the UTV.
   L.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway unless the driver and all passengers thereon are seated, with seatbelts
engaged, in the UTV installed passenger seats.
   M.   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a UTV on any City
roadway with more passengers in the UTV than there is UTV installed passenger
seats and seatbelts.
   N.   Pursuant to 626 ILCS 5/11-1427.5, it is unlawful for any person to
drive or operate a UTV in any of the ways specified in or in violation of any
of the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-1427 that applies to any all-terrain
vehicle.(Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020; amd. Ord. 3959, 5-4-2020; Ord. 3977, 7-20-2020;
Ord. 4003, 11-2-2020)
6-9-5: GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY:
No action by the City under this Chapter 9 or under 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1
designates the operation of a UTV as an intended or permitted use of property
with respect to Section 3-102 of the Local Governmental and Governmental
Employees Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.). (Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020)
6-9-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter 9 shall, for each
offense, be fined and punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Taylorville City Code for each separate offense. Each day upon
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In
addition thereto, and not in lieu thereof, the Mayor or any member of the
City's police department may suspend or revoke any annual UTV permit upon a
finding that there is evidence of any violation of this Chapter 9 or that the
permittee cannot safely operate the UTV on the designated permitted roadways.
(Ord. 3942, 2-3-2020)
TITLE 7
LAKE TAYLORVILLE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LAKE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Definitions
7-1-2: Buildings and Structures
7-1-3: Permits, Licenses and Leases
7-1-4: Lots and Campsites
7-1-5: Business Regulations
7-1-6: Enforcement
7-1-7: Violations and Penalties
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms used in this Title shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
   CITY: The City of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   CITY-APPROVED LIFE JACKETS OR LIFE PRESERVERS: A Coast Guard- approved life
preserver, life belt, ring buoy, buoyant vest or buoyant cushion in good and
serviceable condition. Approved devices are identifiable by the "Laboratory/
U.S.C.G." inspection labels and numbers.
   CITY-OWNED CRAFT: Any craft owned or operated by the City for any purpose
whatsoever.
   CUSTODIAN: Refers to any lessee of any marginal land for residential,
business, recreational or other purpose.
   CRAFT: Means and includes any boat, raft, canoe, barge or vessel not
permanently attached to the shore.
   DAM: The earth, concrete, rock and steel structure built by the City on and
across the South Fork of the Sangamon River, located in Section 36, Township 13
North, Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian, in Christian County,
Illinois.
   DISTANCE: The shortest distance between two (2) points in question, and
where one of the designated points is in an involved line (such as the
shoreline, etc.), then distance shall be determined as measured at right angles
to such line to the other point in question.
   DRAINAGE AREA: The entire area of land and water that drains into the Lake
or into the South Fork of the Sangamon River south of the dam or any tributary
or other stream above the public water supply dam.
   HIGH-WATER LINE: The contour in and around the Lake known as six hundred
feet (600') above sea level, referred to the United States government
elevations, as obtained from the bench marks established in or near the Lake.
   INTAKE: The place where the water supply for the City is taken from the
Lake. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
   INTAKE TOWER: The upright concrete tower wherein the intake is located and
wherein the dewatering flume gate is located and upon which the intake and gate
controls are located, all of which is founded on the Lake bed immediately
southwest of the west end of the spillway extending upward out of the water
with markings thereon showing the normal pool level of the Lake as five hundred
ninety feet (590') above sea level. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79; 1991 Code)
   LAKE: The artificial Lake and the waters impounded therein by means of a
public water supply dam as defined in this Section's definition of "dam", and
includes any structure heretofore or hereafter constructed within the
topographical contours of six hundred feet (600') above sea level as determined
by the City from its engineering surveys, which is ten feet (10') above the
normal pool of water so impounded therein.
   LAKE TAYLORVILLE: All the lands and appurtenances thereto, around or in
possession of the City in connection with the Lake either below or above the
water impounded therein.
   MARGINAL LAND: The land owned or controlled by the City adjacent to the
shoreline and not flooded by waters of the Lake.
   NORMAL POOL: The contour in and around the Lake known as five hundred ninety
feet (590') above sea level, referred to the United States government
elevations, as obtained from the bench marks, established in or near the City
or the Lake.
   PERSON: The feminine as well as the masculine when applicable, and also the
plural as well as the singular when applicable. It also includes firm, company,
partnership, group, association, club, organization or other entity.
   RECREATIONAL AREAS: Any area in, on or near the Lake allocated by the City
for recreational purposes, and such recreational purposes may vary, one from
the other, as designated by the City.
   SHORELINE: The extended point where the plain of the surface waters of the
Lake touches the land. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
   SPILLWAY: That portion of the dam constructed with concrete, stone and
steel, approximately three hundred feet (300') long in an east and west
direction and located as the east portion of the dam, on and over which the
Lake water runs at or above normal pool level of five hundred ninety feet
(590') above sea level as measured and marked by the City's engineers. (Od.
1918, 7-16-79; 1993 Code)
   WATERCOURSE: Any stream, natural, artificial or constructed channel, ditch,
slope, spring, well, excavation, gully, draw or depression of any kind, in
which water flows continuously or intermittently over any part of the drainage
area, directly or indirectly, into any part of the Lake. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
7-1-2: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions: No building or other structure, whether for
habitation or otherwise, including any dock, wharf, pier, launching device,
jetty, boathouse, stationary raft or anchored raft shall be constructed,
altered, used or maintained on Lake Taylorville property except as provided in
this title. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
   B.   Single-Family Residential Dwellings In The Pines Subdivision;
Restrictions:
      1.   Modular Homes Prohibited: No person shall construct or erect any
modular home on any lot at the Pines Subdivision at Lake Taylorville.
      2.   Single-Family Residential Dwellings: Only single-family residential
homes shall be allowed to be constructed at the Pines Subdivision on Lake
Taylorville.
         a.   (1) No residence shall be erected on lots 1 through 6 inclusive
unless the ground floor area of the main structure, exclusive of one-story open
porches and garages, shall be not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet
for a one-story dwelling, nor less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet for a dwelling of more than one story; provided, however, that the second
story shall be not less than eight hundred (800) square feet, making a total of
not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in the case of a dwelling of
more than one story. Basements do not constitute a story.
            (2)   No residence shall be erected on lots 7 through 9 inclusive
unless the ground floor area of the main structure, exclusive of one-story open
porches and garages, is not less than one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square
feet for a one- story dwelling, nor less than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet for a dwelling of more than one story; provided, however, that the
second story shall be not less than six hundred (600) square feet, making a
total of not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet in the
case of a dwelling of more than one story. Basements do not constitute a story.
         b.   No building shall be located on any lot nearer to the front line
thereof than forty feet (40') therefrom, said distance being measured from said
front lot line to the foundation of said building. No single-family residence
shall be located nearer to any interior lot line than ten feet (10') therefrom.
For the purpose of this covenant, eaves, steps and open porches shall not be
construed to permit any portion of a building on one lot to encroach upon any
other lot or property. Each dwelling must include an attached two (2) or three
(3) car garage and a driveway of concrete or asphalt.
      3.   Compliance With Provisions; Building Plans: No person, firm,
corporation or other entity shall violate the above or any other building
restrictions or covenants contained in the subdivision documents of the Pines
Subdivision final plat approved by the city council, and no building permit
shall be issued for construction until the landowner submits building plans
which show compliance with the terms of this subsection and any other building
restrictions or covenants which pertain to the Pines Subdivision, Taylorville,
Illinois.
      4.   Variance, Change Or Amendment: No owner or owners of any lot in the
Pines Subdivision shall be entitled to any variance, change or amendment to the
recorded final plat of the Pines Subdivision nor shall be entitled to
resubdivide any lot therein unless and until such owner(s) first obtains the
affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the city's corporate
authorities, including the city council and the mayor. (Ord. 2672, 11-21-1994)
7-1-3: PERMITS, LICENSES AND LEASES:
   A.   Applications: All applications for permits or licenses provided for
shall be directed to the city.
Each custodian of marginal land and each holder of any permit, license or lease
shall state his address on the application thereof, and unless so changed at
the city clerk's office, such address shall be deemed to be the address of such
applicant for the service of any notice or process accordingly.
   B.   Permits, Licenses And Leases May Be Numbered: All such permits,
licenses and leases may be numbered by the city as a matter of identification
thereof.
   C.   Nontransferability: All permits, licenses and leases herein provided
for that may be issued by the city shall not be transferable in any way, but
all benefits which may be derived therefrom shall accrue only to the person to
whom the permit was originally issued by the city.
   D.   Revocation Of Permit, License Or Lease: Each permit, license or lease,
whether or not issued for a consideration, shall be subject to revocation by
the city, unless otherwise expressly provided, whenever the holder of such
permit, license or lease in any way violates or permits the violation of any
law, ordinance, rule or regulation for the regulation, care, protection or
control of the lake, drainage area or the water supply of the city, or
otherwise violates or is in default of any term or condition of said permit,
license, or lease. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 3944, 2-18-2020)
7-1-4: LOTS AND CAMPSITES:
   A.   Lease Of Lake Lots; Conditions:
      1.   The City may lease Lake Lots on a seasonal basis. Lake Lot Leases
shall commence as of April 1 and shall terminate on October 31 each season. The
Lake Superintendent shall designate the Lake Lots and attend to the
administrative requirements in the Lease of the Lots. The rental fee shall be
six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the current season. The required security
deposit for the current season shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). The
terms and the conditions of the Lake Lot Lease Agreement for the current season
and each season thereafter and the amount for such rental fee and security
deposit for the current season and each season thereafter shall be established
and designated in the form of the Lake Lot Lease Agreement as may be approved
by the City Council from time to time by Motion adopted by a majority vote of
the City Council.
   B.   Lease Of Campground Sites; Conditions:
      1.   The City may lease campground sites on a seasonal basis. Campground
Site Leases shall commence as of April 1 and shall terminate on October 31 in
each season. The Lake Superintendent shall designate the campground sites and
attend to the administrative requirements in the lease of the campground sites.
The rental fee shall be eight hundred seventy-five dollars ($875.00) for the
current season. The required security deposit for the current season shall be
three hundred dollars ($300.00). The terms and conditions of the Campground
Lease Agreement for the current season and each season thereafter and the
amount for such rental fee and security deposit for the current season and each
season thereafter shall be established and designated in the form of the
Campground Lease Agreement as may be approved by the City Council from time to
time by motion adopted by majority vote of the City Council.
      Prior to the City’s execution of any lease agreement for a campground
site, the prospective tenant shall pay the City Clerk a ten dollar ($10.00) fee
for preparation of each additional lease agreement because such prospective
tenant failed to return to the City the lease agreement previously furnished to
said prospective tenant.
      The leasing of any available campground site leases shall be conducted by
a lottery system procedure that is recommended from time to time by the Lake
Committee and that is approved by the City Council from time to time. The Lake
Superintendent shall maintain a list of campground sites available each year
for lease and shall designate a date for the leasing of the available
campground sites.
      Notwithstanding anything herein or in the aforesaid lottery system
procedure adopted from time to time to the contrary, the following rules shall
apply to said lottery system procedure and the availability of any campground
sites:
         a.   Only bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents shall be first
selected through said lottery system to lease any available campground site
from time to time.
         b.   Non-bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents can only be selected
through said lottery system to lease any available campground site from time to
time if there are no remaining bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents
participating in said lottery system for the applicable lease year in question
from time to time.
         c.   No immediate family member of any tenant of any campground site
lease can participate in the aforesaid lottery system procedure. For purposes
hereof, “immediate family member” of the tenant shall include: spouse, civil
partner, natural or adopted or step child or grandchild, brother, sister,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law or any of their
respective natural or adopted or step children.
         d.   Tenants shall not be entitled to sublease or assign their
campground site lease in whole or in part at any time; and any such sublease or
assign shall automatically terminate the lease.
         e.   Once a person has leased a campground site, such tenant shall not
be entitled to participate in the aforesaid lottery system, until and unless
such tenant first relinquishes his or her then existing lease of a campground
site. Reimbursement of funds, if any, associated with the said relinquished
lease may be refunded at the direction of the Lake Superintendent.
         f.   Campground sites shall not be held or reserved but may only be
secured by executing the required lease agreement and by paying the required
rent.
      2.   No more than one camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or other
camping facility shall be placed on a campground site; provided, however, that
one additional camper, trailer, recreational vehicle or other camping facility
shall be permitted to locate on a campground site for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days with the written registration per directive of the Lake
Superintendent or designated official. The additional camper, trailer,
recreational vehicle or other camping facility shall be permitted to locate on
a campground site but must be removed from lake property for no less than
fourteen (14) days before being allowed back on any lake property. “Camping
facility” as set forth herein, shall not include tents. No more than two (2)
tents (not to exceed 10 feet by 10 feet each in size) shall be placed on a
campground site. Only the lot lessee either in person or over the phone can
complete the written registration with an employee of the marina office during
the marina’s working hours. The registration form will include no less than the
following: campground site number, name of campground site lessee, name of
person visiting with the second camping facility, description and license plate
number of the visiting facility and date of arrival and scheduled departure. It
will be the lessee’s responsibility to ask the name of the employee completing
the form over the phone to avoid any misunderstandings if a problem would
arise.
      3.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, if a lease
is terminated because of default(s) of tenant as set forth in the campground
lease agreement, then tenant, any immediate family member of tenant (as defined
in such lease agreement), and any person who resides with tenant anywhere and
at any time on the date of or after such default shall not be entitled or
eligible to participate in the aforesaid lottery, as established from time to
time, for any lease of any City lake lot or campground site for a period of one
full calendar year following the year during which occurred the effective lease
termination date or of its nonrenewal or nonextension.
   C.   Leasing For Winter Storage: The City may lease lake lots and campground
sites in designated areas for winter storage purposes. The winter storage
period for lake lots shall be November 1 through the following March 31. The
winter storage for Campground Site Leases shall be from November 1 through the
following March 31. The Lake Superintendent shall designate the winter storage
lots or sites and attend to the administrative requirements in the winter
storage leasing of the lake lots and campground sites. The rental fee for the
winter storage for each lake lot or campground site shall be payable in advance
and shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the current season. The
amount of the winter storage fee for the current season and each season
thereafter shall be established and designated in the form of the Lake Lot
Lease Agreement and/or in the Campground Lease Agreement as may be approved by
the City Council from time to time by Motion adopted by majority vote of the
City Council.
The winter storage rental fee shall apply to house trailers, mobile homes,
trailer coaches, dwelling units, bus or recreational vehicles, campers,
trailers, tents, camping facilities, storage structures, decks, porches,
patios, and anything else located on the lake lot or campground site which does
not belong to the City, during the above mentioned winter storage time periods.
   D.   City Residents Given Priority: The city, in leasing or renting lake
lots or campground sites, shall give preference to residents of the city. Only
one lake lot or campground site lease will be allowed per household.
   E.   Garbage And Trash Disposal: Lessees of the lake lots or campground
sites, their families and guests shall place all garbage, rubbish, cans,
bottles, debris and other trash in receptacles provided by the city. The
failure of a lessee, his family and guests to comply with this provision shall
be deemed to create a public or private nuisance, and such lessee, his family
and guests may be prohibited from further use of the lake lot or campground
site and shall forfeit all site rights to such lease. The lease monies received
from said lessee by the city shall be forfeited by the lessee and retained by
the city as liquidated damages.
   F.   Holding Tanks For Lake Lots And Campsites:
      1.   Tenants of lake lots or campsites may install and maintain, at
tenant's own expense, one underground human waste sanitation sewer holding tank
or concrete holding tank on the lake lot or campsite leased by such tenant or
tenants provided all of the following terms and conditions are first satisfied:
         a.   Such holding tank or concrete holding tank must be constructed of
reinforced fiberglass or of thermoplastic or of reinforced plastic and such
construction and installation, maintenance and removal thereof shall fully
comply with all the requirements as set forth in the Illinois department of
public health private sewage disposal licensing act and code; and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, all as now enacted or hereafter amended.
         b.   Such holding tank or concrete holding tank must have a capacity
of at least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons.
         c.   A permit to install and maintain such holding tank or concrete
holding tank must be obtained by such tenant or tenants (if there is more than
1 tenant of such lake lot or campsite) from the Christian County health
department approving the installation and maintenance of such holding tank.
         d.   Such tenant or tenants must give at least a five (5) day written
prior notification to the lake superintendent of the date such holding tank or
concrete holding tank is to be installed and include with such notification a
signed copy of said Christian County health department permit and satisfactory
proof of full payment for such holding tank.
      2.   Any such holding tank or concrete holding tank must be installed in
accordance with said Christian County health department permit and all
applicable federal, state, county and city laws, statutes, ordinances, rules,
and regulations.
      3.   Any such holding tank or concrete holding tank shall become the sole
property of the city immediately upon installation of such holding tank.
Following such installation, such tenant or tenants shall provide satisfactory
proof to the lake superintendent that all such installation costs have been
fully paid. Such tenant or tenants shall, jointly and severally, be obligated
to and shall, at their own expense, maintain such holding tank or concrete
holding tank in good repair and operating condition during the term of such
lease.
   G.   Overnight Camping:
      1.   The City may lease campsites for overnight camping and the fees for
same shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per night; provided however, commencing
January 1, 2022, the fees for same shall be increased to thirty-five dollars
($35.00) per night on holidays, and increased to thirty dollars ($30.00) per
night for every night not a holiday.
      2.   In the event a person/entity wishes to reserve overnight camping in
advance, overnight camping can be reserved by the person/entity placing
reservations with the city of Taylorville by providing the city of Taylorville
with a check in the sum equal to the first overnight stay plus a five dollar
($5.00) nonrefundable reservation fee. The check must be made payable to the
"City of Taylorville". If the reservation check does not include the correct
fee, the check will be returned to the drawer and no effective reservation will
be recognized.
      3.   If a reservation is canceled two (2) days before the arrival date,
the canceling party will receive the first night's lease fee, but the canceling
party will forfeit the nonrefundable reservation fee. If a reservation is
canceled less than two (2) days before the arrival date, the canceling party
forfeits the first night's lease and the nonrefundable reservation fee.
   H.   Alcohol And Illegal Drugs, Etc., Prohibitions On Lake Lots Or
Campgrounds:
      1.   For purposes of this subsection H, the term "illegal drugs" shall
mean any substance illegal under the laws of the state of Illinois and/or the
federal government and shall include, but is not limited to, any controlled or
counterfeit substance or controlled substance analog or any methamphetamine
manufacturing chemical, or the salt of an optical isomer of methamphetamine or
an analog thereof, or cannabis, as those terms are defined or referred to in
the Illinois controlled substance act 1  or the cannabis control act 2  or the
controlled substance and cannabis nuisance act 3  all as now enacted or
hereafter amended.
      2.   If under the age of twenty one (21) years, the tenant of any lake
lot or campground lease agreement shall not sell, give, deliver, consume, or
possess any alcoholic beverages on the leased premises. The tenant, regardless
of age, of any lake lot or campground lease agreement shall not cause or permit
or allow the sale, gift, delivery, consumption or possession of any alcoholic
beverage(s) on the leased premises by any person or persons under the age of
twenty one (21) years.
      3.   The tenant of any lake lot or campground lease agreement, regardless
of age, shall not sell, give, serve, deliver, store, consume, manufacture,
produce, grow, cultivate, use, or possess any illegal drugs or any illegal
drugs contraband or paraphernalia on the leased premises. Such tenant,
regardless of age, shall not cause or permit or allow the sale, gift, serving,
delivery, storage, consumption, manufacturing, production, growing,
cultivation, use or possession of any illegal drugs or any illegal drug
contraband or paraphernalia on the leased premises by any person or persons.
      4.   For purposes of this subsection, if the tenant of any lake lot or
campground lease agreement or any person or persons is or are determined by the
lake superintendent or his representative, or by any law enforcement officer to
be or has been in violation of any of the terms of this subsection H, then such
determination shall be conclusively deemed a default and violation under the
terms and provisions of such tenant's lake lot or campground lease agreement,
unless such tenant shall prove to the lake superintendent's satisfaction that
such violation was by a person who was a trespasser on the leased premises and
not expressly or impliedly invited or permitted upon the leased premises by
such tenant or any of such tenant's guests, invitees, licensees, agents or
employees.
   I.   Cabin Rental Rate:
      1.   The city may rent cabins at Lake Taylorville, and the rental rate
shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) per rental unit for Sunday through Thursday,
and seventy five dollars ($75.00) per rental unit on Friday, Saturday, and
Holidays.
   J.   Disabled Veterans Camping Privileges: Disabled veterans of the United
States military shall be allowed, on a first come, first served basis and upon
proof of military service connected disability, free access to the handicapped
accessible cabin or to an overnight camping site or to a tent camping site not
to exceed a total of two (2) weekends each season (i.e., April 1 to October 31
of each year) for any selection or combination of such cabin and/or sites.
   K.   Storage Sheds Constructed Or Located On Lake Lots And Campground Lots:
      Lessees of lake lots and campground lots shall be allowed to construct or
locate one vinyl storage shed not to exceed a size of eight foot by ten foot
(8' x 10') on their lake lot and/or campground lot. Prior to doing so, the
lessee shall obtain approval of the lake superintendent or his designee of such
storage shed and the requested area where such storage shed will be located on
the lessee's lake lot or campground lot; and, in addition, lessee shall first
purchase a ten dollar ($10.00) prelocation inspection fee permit from the lake
department.
      In the event that a lessee constructs or locates such storage shed on the
lessee's lake lot or campground lot without first paying for and obtaining such
ten dollar ($10.00) prelocation inspection fee permit, the lessee will have ten
(10) days following demand of the lake superintendent or his designee to pay
for and obtain a ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee permit and shall move such
storage shed to another location on or off the lessee's lake lot or campground
lot as may be required or approved or directed by the lake superintendent or
his designee.
      If such permit is not obtained within such ten (10) day period, or such
storage shed is not moved to the location as designated, approved or directed
by the lake superintendent or his designee within ten (10) days after issuance
of such permit, then the lessee shall immediately permanently remove such
storage shed from lessee's lake lot or campground lot immediately upon demand
of the lake superintendent or his designee.
      The lessee shall at all times secure such storage shed with tie downs or
with some other alternative means as may be approved by the lake superintendent
or his designee from time to time. Lessee shall not use or allow or permit such
storage shed to be used as a living habitat for anything or anyone, including,
but not limited to, any human or animal. If such storage shed is used for such
purpose, the lessee shall permanently remove such storage shed from such lake
lot or campground lot immediately upon demand of the lake superintendent or his
designee.
(Ord. 3128, 7-7-2003; amd. Ord. 3270, 2-6-2006; Ord. 3357, 12-3-2007; Ord.
3493, 12-6-2010; Ord. 3659, 2-3-2014; Ord. 3624, 7-1-2013; Ord. 3632, 8-19-
2013; Ord. 3659, 2-3-2014; Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014; Ord. 3787, 1-3-2017; Ord.
3940, 1-21-2020; Ord. 3915, 9-16-2019; Ord. 3953, 4-6-2020; Ord. 3957, 4-20-
2020; Ord. 3960, 5-4-2020; Ord. 4004, 11-2-2020; Ord. 4058, 8-2-2021; Ord.
4070, 10-4-2021; Ord. 4155, 2-21-2023; Ord. 4259, 8-19-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
3 3. 740 ILCS 40/0.01 et seq.
7-1-5: BUSINESS REGULATIONS 1 :
   A.   Businesses Regulated: Unless duly authorized, in writing, by the city,
no person shall maintain or operate any garage, restaurant, confectionery,
refreshment parlor, dance hall, motel, club, inn, place of amusement for hire,
store or stand for the sale of merchandise. Any license issued by the city
shall be kept conspicuously posted in such place of business or establishment.
   B.   Peddling And Soliciting Prohibited: No person shall beg, solicit alms
or do anything pertaining to soliciting, peddling or hawking in the lake area.
(Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3 of this code.
7-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The city may appoint and employ such number of special policemen,
deputy sheriffs and deputy game wardens to act as police officers, who may be
known as "lake police", as the city may determine to be necessary to enforce
the provisions of this title and to protect the city property or the property
of other persons on the lake or on the marginal lands in connection therewith
and for the preservation of the peace generally.
   B.   The lake superintendent 1 , specifically, is designated a conservator
of the peace 2  and is empowered as a lake policeman under this section.
   C.   The city lake guards are hereby appointed and designated as special
policemen, who may be known as "lake police", under the direct supervision of
the lake superintendent, and shall have the limited powers to issue citations
for violations of the provisions of this title and to protect the city property
or the property of other persons on the lake or on the marginal lands in
connection therewith and for the preservation of the peace generally. Such city
lake guards shall not, however, carry any firearms, or other weapons in the
performance of his or her duties. Such city lake guards shall not, by virtue of
their designation as special policemen or "lake police", be included within any
union membership organized for the city's police department. (Ord. 2689, 4-3-
1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article H of this code.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25.
7-1-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically stated elsewhere in this title or
code, any person violating any of the provisions of this title, or any term(s)
or provision(s) of the aforesaid lake lot lease or campground site lease, shall
be subject to a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
violation, and the maximum fine shall be the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation, plus all court costs. Such fine or fines and
costs shall be penal in nature and shall not include any civil damage or damage
to city property or property in the city's possession or to another person's
property situated on the lake or on the marginal lands thereto. Each day that
the condition or act in violation of this title shall remain or continue shall
be deemed, on the part of the person guilty of such violation, to be a separate
and distinct offense. Each offense shall be punished as provided by this title
or as is provided by law or both. In the event of lease termination, no
deposits or fees will be refunded.
Anyone in violation of subsection
7-1-4A2 or B2 of this chapter shall be subject to a written warning for the
first offense, a fine in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the
second offense, termination of lake lot or campsite lease for a third offense
plus all court costs. In the event of lease termination, no deposits or fees
will be refunded. Violations will accrue over a twelve (12) month period
beginning on the date of the first violation. (Ord. 3427, 6-1-2009)
   B.   In addition to subsection A of this section, any person violating any
provision of this title or any term(s) or provision(s) of the aforesaid lake
lot lease or campground site lease, shall become liable for all damages and all
expenses thereby caused to the city or any other person by reason of such
violation in addition to the criminal penalties provided. (Ord. 3196, 9-20-
2004)
CHAPTER 2
USE OF THE LAKE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Boating
7-2-2: Waterskiing And Surfboard Riding
7-2-3: Fishing
7-2-4: Use Of Lake When Frozen
7-2-5: Prohibition Of Boats Or Powered Watercraft
7-2-1: BOATING:
   A.   Prohibited Areas; Scope: Boating of any kind or character is prohibited
in that portion of the lake within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of
the dam to protect the public water supply.
Boating, otherwise, on the lake is subject to the restrictions as provided in
this section.
      1.   Age Of Operator:
         a.   No person under ten (10) years of age may operate a motorboat.
         b.   Persons at least ten (10) years of age and less than twelve (12)
years of age may operate a motorboat only if:
            (1)   They are accompanied on the motorboat and under the direct
control of a parent or guardian, or a person at least eighteen (18) years of
age designated by a parent or guardian.
         c.   Persons at least twelve (12) years of age and less than eighteen
(18) years of age may operate a motorboat only if:
            (1)   They are accompanied on the motorboat and under the direct
control of a parent or guardian; or
            (2)   A person at least eighteen (18) years of age designated by a
parent or guardian; or
            (3)   Such motorboat operator is in possession of a boating safety
certificate issued by the department of natural resources, division of
education or a valid certificate issued by another state, a province of the
dominion of Canada, the United States coast guard auxiliary or the United
States power squadron.
         d.   For purposes of this subsection A1, the term "motorboat" shall
mean and include any motorized watercraft of any kind, nature, or extent
whatsoever.
         e.   Violations of this section done with the knowledge of a parent or
guardian shall be deemed a violation by the parent or guardian and punishable
under subsection I of this section.
   B.   Boat Licenses And Registration:
      1.   License And Registration Required: No boat or craft of any kind may
be propelled, kept or used in or on the lake, or stored upon the marginal land,
until the owner or person responsible therefor shall have registered such boat
or craft and secured a written license and registration number from the city
based upon a written approval application setting forth the length thereof, its
means of locomotion and, if propelled by motor or engine, the horsepower rating
thereof, the maximum number of passengers or load such boat or craft may carry,
its contemplated use and such other information as the city may, from time to
time, require.
      2.   License Plate: Such license, when granted, shall be in writing and
may be further evidenced by an official number plate or marker to be furnished
by the licensee. Such plate or marker shall be uniformly placed in such
conspicuous position on the boat or craft as may be designated by the city, and
such license shall be exhibited on request to any agent of the city.
      3.   Registration Number: The registration number in figures at least
three inches (3") high must appear on each side of the boat, or other position
designated by the city, but always aft (rear). Sailboats may display their
class serial number on both sides of their mainsail in lieu of the registration
number on both sides of the bow (front).
      4.   Term Of License: Such license, unless issued for a special event,
shall expire on December 31 of the year for which same is issued.
      5.   License Fees: In order to provide a fund to be used to defray the
expenses of inspection and supervision of boats or craft on the lake, to
enforce the provisions of this Title and all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations, and for improvement of navigation and the safety and pleasure of
boating, and for the protection of the public water supply, such application
for license, for renewal or otherwise, must be accompanied by the payment of
the annual license fee to the City as follows:
a. Rowboats, canoes, kayaks, sailboats, wind boards: $35.00
a. Rowboats, canoes, kayaks, sailboats, wind boards: $35.00
b. Powerboats:                                        
  15 hp and under                                   $45.00
  16-25 hp                                          $50.00
  26-75 hp                                          $70.00
  76-150 hp                                         $90.00
  151-200 hp                                        $125.00
  201-250 hp                                        $145.00
  251 hp-UP                                         $160.00
c. Jet Skis (powered watercraft)                     $130.00
d. Boat Dealers                                      $125.00
 
         e.   The city may issue a special written permit for the use of any
boat or craft for the following periods and fees:
 
1-day permit:
Fishing tournaments only $ 12.00
All others               15.00
 
2-day permit:
Fishing tournaments only 17.00
All others               20.00
 
         f.   Persons sixty two (62) years and older shall be permitted to
maintain and operate their personally owned or leased boats upon and in the
waters of Lake Taylorville for an annual license fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) if the boat is 25 horsepower or less and the annual license fee shall
be forty five dollars ($45.00) for those boats over 25 horsepower provided
these persons are bona fide city of Taylorville residents, and provided they
comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations governing the safe
maintenance and operation of boats in said waters.
         g.   For purposes of this subsection B5, "resident" or "residents"
shall mean a person(s) who lives and resides within the corporate limits of the
city of Taylorville on a regular basis, exclusive of residing on any city lake
lot or city campsite.
         h.   The license fees as set forth in this section shall be waived for
disabled veterans injured in the line of duty upon proof of service connected
with the injury. This section shall be reviewed after one year.
   C.   Equipment Requirements:
      1.   Motor: No boat or craft shall be operated on the lake with a motor
or engine of greater rated horsepower than that which was designated for the
boat or craft and that which is stated in the application for license.
      2.   Muffler:
         a.   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any boat or
craft equipped with a motor or internal combustion engine, regardless of
whether such motor or engine be temporarily attached to such boat or craft, on
any waters of the lake unless such motor or engine is equipped with an
efficient muffler in good working order and constant operation so as to prevent
excessive noise and annoying smoke.
         b.   No outboard motor or internal combustion engine shall be deemed
equipped with an efficient muffler unless the exhaust gases are discharged
underwater or are so muffled as to be not noisier or more annoying than an
internal combustion engine of like power equipped with underwater exhaust.
         c.   No inboard motor or internal combustion engine shall be deemed
equipped with an efficient muffler unless the exhaust gases are condensed and
silenced by the continuous circulation of water through the exhaust pipe or are
so muffled as to be not noisier or more annoying than when so condensed and
silenced by water circulation through the exhaust pipe of an internal
combustion engine of like power.
         d.   No person shall use on any boat or craft on the waters of the
lake a muffler cutout or any device whatsoever that operates to discharge
exhaust gases of any motor or engine without such gases passing through an
efficient muffler, except as may be permitted by the city for racing boats at
times to be fixed and in zones to be specified for such purpose.
      3.   Lights:
         a.   Generally:
            (1)   No boat or craft of any kind or character shall be used,
propelled or operated between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless such boat
or craft plainly displays an adequate light which can be clearly observed from
any quarter by an approaching boat, as prescribed by the laws and regulations
of the state.
            (2)   No boat or craft that may be operated or propelled by means
of any motor or engine which may be temporarily or permanently attached thereto
may be operated on the waters of the lake between the hours of sunset and
sunrise unless it plainly displays a bright white light in the aft (rear) part
of the boat or craft visible from all quarters and twin lights or a combined
lantern in the fore (forward) part of the same showing a green light to the
starboard (right) and a red light to the port (left) side of the boat or craft,
each such colored light to be so shielded as to not be visible from across the
beam of the boat or craft, as prescribed by the laws and regulations of the
state.
         b.   Sailboats: Sailboats shall be equipped with one or more red
lights and shall be of such brilliancy they may be easily seen by an
approaching boat or craft for a distance of at least eight hundred feet (800'),
said lights to be visible from all quarters at all times during darkness, as
prescribed by the laws and regulations of the state.
         c.   Rowboats And Canoes: Rowboats and canoes not equipped with
outboard motors shall carry a white light mounted on a suitable standard not
less than one foot (1') in height, said light to be of such brilliancy that it
may be easily seen by an approaching boat or craft for a distance of eight
hundred feet (800'), said light to be visible from all quarters at all times
during darkness, as prescribed by the laws and regulations of the state.
      4.   Horns; Sirens: All motorboats of twenty (20) and more horsepower
shall carry a mouth, hand or power operated whistle, horn or other appliance
capable of producing a blast of two (2) seconds or more duration and audible
for at least one-half (1/2) mile. Sirens are prohibited on all boats and craft
except police, fireboats or boats owned by the city, the state or the federal
government.
      5.   Safety Equipment:
         a.   Fire Extinguishers: It is unlawful to operate a motorboat
equipped with an internal combustion engine without at least one U.S. coast
guard approved fire extinguisher so placed as to be readily accessible and in
such condition as to be ready for immediate and effective use.
         b.   Life Preservers: No boat or craft of any kind or character shall
be operated on the lake unless it carries for each occupant an approved life
preserver, in good condition, especially designed for that purpose.
   D.   Houseboats Prohibited On Lake: No boat or watercraft commonly known as
a "houseboat", which is a boat designed and equipped for use as a dwelling and
pleasure craft with a broad beam, shallow draft, and a large superstructure
resembling a house in which the occupants have sleeping quarters or
accommodations, shall be permitted on Lake Taylorville at any time. It shall be
unlawful for any person to be in possession of or to own or operate or maintain
any such "houseboat" on Lake Taylorville at any time. The term "houseboat"
shall not include what is commonly known as a "pontoon boat", which is a flat
bottomed entirely open air boat designed and equipped for use as a pleasure
craft only that has hollow tubes or compartments underneath used to float such
boat; and the term "houseboat" shall not include what is commonly known as a
"cabin cruiser" boat that is a motorboat designed and equipped for use as a
pleasure craft with a cuddy cabin (not a large superstructure resembling a
house) in which the occupants have sleeping accommodations.
   E.   Operation Of Boats:
      1.   Rules: The following steering and sailing rules shall govern the use
and operation of boats and craft on the lake:
      Rule 1. When two (2) sailing boats are approaching one another so as to
involve risk of collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the other
as follows, namely:
         a.   A sailboat which is running free shall keep out of the way of a
sailboat which is close hauled.
         b.   A boat which is close hauled on the port (left) tack shall keep
out of the way of a boat which is close hauled on the starboard (right) tack.
         c.   When both are running free, with wind on different sides, the
boat which has the wind on the port (left) side shall keep out of the way of
the other.
         d.   When both are running free with the wind on the same side, the
boat which is to windward shall keep out of the way of the boat or craft which
is to leeward.
      Rule 2. When two (2) motor or engine driven boats are meeting end on, or
nearby and on, so as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter its course
to starboard (right) so that each shall pass on the port (left) side of the
other.
      Rule 3. When two (2) motor or engine driven boats are crossing so as to
involve risk of collision, the boat which has the other on its starboard
(right) side shall keep out of the way of the other.
      Rule 4. When a motor or engine driven boat and a sailing boat are
proceeding in such direction as to involve risk of collision, the motor or
engine driven boat shall keep out of the way of the sailing boat.
      Rule 5. The meeting or crossing of two (2) boats propelled by oars or
muscular power shall be governed in like manner as two (2) motorboats under
rule 2 and rule 3 of this subsection.
      Rule 6. When a sailing boat or motor or engine driven boat meets, crosses
the course of or overtakes a boat propelled by oars or muscular power, the
sailing or motor or engine driven boat shall keep out of the way of the other.
      Rule 7. Where, by any of the rules herein prescribed, one of two (2)
boats shall keep out of the way, the other shall keep its course and speed.
      Rule 8. Every motor or engine driven boat which is directed by these
rules to keep out of the way of another boat shall, on approaching it, if
necessary, slacken its speed or stop or reverse.
      Rule 9. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, every boat or
craft overtaking any other shall keep out of the way of the overtaken boat or
craft.
      Rule 10. In obeying and construing these rules, due regard shall be had
to all dangers of navigation and collision and to any special circumstances
which may render a departure from the above rules necessary to avoid immediate
danger.
      Rule 11. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any boat or craft or the
owner or operator thereof from the consequences of any neglect to keep a proper
lookout or of a neglect of any precaution which may be required by the exercise
of due care and caution or by the special circumstances of the case.
      Rule 12. No boat or craft shall collide with, run against, strike,
injure, deface or damage any buoy, stake, sign, piling, ramp, dock, pier or
other structure installed by the city or with the city's consent or be anchored
or moored so as to obstruct the view of any buoy or navigation sign or signal.
Any person causing or permitting any injury or damage, directly or indirectly,
shall be liable to the city for such damage as may be caused by such boat, its
operator or owner.
      Rule 13. The operation of a boat or craft at a speed greater than is safe
and prudent under the circumstances is prohibited 1 . All boats and craft must
operate at a safe distance from other boats and craft. Racing or circling
around other boats is prohibited.
      Rule 14. No bottles, cans or other refuse shall be dumped, thrown, cast,
placed or deposited into the water of the lake or on the adjacent shores from
any boats or craft.
      2.   Speed Limits: Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting any
boat or craft to be operated at a speed greater than is safe and prudent under
the circumstances, and the operator shall observe and comply with all signs and
other regulations placed by the city on or near the lake. Speed limits are
hereby established at not to exceed five (5) miles per hour under bridges or
within fifty feet (50') thereof in or on any established boat harbor, boat
mooring area or boat launching area or within fifty feet (50') thereof, and
elsewhere on the lake, it shall be unlawful to operate any boat or craft at a
speed in excess of thirty five (35) miles per hour.
      3.   Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
         a.   Persons using or operating any boat or craft on the waters of the
lake shall do so in such manner as not to create an unsanitary condition in or
about such waters and shall not pollute such waters by the discharge, in any
material amount, of oil or other polluting liquid or solid tending to make such
waters unwholesome or unfit for water supply purposes or injurious to the
aquatic life thereof.
         b.   No boat or craft shall be used, or operated, nor any horn or
sound device sounded so as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or quiet
of any neighborhood or any properly occupied area.
         c.   No person in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of
narcotic drugs shall operate any boat or craft on the waters of the lake.
         d.   No more than three (3) boats or watercraft shall be tied
together. All tied up boats or watercraft shall remain at least two hundred
(200) yards from any other tied up boats or watercraft.
   F.   Abandoned, Unlicensed Boats: Any boat or craft found abandoned or
adrift in the lake or any unlicensed boat or craft thereon shall be taken up by
the city, and the city shall have a lien thereon for all license fees therefor
and the expenses of taking, towing, mooring, keeping, storage, advertising and
selling of the same and for all damages caused by such boat or craft to
property of the city, and the city may enforce such lien by advertisement and
sale of such boat or craft in like manner as the foreclosure and sale of
personal property liens or chattel mortgages under the laws of the state.
Nothing herein shall be construed as exonerating the owner or operator of any
boat or craft from personal liability to the city, or any other person, for any
damage or injury caused by such boat or craft.
   G.   Leasing Dock Space: The city may lease its city owned floating and
stationary boat docks in the marina area as follows: Boat Dock Rental Fee:
      At floating dock: The rental fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the current season, and each season thereafter until and unless
amended by the Taylorville City Council.
      At stationary dock: The rental fee shall be two hundred twenty dollars
($220.00) for the current season, and each season thereafter until and unless
amended by the Taylorville City Council.
   The leasing of any available boat dock leases shall be conducted by a
lottery system procedure that is recommended from time to time by the Lake
Committee and that is approved by the City Council from time to time. The Lake
Superintendent shall maintain a list of boat docks available each year for
lease and shall designate a date for the leasing of the available boat docks.
   Notwithstanding anything herein or in the aforesaid lottery system procedure
adopted from time to time to the contrary, the following rules shall apply to
said lottery system procedure and the availability of any boat docks:
      1.   Only bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents shall be first
selected through said lottery system to lease any available boat dock from time
to time.
      2.   Non-bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents can only be selected
through said lottery system to lease any available boat dock from time to time
if there are no remaining bona fide Taylorville Illinois residents
participating in said lottery system for the applicable lease year in question
from time to time.
      3.   No immediate family member of any tenant of any lake lot lease or
campground site lease can participate in the aforesaid lottery system
procedure. For purposes hereof, “immediate family member” of the tenant shall
include: spouse, civil partner, natural or adopted or step child or grandchild,
brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law
or any of their respective natural or adopted or step children.
      4.   Tenants shall not be entitled to sublease or assign their boat dock
lease in whole or in part at any time; and any such sublease or assign shall
automatically terminate the lease.
      5.   Once a person has leased a boat dock lease, such tenant shall not be
entitled to participate in the aforesaid lottery system, until and unless such
tenant first relinquishes his or her then existing lease of a boat dock.
Reimbursement of funds, if any, associated with the said relinquished lease may
be refunded at the direction of the Lake Superintendent.
      6.   Boat docks shall not be held or reserved but may only be secured by
executing the required lease agreement and by paying the required rent.
   H.   Authority To Regulate: The city shall, at all times, have power and
authority to prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit or regulate the keeping,
maintenance or operation of any and all boats and craft on the waters of the
lake should it become necessary to do so in the interest of the public health
or safety or for the protection or improvement of the lake or other cause.
   I.   Violation; Penalties: Any individual violating this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and the minimum fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00),
and the maximum fine shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus costs of
court.  (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 3038, 8-20-2001; Ord. 3109, 1-21-2003;
Ord. 3127, 6-2-2003; Ord. 3161, 2-2-2004; Ord. 3168, 4-19-2004; Ord. 3346, 8-6-
2007; Ord. 3357, 12-3-2007; Ord. 3419, 2-17-2009; Ord. 3493, 12-6-2010; Ord.
3687, 10-6-2014; Ord. 3915, 9-16-2019; Ord. 4004, 11-2020; Ord. 4259, 8-19-
2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection E2 of this section.
7-2-2: WATERSKIING AND SURFBOARD RIDING:
   A.   Authority To Regulate:
      1.   The city shall, from time to time, designate the hours, days or
other times and the place or places on the lake for skiing and surfboard
riding.
      2.   The city shall have the right at any and all times during which
skiing or surfboard riding is permissible, to prohibit any person from
participating in such activity as a matter of regulating the conduct and safety
of other persons who may or might be using the lake and for the protection of
the public water supply from injury and abuse.
   B.   Hours: No waterskiing or surfboard riding shall be permitted between
one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise.
   C.   Prohibited Areas:
      1.   No waterskiing or surfboard riding is permitted within two hundred
feet (200') of the shoreline, unless otherwise designated for starting or
stopping, or in any areas used for boat harbors, boat moorings and areas marked
for a bathing beach. All areas for ingress and egress for skiers and surfboard
riders shall be those designated by the city and none other. Whether such
ingress and egress areas are marked or not, it shall be the duty of the person
or persons participating in the waterskiing or surfboard riding to make inquiry
of the same.
      2.   Waterskiing and surfboard riding are prohibited under all bridges.
      3.   Waterskiing and surfboard riding are prohibited one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') from the dam, in the marina harbor, two hundred feet
(200') from any shoreline or within three hundred feet (300') of the swimming
area at the beach unless specifically authorized by the city. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-
1979)
   D.   Headgear Required: (Rep. by Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014)
   E.   Number Of Skiers; Procedures: Not more than two (2) skiers shall be
pulled at one time by any boat.
All skiers shall hold one ski aloft when they fall in the water and signal to
others with an upward extended hand and arm as to their safety and whereabouts.
(Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
   F.   Boat Occupants: At least one person over the age of eighteen (18) years
must be occupying the boat pulling a waterskier or surfboard rider. (Ord. 3038,
8-20-2001)
   G.   Kites And Parasails:
      1.   The towing of persons employing kites or similar instruments,
facilities or devices is hereby prohibited on Lake Taylorville. (Ord. 1918, 7-
16-1979)
      2.   Equipment and devices, hereinafter referred to as parasails, which
are attached by line to and pulled by powerboats shall be permitted on Lake
Taylorville, subject to terms and conditions stated as follows:
         a.   That such parasail be at all times connected to the powerboat by
adequate and durable line not exceeding four hundred feet (400') in length.
         b.   That the owner and operator of the powerboat shall furnish unto
the lake superintendent evidence of insurance sufficient to fully indemnify,
protect and hold the city harmless in an amount not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each occurrence.
         c.   That all participants release and discharge the city and its
officials from all liability and responsibility as might otherwise result from
the authorization and/or use and operation of the parasails.
         d.   That the lake superintendent 1  shall possess the right to
determine and regulate the nature and extent of the use of parasails on Lake
Taylorville and, in all events, the lake superintendent shall limit the use
thereof to not more than two (2) at any one time upon Lake Taylorville. (Ord.
2100, 7-18-1983)
   H.   Violation; Penalties: Any individual violating this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and the minimum fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00),
and the maximum fine shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus costs of
court. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article H of this code.
7-2-3: FISHING:
   A.   State License Required; Obedience To State Law: No person required to
be licensed by the laws of the state shall take, catch or attempt to take or
catch any species of fish, frogs or turtles without a state fishing license in
full force and effect, issued to such person and in his possession. All persons
shall strictly adhere to the fish code 1  of the state and the amendments
thereto. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
   B.   Authority Of City To Regulate: The city is hereby authorized and vested
with full power and authority to make, promulgate and enforce such rules and
regulations as may be deemed necessary and proper for regulating fishing as
permitted or prohibited by this title or the rules and regulations established
by the state department of conservation applicable to the waters in the lake.
   C.   Prohibited Area: Fishing is prohibited from the south face of the dam.
(Ord. 2279, 3-7-1988)
   D.   Restrictions On Type And Number Of Fish: It is prohibited for any
individual to take or catch or have in his or her possession from Lake
Taylorville within any twenty four (24) hour period (defined as commencing at
6:00 A.M. on one day and extending until 6:00 A.M. the next day) any bass,
crappie, or sauger except as set forth as follows:
Bass: Maximum of five (5) total, with each being a minimum of fifteen inches
(15") long.
Crappie: Maximum of twenty five (25) total, with each being a minimum of nine
inches (9") long.
Sauger: Maximum of six (6) total, with each being a minimum of fourteen inches
(14") long. (Ord. 3219, 1-18-2005)
   E.   Fishing Methods: Bank line fishing is allowed only if such fishing
equipment is personally attended to at all times. Jug fishing is allowed if all
jugs set in a body of water shall be under the immediate supervision of the
fisherman. "Immediate supervision" shall be defined as the fisherman being on
the water where the jugs are set to be readily available to identify jugs to
law enforcement officers empowered to enforce this code. Jugs or bank lines
left unattended shall be confiscated by the city. No person shall take, catch,
or attempt to take or catch, any fish in the lake by any method whatsoever,
except that of a hook attached to a single line. The use of any trotline, any
seine, any dip, hoop, net, basket net or of any trap for the taking of aquatic
life is hereby prohibited. The city shall have the reserved right to issue
special commercial fisher permits at its discretion. (Ord. 3039, 8-20-2001)
Jugs shall not be placed on Lake Taylorville until forty five (45) minutes
after sunset and must be removed by eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next morning.
The owner's name shall be conspicuously displayed on each jug. Each fisherman
shall be limited to fifty (50) jugs, and each fisherman shall attend his jugs
at all times. (Ord. 2414, 12-17-1990)
The city shall reserve the right to prohibit shoreline fishing on any marginal
land at its discretion.
   F.   Preservation Of Lake Conditions: All persons using the waters of the
lake for fishing purposes shall so use the same as not to create an unsanitary
condition or pollute any part of the lake.
   G.   Suspension Of Fishing Privileges: The privilege of fishing in the lake
or any part thereof may be suspended by the city at any time whenever such
suspension shall be deemed proper to conserve aquatic life or to prevent any
tendency to pollute the waters of the lake or to promote the improvement or
convenient maintenance or control of all or any part thereof. The posting of
any authorized sign in any part of the lake shall suspend the privilege of
fishing in such posted location.
   H.   Exemption From Provisions: Nothing herein enumerated in subsections A,
B, C, D, E and G of this section shall apply to or be construed to prevent or
penalize anything done or caused by the city or by its agents or employees of
the department of conservation of the state in protecting or caring for the
lake or the aquatic life therein.
   I.   Violations; Penalties: Any person or persons violating this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the minimum fine shall be fifty dollars
($50.00), and the maximum fine shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus
costs of court. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 2. 515 ILCS 5/1-1.
7-2-4: USE OF LAKE WHEN FROZEN:
No person shall skate or use any iceboat or ice craft upon any of the ice of
the lake except as may be designated by the city. No ice cutting shall be
permitted in or upon the waters of the lake except when specifically authorized
by the city. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
7-2-5: PROHIBITION OF BOATS OR POWERED WATERCRAFT:
   A.   Prohibitions: In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fines or
penalties as are provided for in this title for any violation of any provision
of this title, the following prohibitions shall apply if such violation
involves the use, maintenance or operation of any boat or powered watercraft
while on Lake Taylorville or on Lake Taylorville property:
First offense: Such boat or powered watercraft and operator shall be prohibited
from entering, being present upon, or remaining on Lake Taylorville for a
period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours from the time of an oral notice of
any violation or from the time of issuance of any written citation for any
violation of any provisions of this title which involves the use, maintenance
or operation of any boat or powered watercraft while on Lake Taylorville or on
Lake Taylorville property.
Second offense: Such boat or powered watercraft and operator shall be
prohibited from entering, being present upon, or remaining on Lake Taylorville
for a period of seventy two (72) consecutive hours from the time of an oral
notice of any violation or from the time of issuance of any written citation
for any provision of this title which involves the use, maintenance or
operation of any boat or powered watercraft while on Lake Taylorville or on
Lake Taylorville property.
Third offense and for each subsequent offense: Such boat or powered watercraft
and operator shall be prohibited from entering, being present upon, or
remaining on Lake Taylorville for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days from
the time of an oral notice of any violation or from the time of issuance of any
written citation for any violation of any provision of this title which
involves the use, maintenance or operation of any boat or powered watercraft
while on Lake Taylorville or on Lake Taylorville property.
      1.   Such prohibition shall be evidenced by an oral notice or the
issuance of a written citation designating such prohibited time periods.
      2.   For purposes hereof, the lake superintendent or any city police
officer shall have the power and authority to issue such written citations and/
or oral notifications of violations; and the city's lake guard shall have the
power and authority to issue such oral notifications of violations.
      3.   For purposes of determining whether an offense constitutes a second,
third or subsequent offense, such offense need not be for the same violation of
the same provision of this title as the prior offense, but shall be construed
to mean any offense for the same or for a different violation of any provision
of this title committed at any time and not limited to any one boating or
watercraft season. (Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014)
   B.   Violations And Penalties: Any person, who is found to be operating, in
control of, or in charge of any such boat or power watercraft on Lake
Taylorville during any of the aforesaid designated times in which such boat or
power watercraft has been prohibited from entering, being present upon, or
remaining upon Lake Taylorville, shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction,
in an amount not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00), but no more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation exists or continues.
(Ord. 2813, 11-3-1997)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Pollution Of Water And Watercourses Generally
7-3-2: Sewage Disposal
7-3-3: Garbage And Refuse Disposal
7-3-4: Use Of Fertilizers
7-3-5: Washing Clothes, Animals And Equipment
7-3-6: Swimming, Wading And Bathing
7-3-7: Interments Prohibited
7-3-8: Miscellaneous Offenses
7-3-9: Feeding Of Geese, Etc. Prohibited
7-3-1: POLLUTION OF WATER AND WATERCOURSES GENERALLY 1 :
   A.   No person shall, within the Lake Taylorville area or its drainage area,
place, throw, discard, discharge or cause to be discharged any sewage, garbage,
decayed or fermented fruit or vegetables, offal, dead body, carcass or portions
thereof, chemical compounds, manure, salty or contaminated waters or liquids,
polluted, filthy, dirty, unsanitary, decaying, fermenting, putrescible or oily
matter or liquid, industrial or commercial wastes, junk or discarded materials
onto the land or water in any manner so as to reach any natural or artificial
watercourse, or open or covered sewer, ditch, tile or drain flowing directly or
indirectly, continuously or intermittently, into and so as to pollute or tend
to pollute, contaminate or tend to contaminate or otherwise do injury to the
impounded waters in the Lake constituting the public water supply from which
the City obtains its water supply for its inhabitants and the public in
general.
   B.   No person shall construct, use or maintain within the drainage area or
in any part or portion in the drainage area that subsequently drains into the
Lake any open or covered sewer, ditch, tile or drain or make an alteration
therein or in connection therewith so as to cause any pollution or polluted or
oily water or liquid or salt or chemical contaminated water or liquid or
chemical treated water to flow into, directly or indirectly, or reach more
quickly such Lake or the public water supply of the City therein.
   C.   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed or permit to be
constructed or use any toilet, water closet, sink, urinal, cesspool, septic
tank, privy, garage, stable, animal lot, barn, slaughterhouse or other
structure, establishment or place which is so situated that polluted or oily
liquid or other matter therefrom, either solids or liquids, may continuously or
intermittently so flow as to ultimately reach and pollute or tend to pollute
the water of the Lake or the waters that flow into the Lake from which the City
obtains its public water supply.
   D.   No such pollution, contamination or injury to the waters in or flowing
into the Lake shall be allowed unless there is constructed, maintained and
operated such sewage treatment and disposal units and facilities for the
adequate treatment thereof or disposal thereof as may be approved by the City
and in keeping with the accepted practices established by the laws of the State
to prevent pollution, contamination and other injury to the reservoir and the
City's public water supply. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 8, Chapter 5 of this Code.
7-3-2: SEWAGE DISPOSAL 1 :
No toilet, water closet, urinal, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewer or other
means for the depositing, storing, retaining or disposing of sewage, sink,
bathroom or wastewaters shall be built, used or maintained on Lake Taylorville
property unless the same is approved by the City and a written permit issued
the applicant therefor. Such application shall set forth the specifications
therefor, disclosing the location, the nature of the intended and limited use
and the means of treatment or disposal or both of such sewage, sink, bathroom
or wastewaters to meet the standards of accepted good practices in connection
therewith and the requirements of the City and in keeping with practices
preventing pollution, contamination and injury to the public water supply in
the Lake. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 8, Chapter 5 of this Code.
7-3-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL 1 :
No house slop, sink waste, junk, trash, cans, rubbish, garbage, bottles,
discarded personal or household effects, decayed or fermented fruits, grain or
vegetable refuse, offal, swill, carcass, filthy, decaying, fermenting or
putrescible matter of any kind or unsanitary waste product or polluted or oily
liquid or solid shall be thrown into the Lake or placed, piled, thrown or
discharged in any manner in the Lake Taylorville area. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Title 4, Chapter 3 of this Code.
7-3-4: USE OF FERTILIZER:
Manure and commercial fertilizer may be used for horticultural purposes at
times and places approved by the City. No manure or commercial fertilizer shall
be placed, used or spread on or in any grounds in such quantities or in such
manner as to cause pollution or as to threaten to cause pollution of the Lake
or bring about any public or private nuisances. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
7-3-5: WASHING CLOTHES, ANIMALS AND EQUIPMENT:
No bedding, clothing, carpet, rug, blanket, animal equipment, animals 1 ,
vehicles, mechanical devices, trailers, trucks, tractors, farm, commercial,
industrial, household or mechanical equipment, mobile or stationary equipment
or other articles that may pollute or tend to pollute water shall be placed,
thrown or cast into or washed or wetted down in the Lake, directly or
indirectly, or into the waters running or flowing into the Lake or into a
tributary, stream or ditch collecting such waters that subsequently flow into
the Lake and the City's public water supply. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  7-5-4 of this Title.
7-3-6: SWIMMING, WADING AND BATHING:
   A.   Area Restrictions:
      1.   Swimming, bathing and wading are prohibited in the lake within one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the dam. (Ord. 2546, 5-16-1994)
      2.   Swimming, bathing and wading are prohibited in the remainder of Lake
Taylorville except when waterskiing or surfboard riding and in the one area
which is designated as a city beach by the city. Such city beach area shall be
so designated with an appropriate sign. (Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014)
   B.   Diseased Persons: No person having any communicable disease or skin
infection shall swim, bathe or wade in any portion of Lake Taylorville.
   C.   Swimming From Boats: Swimming out of boats is hereby prohibited. (Ord.
2546, 5-16-1994)
   D.   Responsibility For Swimming, Wading Or Bathing: Any person who does
swim, bathe or wade in Lake Taylorville does so at his or her own selection and
risk and not at the invitation of the city or as a risk of the city. (Ord.
3687, 10-6-2014)
   E.   Prohibition Of Swimming At The City Beach By Those Under Age Seventeen
Unless Accompanied By An Older Person: It shall be unlawful for any person
under seventeen (17) years of age to enter said city beach area or swim therein
without a responsible person seventeen (17) years of age or older present, and
no one may enter such city beach area alone or swim alone. Any swimming is at
the person's own risk. No lifeguard will be provided by the city, nor will the
city exercise any supervision at such city beach.
   F.   Exemptions From Provisions: Being in the waters of the lake for the
purpose of construction work, rescue work or assisting in launching or landing
a craft or boat shall not be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 2546, 5-
16-1994)
7-3-7: INTERMENTS PROHIBITED 1 :
No interment of a human body shall be made in the Lake Taylorville area
whatsoever. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-2-5 of this code.
7-3-8: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 2 :
   A.   Hindering Or Interfering With City Employees: No person shall interfere
with or in any manner hinder any employee or agent of the city while engaged in
any work or duties in connection with the improvement, care or supervision of
any portion of the lake or any portion of the marginal lands thereto.
   B.   Going Upon Prohibited Areas: No person shall go upon any prohibited
area when so designated or posted by the city. The spillway, intake tower, pump
house and all areas prohibited for boating are herein designated as prohibited
areas.
   C.   Disorderly Conduct 3 : No person shall commit in public or in a public
place any indecent, lewd or filthy act or use any threatening or obscene
language or, by boisterous talk and conduct, become obnoxious to others or make
any indecent exposure of his or another's person in or on any portion of the
lake or the marginal lands thereto 4 .
   D.   Breach Of The Peace: No person shall make, aid or countenance or assist
in making any improper noise, racket, disturbance, breach of the peace or
anything tending to be a breach of the peace or be guilty of any disorderly or
offensive conduct 5  or collect or assemble any body or group of persons for
any unlawful purpose or for the annoyance or disturbance of any person or the
damage or destruction of property of the city or property operated or in
possession of the city or the property of any person within any of the lake
area or the marginal lands in connection therewith. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
In particular, the hours from eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. shall be regarded as "quiet hours" wherein various noises, including
music, conversations and like sounds, shall be maintained at an absolute
minimum in compliance with the spirit and intent of this subsection. (Ord.
3547, 2-6-2012)
   E.   Refrigerators And Freezers: No person shall abandon any refrigerator,
freezer, icebox, or ice chest on any Lake Taylorville property. No person shall
leave any such refrigerator, freezer, icebox, or ice chest out of doors on any
Lake Taylorville property.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply to any refrigerator, freezer,
icebox, or ice chest having a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or
more.
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this subsection shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each day during or with respect to which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014)
 
Notes
2 2. See also subsection
  7-5-6A2 of this title regarding discharge of firearms.
3 3. See also section
  5-4-1-1 of this code.
  4. See also sections
4 5-4-3-2 and
  5-4-3-3 of this code.
5 5. See also section
  5-4-1-1 of this code.
7-3-9: FEEDING OF GEESE, ETC. PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to feed any goose or geese or gander or
gosling or gaggle located on or within Lake Taylorville or its environs.
   B.   Any person in violation this Section
7-3-9 shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense plus all applicable court costs. (Ord. 4194, 9-5-2023)
CHAPTER 4
MAINTENANCE AND CARE OF LAKE PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-4-1: Fires And Fireworks
7-4-2: Damage To, Tampering With Property
7-4-3: Advertisements
7-4-4: Traffic Regulations
7-4-5: Vehicle Use Restrictions
7-4-6: Boat Docks, Boathouses, Swimming Docks, Ski Lifts, And Other Buildings,
Structures Or Improvements Or Shoreline Alterations
7-4-1: FIRES AND FIREWORKS:
No fires shall be lighted or used on the marginal lands except at such places
and purposes as may be designated by the City. No fireworks or balloons shall
be lighted or set off on the marginal lands or on the Lake unless specifically
authorized by the City 1 , and there shall be no burning of garbage or trash of
any kind at any time in the camp areas 2 . (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-8-1 of this Code.
2 2. See also Section
  4-3-5 of this Code.
7-4-2: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY:
   A.   Generally: No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently cut,
break, climb on, carry away, conceal, transfer, tamper with, mark upon or in
any way, injure, damage or deface any shrub, plant, turf, grass, statue, bust,
monument, lamppost, hydrant, regulating device, transformer, meter, switch,
wiring, pole, electrical fixture, curbstone, coping, rip rap, flagstone, fence,
wall, bridge, balustrade, railing, bench, building, pier, ramp, buoy, dock,
wharf, sign, marker or other structure of any kind or property, or take down,
alter, mar, move, injure or destroy any sign, trail marker, placard, notice,
pile or buoy posted or placed by the City or authorized to be posted or placed
by the City in any of the marginal lands, or drive any motor car, vehicle, boat
or craft in such a manner as to cause to strike, injure or deface or damage any
such property without first being authorized by the City for some specific
purpose which might conflict herewith. No person shall injure, deface, damage
or destroy any roads, walks, parking areas, boat facilities or any other
property belonging to the City or in the care of the City. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79;
amd. Ord. 2004, 4-20-81)
   B.   Trees: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, fall, destroy or
otherwise damage trees located on Lake Taylorville property except pursuant to
authorization of the appropriate corporate authorities.
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this subsection shall
be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each day during or with respect to which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 2004, 4-20-81)
   C.   Fire Hydrants: No person shall open any fire hydrant of the City except
a duly authorized fireman or agent of the City 1 . (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  8-4-6 of this Code.
7-4-3: ADVERTISEMENTS 1 :
The erection or maintenance of any sign, bill, poster, placard or card or the
distributing of any advertising matter by handbills or otherwise is prohibited
in the Lake area except signs posted or authorized to be posted by the City 2 .
(Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Title 4, Chapter 10 of this Code.
2 3. See Title 9, Chapter 8 of this Code for signs.
7-4-4: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 1 :
All persons shall observe and obey all official signs and traffic signals and
police officers and Lake officers of the City. The display of unauthorized
signs and signals is prohibited. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
 
Notes
1 4. See also Title 6 of this Code.
7-4-5: VEHICLE USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Vehicle Use Generally:
      1.   Vehicles shall be driven in the Lake area only upon roadways and
parking places constructed by the City for such use. No vehicle shall be driven
upon any shoulder or other land surface being tilled or planted in grass. Any
injury caused by improper driving on surfaces other than the main portion of
the roadways or parking places shall be assessed against the owner and operator
of the vehicle in question and collected by civil action according to law.
      2.   No person, excepting those persons who have leased Lake lots for
camping sites, shall operate and drive a motor vehicle in the Camping Area No.
1; further excepting motor vehicles when used in the pulling of campers and
trailers to and from the campsite.
   B.   Mini-Bikes And Motorcycles: Mini-bikes or other motor-driven cycles
shall not be operated or ridden inside the Camp Areas No. 1, 2 or 3 at any
time. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-79)
   C.   All-Terrain Vehicles; Off-Highway Motorcycles: It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive or operate any all-terrain vehicle or off-highway
motorcycle upon any property owned by the City or upon any street, highway or
roadway in the City. The definition of "all-terrain vehicle", "off-highway
motorcycle", "operate" and "operator" shall be the same as that set forth in
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/1-102.02, 5/1-153.1, 5/1-154.1 and 5/1-154.2,
which are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2278, 3-7-88)
7-4-6: BOAT DOCKS, BOATHOUSES, SWIMMING DOCKS, SKI LIFTS, AND OTHER BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES OR IMPROVEMENTS OR SHORELINE ALTERATIONS:
   A.   On and after April 17, 1995, it shall be unlawful for any owner or
tenant of any privately-owned real property or for the tenant of any City lake
lot or campsite to construct or cause to be constructed, any boat dock,
boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or any other building, structure or
improvement on or within Lake Taylorville or along the shoreline of Lake
Taylorville, or for any owner or tenant of any privately-owned real property or
for the tenant of any City lake lot or campsite to make or cause to be made any
alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville except as may be permitted in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this Section.
   B.   For purposes hereof, "privately-owned real property" shall mean and
refer to any real property which is owned or leased, in whole or in part, by
any person, trustee, firm, entity, partnership, or corporation, but excluding
any real property owned by the City.
   C.   Any such owner or tenant desirous of constructing any boat dock,
boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or any other building, structure or
improvement on or within Lake Taylorville or to make any alteration to the
shoreline of Lake Taylorville shall submit a written application for a building
or alteration permit. Such application shall be signed by all owners and
tenants of such privately-owned real property or by the tenant of such City
lake lot or campsite, shall be accompanied with detailed plans, drawings and
specifications for such requested construction or alteration, and shall be
first submitted to the City Clerk. No such building or alteration permit shall
be issued until same is approved by the Lake Committee and the City Council by
at least a majority affirmative vote in both instances. In addition to the
regulations and restrictions as set forth in the following subparagraphs
numbered 1 through 7, the Lake Committee and City Council may impose such other
regulations and restrictions as it may deem necessary and proper under the
circumstances as a condition to issuance of such building or alteration permit.
      1.   Such boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or other
building, structure or improvement or alteration can only be built or
constructed on or from privately-owned real property or from such City lake lot
or campsite and shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in length into Lake
Taylorville, as measured from the shoreline at Lake Taylorville's normal pool
level; provided, however, on a case by case basis, said twenty-five feet (25')
length may be extended to a maximum length limit of forty feet (40'), as
measured from the shoreline at Lake Taylorville's normal pool level, as may be
approved and upon such terms and conditions as may be determined from time to
time by the majority affirmative vote of the City's corporate authorities,
after consideration of the risk of injury to and the safety of persons using
Lake Taylorville and of the risk of any property damage to other improvements
located within or adjoining or adjacent to Lake Taylorville.
      In any event, a boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or other
building, structure or improvement or alteration that is approved for any such
extension in excess of said twenty-five feet (25') length must have installed
and mounted thereon, every five feet (5') of the entire length, adequate
perimeter solar lamps that each shall emit and exhibit, during a period from
sunset to sunrise, a white light visible and clearly discernible from a
distance of a least five hundred feet (500') to all persons in any and all
boats, wave runners, jet skis, vessels, or watercrafts of any kind, nature or
extent whatsoever or to water skiers on Lake Taylorville during the time period
Lake Taylorville is open to the general public.
      2.   Such boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or other
building, structure or improvement shall not contain or be used for living
quarters or residential purposes.
      3.   Any such alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville shall not
include any canal, trench, ditch or waterway of any kind, nature or extent
whatsoever which leads to or gives upon or across any privately-owned real
property or goes upon or across any leased City lake lot or campsite, all of
which are hereby expressly prohibited.
      Any retaining wall installed and/or constructed must be a minimum of
twenty-four inches (24") above normal pool level. Any retaining wall installed
and/or constructed must be made of 7-gauge steel, minimum.
      4.   Any such alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville which
involve the hauling or transporting of dirt shall be hauled or transported by
such owner or tenant and no City trucks or vehicles shall be used for such
purposes.
      5.   As a condition for issuance of such building or alteration permit,
each owner and tenant of such privately-owned property or tenant of such City
lake lot or campsite shall agree to and shall hold the City harmless and
indemnified from and against any and all damages, loss, costs or expenses of
any kind, nature or extent whatsoever incurred by the City including City's
reasonable attorney fees relating to any and all property damage, personal
injury or death sustained by any and all owner(s) and/or tenant(s) and/or by
any person, firm, entity or corporation, caused in whole or in part, directly
or indirectly, from any matter or thing relating to the construction, use,
operation and maintenance of such boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski
lift, or other building, structure or improvement on or within Lake Taylorville
or such alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville. Such hold harmless and
indemnity obligation shall survive and remain in effect notwithstanding the
revocation of such building or alteration permit.
      At their sole expense, each such owner and tenant shall obtain and
maintain an insurance policy, and deliver to the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance, in the amount as required by Section
8-1D-2 of the Taylorville City Code, which policy shall name the City, and its
elected and/or appointed Mayor, City Council, officials, officers, employees,
and agents as additional named insureds. Article D of Title 8 of the
Taylorville City Code also applies to each such building or alteration permit.
   D.   All such building or alteration permits, if issued, shall be signed by
the Mayor. It shall be unlawful for any such owner or tenant to fail to
construct such boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or other
building, structure or improvement on or within Lake Taylorville or to make any
such alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville contrary to the terms and
provisions of such building or alteration permit; and in addition to any fine
or fines which may be imposed under Section
1-4-1 of the Taylorville City Code for any violation of this Section
7-4-6, such owner and tenant shall, upon notice from the Mayor immediately
reconstruct or convert to conform to such building or alteration permit or
remove such boat dock, boathouse, swimming dock, ski lift, or other building,
structure or improvement from Lake Taylorville and/or restore such alteration
to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville, all at the expense of such owner and
tenant.
   E.   In addition to the City's right to revoke building or alteration
permits pursuant to subsection
7-1-3D of this Title, building or alteration permits are further subject to
revocation at the sole discretion of the City Council at any time. Furthermore,
upon any termination of a City lake lot or campsite lease, the City shall
revoke each such permit related to said terminated lease. Upon revocation of
each said permit, and unless otherwise agreed by an affirmative majority vote
of the City Council, such owner and tenant shall, within ten (10) calendar days
following revocation of said permit, remove any and all boat docks, boathouses,
swimming docks, ski lifts, buildings, structures or other improvements from
Lake Taylorville and Lake Taylorville shoreline and City property and adjoining
property, and restore the City property to the same condition as existed prior
to the installation of any alteration, structure, or improvement all to the
satisfaction of the City Council. (Ord. 2691, 4-17-1995; amd. Ord. 3255, 11-7-
2005; Ord. 3944, 2-18-2020; Ord. 3952, 4-6-2020)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMALS 1
SECTION:
7-5-1: Running At Large Prohibited; Impoundment And Disposal
7-5-2: Lake Areas Where Animals Permitted
7-5-3: Animals To Be Hitched Or Attended
7-5-4: Washing Or Wading In Lake Waters Prohibited
7-5-5: Dogs On Beaches
7-5-6: Hunting And Trapping
7-5-7: Illinois Department Of Natural Resources (IDNR) Sanctioned, Scheduled
Events
7-5-8: Turkey Hunting Restrictions
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 3 of this code.
7-5-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED; IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL:
No person shall cause or permit any domestic livestock or poultry to run at
large in the Lake Taylorville area. Any livestock or poultry or any domestic
animals found at large may be taken by the city and sold to pay the cost and
expense of taking, keeping, advertising and selling such livestock or poultry
and all damage caused to the city or its property by such livestock or poultry.
Any such livestock or poultry found at large and which are not easily
apprehended by city employees or agents may be, at the discretion of the city,
removable even by destruction of the same. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
7-5-2: LAKE AREAS WHERE ANIMALS PERMITTED:
No person shall bring, drive, lead, pen or otherwise permit any domestic
animals, livestock or poultry, except pets, in the Lake Taylorville area except
in lawful use of the public highways therein and except horses when used
thereon for riding and driving. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
7-5-3: ANIMALS TO BE HITCHED OR ATTENDED:
No person shall cause or permit any horse or other domesticated animal to stand
in any street, road or parkway unless securely hitched or in charge of some
competent person in attendance. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
7-5-4: WASHING OR WADING IN LAKE WATERS PROHIBITED 2 :
No domesticated animal, livestock or poultry shall be allowed to stand, wallow,
wade or swim or be washed or watered in the lake or in any tributary, stream or
ditch wherein surface, storm, rain or land waters flow into the lake directly
or indirectly. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
2 2. See also section
  7-3-5 of this title.
7-5-5: DOGS ON BEACHES:
No dogs shall be allowed on the beach area at any time. Any dogs found in the
beach area shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be picked up by the city animal
control officer and impounded according to this code 1 . (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-3A-4 of this code.
7-5-6: HUNTING AND TRAPPING 2 :
   A.   Hunting And Trapping Restrictions Generally:
      1.   There shall be no hunting of any kind within the limits of the lake
or the marginal lands, except for duck and goose hunting, as allowed by the
city council. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
      2.   No person shall fire or discharge any firearm of any description
within the limits of the lake or the marginal lands, except duck and goose
hunters, participants in IDNR (Illinois department of natural resources)
sanctioned, scheduled events, police officers, or the lake officers in the
performance of their duties. (Ord. 3437, 8-3-2009)
      3.   The city may authorize or license any person to use firearms, traps
or other means to destroy any predatory or otherwise undesirable animal, bird
or aquatic life.
   B.   Duck And Goose Hunting:
      1.   Annual Review: Duck and goose hunting shall be allowed at Lake
Taylorville only upon the decision of the city council on a year to year basis.
      2.   Permitted Areas: Subject to the existing state and federal laws,
duck and goose hunting is hereby permitted by the city on Lake Taylorville in
the areas described as follows:
Lake Taylorville lying within Section 23, Township 12 North, Range 2 West of
the 3rd Principal Meridian in Christian County, Illinois, commonly known as the
Lake area lying west of the Dappert Bridge and levees approaching thereto.
Beginning at the intersection of west shoreline of Lake Taylorville with the
south line of Section 14, Township 12 North, Range 2 West, 3rd Principal
Meridian, thence meandering northerly, thence easterly, thence northerly along
said shoreline to the east sixteenth section corner of the northwest quarter of
Section 13 of the aforementioned Township 12 North, Range 2 West, 3rd Principal
Meridian.
Beginning at the intersection of the shoreline of Lake Taylorville with the
west line of Section 18, Township 12 North, Range 1 West, 3rd Principal
Meridian, (a point approximately 400 feet north of the southwest corner of said
Section 18) then meander along the shoreline of Lake Taylorville easterly,
westerly, northerly, thence southeasterly, thence northwesterly, thence
northeasterly, thence southwesterly to a point on said shoreline situated 1700
feet east and 1950 feet north from the southwest corner of Section 7, Township
12 North, Range 1 West, 3rd Principal Meridian.
(Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
      3.   Hunting From Duck Blinds:
         a.   Location Of Blinds: There shall be thirteen (13) designated and
marked places for duck blinds. The lake superintendent 2  shall determine the
location of all of the thirteen (13) blinds and have such locations properly
marked.
There shall be no duck blinds located within two hundred (200) yards of any
public road, any residence, Boy Scout area, Girl Scout area or the Boyd Dappert
Youth Reservation.
No duck blinds shall be on the lakeshore but must be on the lake waters during
hunting. (Ord. 3687, 10-6-2014)
         b.   Construction Of Duck Blinds:
            (1)   All duck blinds shall be portable on the water, and there
shall be no nonportable duck blinds.
            (2)   Each blind must have at least twelve (12) decoys.
            (3)   No trees or shrubbery may be cut down around the lake area to
build duck blinds.
         c.   Hunting Ducks And Geese:
            (1)   There shall be no duck or goose hunting except from the
blinds at the locations provided herein. All duck and goose shooting must take
place in a duck blind designated in this section (unless after a cripple), and
there shall be no shooting on the lakeshore.
            (2)   No more than three (3) persons are allowed to occupy any one
duck blind at any one time during the course of the duck and goose season.
            (3)   Shooting time at said duck blinds shall be from sunrise to
sunset.
            (4)   All boats used for duck hunting shall be licensed by the
city.
            (5)   All persons duck and goose hunting must obey all state and
federal laws while hunting.
         d.   Duck Blind Permits: All duck blind permits will be issued at a
drawing to be conducted by the city. The time and place of said drawing shall
be made public, and all persons must be at least sixteen (16) years of age in
order to draw for a duck blind.
There shall be no charge for a permit to hunt ducks or geese on Lake
Taylorville.
   C.   Trapping, Wounding Animals; Damage To Eggs Or Nests: No person shall
trap, catch, kill or wound or attempt to trap, catch, kill or wound any bird or
animal, take any bird egg or molest any nest of any bird or animal or cruelly
treat any bird or animal in or on any portion of the lake or marginal lands
thereto, excepting only when so authorized in writing for a particular purpose
by the city. (Ord. 1918, 7-16-1979)
   D.   Archery Whitetail Deer Hunting:
      1.   Annual Review: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, and if
Whitetails Unlimited and/or Christian County Bow Hunters Associations pay for
the costs to survey and to prepare a survey plat of the permitted area
hereinafter mentioned and to record such survey plat with the recorder's office
for Christian County, Illinois, and further pay for the local newspaper
publication costs each time to publish the notice of the "annual onetime
drawing for permits" hereinafter mentioned, then archery (bow and arrow)
whitetail deer hunting shall be allowed within the permitted area described in
subsection D2 of this section at Lake Taylorville, but only upon the decision
of the city council on a year (deer hunting season) to year (deer hunting
season) basis and if so approved only upon the additional terms and conditions
as set forth in this subsection D.
      2.   Permitted Area: Subject to the existing state of Illinois and
federal laws, approval of the city council as referred to in subsection D1 of
this section, and the rules and regulations set forth in this subsection D,
archery (bow and arrow) whitetail deer hunting is hereby permitted by the city
at Lake Taylorville during the deer hunting season, as permitted and designated
by the state of Illinois, within the area legally described below: (Ord. 3152,
11-3-2003)
   Parcel A
Part of the North Half of the Northwest Quarter and the Northwest Quarter of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 20, Township 12 North, Range 1 West of the
Third Principal Meridian, Christian County, Illinois, more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the Southeast Quarter of said North half, South 89 degrees 46'49"
West, 1996.47 feet; thence North 00 degrees 7'25" West, 1301.04 feet to the
South right of way line of County Highway #8; thence North 89 degrees 34'41"
East, on said right of way line, 1999.11 feet; thence continuing on said right
of way line, South 89 degrees 58'58" East, 1332.74 feet; thence South 00
degrees 2'21" East, 1302.58 feet; thence South 89 degrees 46'49" West, 1333.43
feet to the point of beginning, containing 99.78 acres, more or less.
   Parcel B
The East 42 acres of the Northwest Quarter of Section 36, and all that part of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 36 lying North of the North right of way line
of West Lakeshore Drive, West of the West right of way line of the Lincoln
Trail bike path (former B&O Railroad right of way), all in Township 13 North,
Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian, Christian County, Illinois.
No hunting on parcel B shall be allowed within seventy five (75) yards from any
house and/or public road and/or bike trail that is included in the above parcel
B legal description. (Ord. 3437, 8-3-2009)
      3.   Rules And Regulations:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in archery (bow and
arrow) whitetail deer hunting on city property without a permit having been
first issued by the city to such person or for any person who is not deemed a
person authorized hereunder to accompany a person issued a permit hereunder
during such deer hunting season. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any of the rules or regulations set forth in this subsection D3.
         b.   Such permits shall be issued by the lake superintendent and shall
be limited to persons who are eighteen (18) years of age or older and who are
bona fide residents residing within the corporate limits of the county of
Christian, Illinois, and who are in possession of a valid and current Illinois
resident hunting license, archery deer tag, and habitat stamp at the time of
the "annual onetime drawing for permits".
         c.   Such permits shall not be issued to any person until and unless
such person signs a hold harmless and indemnity and release agreement in favor
of the city on a form as may be approved by the lake superintendent from time
to time. (Ord. 3152, 11-3-2003)
         d.   A maximum of thirty (30) such permits shall be issued for parcel
A as set forth in subsection D2 of this section. Such permits shall be
available at a rate of one permit for every designated ten (10) acres within
the aforesaid permitted area for archery (bow and arrow) whitetail deer hunting
during any deer hunting season for the following designated time periods: ten
(10) permits shall be available for issuance for the time period from October 1
to October 31; ten (10) permits shall be available for issuance for the time
period from November 1 to November 30; and ten (10) permits shall be available
for issuance for the time period from December 1 to December 31, and for such
extended continuous period of time after December 31 as is then designated by
the state of Illinois for that current archery (bow and arrow) whitetail deer
hunting season applicable to said parcels A and B. A maximum of forty five (45)
such permits shall be issued for parcel B as described in subsection D2 of this
section. Such permits shall be available at the rate of one permit for every
designated ten (10) acres within the aforesaid permitted area for archery
whitetail deer hunting during any deer hunting season for the following
designated time periods: fifteen (15) permits shall be available for issuance
for the time period from October 1 to October 31; fifteen (15) permits shall be
available for issuance for the time period from November 1 to November 30;
fifteen (15) permits shall be available for issuance for the time period from
December 1 to December 31, and for such extended continuous period of time
after December 31 as is then designated by the state of Illinois for that
current archery (bow and arrow) whitetail deer hunting season applicable to
said parcels A and B. Such permits will be available at an "annual onetime
drawing for permits", on a date to be announced in the local newspaper by the
lake superintendent. The lake superintendent shall conduct and prescribe the
terms and conditions and the manner in which such "annual onetime drawing for
permits" shall be conducted and issued, and his decision shall be final and
conclusive. The fact that a person is issued a permit for a particular deer
hunting season shall not guarantee or entitle such person to obtain a permit
for any successive deer hunting season. (Ord. 3732, 10-5-2015)
         e.   Each person who has been issued a permit shall have such permit
on his or her person or shall display such permit in the windshield of his or
her motor vehicle parked within the hereinafter mentioned designated parking
area while hunting.
         f.   Any issued permit shall be nontransferable and shall only allow
the archery (bow and arrow) hunting of whitetail deer within the aforesaid
designated ten (10) acres within the permitted area as designated in subsection
D2 of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in or to
engage in the activity of deer hunting outside the aforesaid designated ten
(10) acres within the permitted area.
         g.   A permit shall allow the person issued such permit and one other
person who is of the age of seventeen (17) years of age or younger or one other
person assisting a disabled person issued such permit to participate in archery
whitetail deer hunting within the aforesaid designated ten (10) acres within
such permitted area with the person issued such permit.
         h.   The person issued such permit shall remove all tree stands,
ground blinds, and any equipment used during the hunt each day.
         i.   It shall be unlawful to cut or injure any tree within the
aforesaid permitted area provided, however, minor trimming of trees are
permitted to provide for shooting lanes. For purposes hereof, "minor trimming"
shall mean only the trimming of tree limbs that are less than four inches (4")
in diameter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be unlawful to use any
device that pierces the bark of any tree (e.g., screw in steps, nails, bolts,
and bow holders). Subject to the prohibition of tree bark piercing, climbing
stands, ladders, strap on steps, and natural ground blinds are permitted.
         j.   Each person issued a permit shall park his or her motor vehicle,
during the hunt, in a parking area as designated by the lake superintendent
from time to time. Parking a motor vehicle on private property to access the
aforesaid permitted area is unlawful.
         k.   It shall be unlawful to drive or operate or park any motor
vehicle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), snowmobile, or any off the road vehicle of
any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever within the aforesaid permitted area.
         l.   It shall be unlawful to engage in or participate in the driving
or organized effort to push or harass deer in the direction of another hunter
or hunters.
         m.   While engaged in hunting on city property, it shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any state of Illinois or federal law regarding
hunting.
         n.   Each person issued a permit shall sign and complete a hunter's
survey at season's end or when surrendering such permit. The lake
superintendent shall designate the form of such survey from time to time.
         o.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except certified law
enforcement personnel, to be in possession of or to use or to discharge any
firearm on city property.
         p.   Any permit issued hereunder shall be a privilege only and is
revocable at the will of the city council or by the lake superintendent with or
without cause or reason whatsoever, and the issuance of any permit shall not
convey any right or ownership of property to the person issued such permit or
to any person as designated above who may accompany the person issued such
permit while hunting.
   E.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person that the lake superintendent determines has violated any
of the rules and regulations set forth in subsection D3 of this section or any
state of Illinois or federal law regarding hunting, or any other city code
provisions, rules, or regulations regarding the use of city property shall not
be entitled to the issuance of any permit hereunder and shall forfeit hunting
privileges of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever on city property for a
period of at least sixty (60) consecutive months thereafter.
      2.   Any person who violates any of the terms or provisions of this
section or any other provisions, rules, or regulations of this code regarding
the use of city property shall be subject to a fine and/or penalty, upon
conviction, in accordance with the general penalty provisions set forth in
sections
1-4-1 through
1-4-4 of this code. (Ord. 3152, 11-3-2003)
 
Notes
  2. See also subsection
2 5-3-4D and section
  5-5-2 of this code.
2 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article H of this code.
7-5-7: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES (IDNR) SANCTIONED, SCHEDULED
EVENTS:
   A.   Annual Review: IDNR sanctioned, scheduled events shall be allowed at
Lake Taylorville only upon the decision of the city council on a year to year
basis.
   B.   Permitted Area: Shotgun hunting for deer and turkey for IDNR
sanctioned, scheduled events is hereby permitted by the city on the following
described parcel:
The East 42 acres of the Northwest Quarter of Section 36, and all that part of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 36 lying North of the North right of way line
of West Lakeshore Drive, West of the West right of way line of the Lincoln
Trail bike path (former B&O Railroad right of way), all in Township 13 North,
Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian, Christian County, Illinois.
No hunting is allowed within two hundred (200) yards from any house and/or
public road and/or bike trail that is included in the legal description of the
parcel above.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person that the lake superintendent determines has violated any
of the rules and regulations set forth in this section or any state of Illinois
or federal law regarding hunting, or any other provisions, rules, or
regulations of this code regarding the use of city property shall not be
entitled to the issuance of any permit hereunder and shall forfeit hunting
privileges of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever on city property for a
period of at least sixty (60) consecutive months thereafter.
      2.   Any person who violates any of the terms or provisions of this
section or any other provisions, rules, or regulations of this code regarding
the use of city property shall be subject to a fine and/or penalty, upon a
conviction, in accordance with the general penalty provisions set forth in
sections
1-4-1 through
1-4-4 of this code. (Ord. 3437, 8-3-2009)
7-5-8: TURKEY HUNTING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Turkey Hunting: The city of Taylorville will allow turkey hunting (bow
only) at the north end of Lake Taylorville for the spring turkey hunting
season. Anyone who participates in the spring turkey hunting season (bow only)
shall first obtain a permit issued by the city of Taylorville by the lake
superintendent. The spring turkey hunting season will be revisited each year.
   B.   Permitted Area: Turkey hunting (bow only) shall only be conducted on
the north end of Lake Taylorville. The real estate is described as follows:
The East 42 acres of the Northwest Quarter of Section 36, and all that part of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 36 lying North of the North right of way line
of West Lakeshore Drive, West of the West right of way line of the Lincoln
Trail bike path (former B&O Railroad right of way), all in Township 13 North,
Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian, Christian County, Illinois.
No hunting on the aforementioned property shall be allowed within seventy five
(75) yards from any house and/or public road and/or bike trail that is included
in the above parcel legal description.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person that the lake superintendent determines has violated any
of the rules and regulations set forth in this section or any state of Illinois
or federal law regarding hunting, or any other provisions, rules, or
regulations of this code regarding the use of city property shall not be
entitled to the issuance of any permit hereunder and shall forfeit hunting
privileges of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever on city property for a
period of at least sixty (60) consecutive months thereafter.
      2.   Any person who violates any of the terms or provisions of this
section or any other provisions, rules, or regulations of this code regarding
the use of city property shall be subject to a fine and/or penalty, upon a
conviction, in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in
sections
1-4-1 through
1-4-4 of this code. (Ord. 3609, 3-4-2013)
CHAPTER 6
DIRT BIKES, ETC.
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Prohibition Of Use Of Dirt Bikes
7-6-3: Violation/Penalties
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms used in this
chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   CITY LAKE PROPERTY: Such property and environs which are owned by the city
at or near Lake Taylorville, in Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   DIRT BIKE: A dirt bike, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, three- wheeler or any
other motorized vehicle used for the primary purpose of recreational or
competitive terrain and off road riding, driving or operation or in practice or
preparation thereof. (Ord. 3109, 1-21-2003)
7-6-2: PROHIBITION OF USE OF DIRT BIKES:
No person shall ride, drive, or operate any dirt bike off any roadway located
within, adjacent to, at, or near city lake property. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and utility terrain vehicles (UTVs)
shall be allowed on the following described property:
The East 42 acres of the Northwest Quarter of Section 36, and all that part of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 36 lying North of the North right of way line
of West Lakeshore Drive, West of the West right of way line of the Lincoln
Trail bike path (former B&O Railroad right of way), all in Township 13 North,
Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian, Taylorville, Christian County,
Illinois.
Operation of ATVs and UTVs on the aforementioned described real estate shall
only be allowed for preparing for IDNR sanctioned, scheduled events as set
forth in section
 7-5-7 of this title, during said IDNR sanctioned, scheduled events, and
cleanup after said IDNR scheduled events. (Ord. 3438, 8-3-2009)
7-6-3: VIOLATION/PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine, upon conviction, in an amount not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) but no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation exists or continues. (Ord. 3109, 1-21-2003)
CHAPTER 7
GOLF CARTS - LAKE TAYLORVILLE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Prohibition Of Use Of Golf Carts
7-7-3: Golf Cart Permit
7-7-4: Driving Under The Influence
7-7-5: Mandatory Insurance
7-7-6: Permitted Streets And Roads
7-7-7: Prohibited Nonhighway Vehicles
7-7-8: Posted Signs
7-7-9: Violation; Penalties
7-7-10: A Valid Driver's License
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and terms used in this
Chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
   CITY: The City of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   CITY LAKE PROPERTY: Such property and environs which are owned by the City
at or near Lake Taylorville, Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course 1 .
(Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-123.9.
7-7-2: PROHIBITION OF USE OF GOLF CARTS:
No person shall ride, drive, or operate any golf cart on any roadway located
within, adjacent to, at, or near City lake property except as specifically set
forth herein. (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-3: GOLF CART PERMIT:
No golf cart shall be operated on City lake property unless it is inspected and
issued a permit from the City of Taylorville. The Lake Superintendent, and/or
his designee, shall be in charge of the inspection. The golf cart being
inspected must meet the specifications as set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1426.1(e). The permit (sticker form) must be displayed openly on
the golf cart. Anyone obtaining a golf cart permit shall pay a fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-4: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a golf cart on a
roadway as otherwise set forth herein while under the influence is subject to
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501 through 5/11-502 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-5: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
Any person who operates a golf cart as otherwise set forth herein shall be
subject to the mandatory insurance requirements under Article VI of Chapter 7
of the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 . (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/7-601 et seq.
7-7-6: PERMITTED STREETS AND ROADS:
Golf carts shall only be allowed to be operated on the following streets and
roads:
   A.   All of Westwood Drive from the intersection of West Lakeshore Drive and
Westwood Drive south to West Sunset Drive and east on West Sunset Drive (a
paved road).
   B.   All of West Lakeshore Drive between the intersection of West Lakeshore
Drive and Westwood Drive and BonVue Drive (a paved road).
   C.   All of Sweeney Drive south of the intersection of West Lakeshore Drive
and Sweeney Drive (a paved road).
   D.   All of Marfel Drive south and east of the intersection of West
Lakeshore Drive and Marfel Drive (a paved road).
   E.   All of Captain's Lane (a paved road).
   F.   Golf carts shall also be allowed on all City of Taylorville lake lot
gravel roads. (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-7: PROHIBITED NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES:
This Chapter shall not be deemed to authorize any other nonhighway vehicles as
defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1 to be operated on City
lake property (all-terrain vehicle, neighborhood vehicle, off highway
motorcycle, utility vehicles [UTV]). (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-8: POSTED SIGNS:
The Lake Superintendent shall cause appropriate signs to be posted on those
streets and roads where golf carts are authorized to be operated. (Ord. 3485,
9-7-2010)
7-7-9: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any terms or provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine, upon conviction, as follows:
 
Per season April 1 through October 31:
First offense  $75.00
Second offense Revocation of permit and removal from lake property
 
If any person violates the provisions of this Chapter requiring a permit and
operates a golf cart without said permit, said golf cart shall be removed from
City lake property. (Ord. 3485, 9-7-2010)
7-7-10: A VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A person may not operate a golf cart as otherwise set forth herein and upon the
street and roads as set forth in Section
7-7-6 of this Chapter unless he or she has a valid Illinois driver's license
issued in his or her name by the Illinois Secretary of State, or a valid out of
state driver's license issued in his or her name by the appropriate department/
agency of that state responsible for issuing driver's licenses. (Ord. 3485, 9-
7-2010)
CHAPTER 8
KIWANIS PARK AND PRIMITIVE PARK
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Closure Of Kiwanis Park And Primitive Park
7-8-3: Violation; Penalties
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms used in this
chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   CITY LAKE PROPERTY: Such property and environs which are owned by the city
at or near Lake Taylorville, Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   KIWANIS PARK: Park located on Eastwood Drive at Lake Taylorville.
   PRIMITIVE PARK: The area between the Lake Taylorville Dam and Kiwanis Park.
(Ord. 3536, 10-3-2011)
7-8-2: CLOSURE OF KIWANIS PARK AND PRIMITIVE PARK:
Kiwanis Park and Primitive Park shall be closed during the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. seven (7) days a week. No
person shall be present at Kiwanis Park or Primitive Park during these hours.
(Ord. 3536, 10-3-2011)
7-8-3: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine pursuant to the general penalty located at section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3536, 10-3-2011)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Supervision
8-1-2: Construction Requirements
8-1-3: Repairs And Defects
8-1-4: Street Openings
8-1-5: Barricades
8-1-6: Use Of Public Ways
8-1-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-1-8: Deposits On Streets And Sidewalks
8-1-9: Building Operations
8-1-10: Penalty
8-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the city shall
be under the supervision of the superintendent of streets and sewers 1 . (1979
Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 1)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article E of this code.
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Ways Generally:
      1.   Permit Requirements: It shall be unlawful to break, construct or lay
any pavement on any public street, alley or other public way or to repair the
same without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the location of the
intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof and the person who is to do the
actual construction work. No such permits shall be issued except by permission
of the superintendent of streets and sewers. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 2)
      2.   Bond Or Insurance: (Rep. by Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
      3.   Specifications: All streets and sidewalk pavements shall be made in
conformity with specifications laid down or approved, from time to time, by the
council. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 4)
   B.   Sidewalks:
      1.   Required: From and after January 18, 2000, sidewalks shall be
required, subject to the terms set forth herein, on each property with a zoning
district classification of C-1 district (commercial C-1) or C-2 district
(commercial C-2) or R-2 district (residential R-2). The property owner(s) of
such property shall construct such sidewalks and shall pay all costs for
engineering services, concrete and other materials, and labor for the
construction of such sidewalks; and such sidewalks shall be constructed
according to such plans and specifications as may be determined by the city
council from time to time; and such sidewalks shall be constructed at the same
time as any new building, structure or improvement is constructed on such
property on and after January 18, 2000. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
may furnish the engineering services and/or concrete and/or other materials
and/or labor to construct such sidewalks or have others to do so, in whole or
in part, and in such event, the city shall charge the cost thereof to such
property owner(s) who shall be liable to pay same within thirty (30) days of
mailing of a bill therefor to such property owner(s) or their representative at
the address of such property. The foregoing requirements shall also be deemed
as additional requirements under title 11 of this code. (Ord. 2935, 1-18-2000)
      2.   "City Of Taylorville Special Service Area One": The city has
previously established by ordinance 2133, which ordinance is incorporated
herein by reference thereto, a special service area known and designated as
"city of Taylorville special service area number one" consisting of the
following described territory:
Lots 1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 13; Lots 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
in Block 14; Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 15; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 18; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and
12 in Block 20; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 12 in Block 21; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 and 12 in Block 22; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in Block 23, all situated
in the Original Town, now City of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
The city has heretofore repaired and restored sidewalks within the "city of
Taylorville special service area number one" and, in particular, has had brick
sidewalks installed therein; and any future removal, repair, and installation
of said brick sidewalks requires special skills to avoid damage to the brick
and sidewalks and to preserve the uniformity of appearance and safety of the
surface of said brick sidewalks.
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person (other than the city) to
remove, repair, or reinstall or to cause the removal, repair, or reinstallation
of any portion of the brick sidewalks within the "city of Taylorville special
service area number one". If the owner(s) of property adjacent to any brick
sidewalk within the "city of Taylorville special service area number one"
desires that any portion of such brick sidewalk adjoining their property be
removed, repaired, or reinstalled, then such owner(s) shall request a written
permit from the superintendent of streets and sewers for such work, which
permit can be denied by the superintendent of streets and sewers, in his sole
discretion. Application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the
superintendent of streets and sewers. The fee for such permit to remove,
repair, or reinstall any such brick sidewalk shall be paid in advance and shall
amount to ten dollars ($10.00) plus forty dollars ($40.00) for each square
yard, or fraction thereof, of brick sidewalk to be removed, repaired, or
reinstalled. All brick sidewalk removal, repair, or reinstallation within the
"city of Taylorville special service area number one" shall be done by the
city's street and sewer department at such time or times as is deemed
convenient by the superintendent of streets and sewers, or his designee, in his
sole discretion.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used
any equipment or to work, or cause work to be performed, around, on, or over
any portion of the brick sidewalks within the "city of Taylorville special
service area number one" without having first obtained a written permit from
the superintendent of streets and sewers. Application for such permit shall be
on a form furnished by the superintendent of streets and sewers. The fee for
such permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Such permit shall expire sixty (60)
days from the date of issuance of such permit. The owner(s) of property
adjacent to the subject brick sidewalk and the holder of such permit and anyone
else using any equipment or working around, on, or over any portion of the
brick sidewalks within the "city of Taylorville special service area number
one" shall be responsible for and shall protect such bricks and sidewalks from
damage at all times and shall be jointly and severally liable to the city and
shall jointly and severally pay the city for any and all damage(s) to such
bricks and/or sidewalks and for the cost to remove and/or to repair and/or to
replace and/or to reinstall any such bricks and/or sidewalks immediately upon
demand of the city.
      3.   Construction, Repair Or Reconstruction: Subject to and except as
required and provided in subsection B1 of this section, the owner(s) of
property adjacent to the city sidewalks outside the "city of Taylorville
special service area number one" may construct, repair or reconstruct existing
sidewalks upon approval of the superintendent of streets and sewers. Upon
application and such approval, the city will furnish engineering services,
remove existing sidewalks and dispose of the broken concrete or other debris
and labor to lay sidewalks. All costs of concrete and other materials shall be
borne by the property owner(s). Also, the city will furnish the concrete for
such sidewalks should the property owner(s) wish to furnish his own labor to
lay the sidewalks, with the approval and supervision of the superintendent of
streets and sewers. (Ord. 3189, 8-2-2004)
   C.   Curbs And Gutters:
      1.   Upon application and written agreement by one or more property
owners who want curbs and gutters constructed along a street adjacent to their
property, and such property owners are willing to be assessed the costs of
construction and allow the city to determine place and design of the curb, then
the city, upon approval of the mayor and city engineer 1 , shall construct such
curbs and gutters and assess the property owner or owners on a front footage
basis for the cost of construction. The engineering expenses, excavation,
removal of debris and street restoration shall be borne by the city.
      2.   The owners of property adjacent to the city streets may repair or
reconstruct existing curbs and gutters when such curbs and gutters are in bad
repair upon approval of the superintendent of streets and sewers. Upon
application and such approval, the city will furnish engineering services,
remove existing curbing and dispose of the broken concrete or other debris, and
labor to install curbs and gutters.
      3.   All costs of concrete and other materials shall be borne by the
property owner. Also, the city will furnish the concrete for such curbs and
gutters should the property owner wish to furnish his own labor to install the
curbs and gutters with the approval and supervision of the superintendent of
streets and sewers. (Ord. 2560, 8-1-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 9, article G of this code.
8-1-3: REPAIRS AND DEFECTS:
All public streets and alleys and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good
repair. Such repair work, whether done by the city or by the abutting owner
shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of streets and sewers.
(1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 6)
It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street or alley or sidewalk or any obstruction thereof to
report the same to the superintendent of streets and sewers as soon as
possible. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 8)
8-1-4: STREET OPENINGS 1 :
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the council. All such
lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or a
railing, with the approval of the superintendent of streets and sewers. (1979
Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 21)
 
Notes
1 2. See also article A of this chapter.
8-1-5: BARRICADES 3 :
   A.   Barricades Required: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a
street, sidewalk or other public place or making an excavation in any such
place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected by amber
flashing lights at nighttime. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 10)
   B.   Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new
pavement or excavation 2  or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 11)
 
Notes
3 3. See also section
  8-1A-3 of this chapter.
2 1. See also article A of this chapter.
8-1-6: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Private Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street,
sidewalk or other public space as space for the display of goods or merchandise
for sale or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavements
without the consent of the city council. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 12)
   B.   Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to
maintain any poles or wires over any public street, alley or other public way
without having first secured permission from the council. (1979 Code Ch. 10,
Art. I, § 18)
   C.   Gas Pumps: It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump
or tank in any public street, alley or sidewalk. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, §
19)
   D.   Games: It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place where such games cause unnecessary noise or
interfere with traffic or pedestrians. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. I, § 20)
   E.   Scaffolds: Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a way that they
overhang or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the
city shall be firmly constructed and safeguarded and it shall be unlawful to
place or leave any tools or article on any such place in such a manner that the
same can fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from
a height greater than four feet (4'). (1979 Code § 24-4-24)
   F.   Disabled Persons Crosswalk: A marked crosswalk identified for use by
disabled persons shall be located across the 100 block of West Market Street
that provides a pedestrian means of travel between the sidewalk along the south
side of the Christian County Courthouse property and the sidewalk along the
front entrance of 108 West Market Street. The sidewalks entering such crosswalk
shall be reconstructed to permit a sloped access to such crosswalk by
wheelchairs. The driver or operator of any vehicle shall yield the right of way
to any disabled person in a wheelchair traveling across such crosswalk between
such sidewalks. (Ord. 3192, 8-16-2004)
8-1-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Injury To Pavements:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal
upon or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade or to knowingly injure any soft newly
laid pavement. (1979 Code § 10-1-5)
      2.   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley
pavement. (1979 Code § 10-1-14)
   B.   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the superintendent
of streets and sewers when necessary in an emergency or in connection with any
lawful construction, repair or removal work. (1979 Code § 10-1-9)
   C.   Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building
or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1979 Code §
10-1-13)
   D.   Obstructing Drains: It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any
public street or alley. (1979 Code § 10-1-17)
   E.   Obstructing Water Flow: No person shall:
      1.   In any manner obstruct or impede the natural flow of water along,
across, over or through city streets, curbs, gutters, ditches and alleyways.
      2.   Park or otherwise place a motor vehicle in unpaved ditch areas.
      3.   Park or otherwise place a motor vehicle upon or within the boulevard
side of a curbed street except as specifically permitted pursuant to ordinance.
(Ord. 2046, 5-17-1982)
   F.   Articles On Windows: It shall be unlawful to place any movable article
on any window ledge or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other
place at a height above four feet (4') from the ground in such a manner that
the same can be or is in danger of falling onto any such street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place. (1979 Code § 24-4-25)
   G.   Stockpiling Dirt:
      1.   From and after January 1, 2015, it shall be unlawful for any person
to place, deposit, maintain, keep, store or stockpile any and all dirt or piles
or mounds of dirt of any height exceeding one foot (1') and which is not an
integral part of landscaping (herein individually and collectively referred to
as "stockpile of dirt") on any property within the city's corporate boundaries
under any of the following circumstances and prohibited time periods:
         a.   When the stockpile of dirt is located in such a place and manner
on any property as to cause the runoff from the stockpile of dirt onto city
sidewalks, streets, adjoining property, or into city drainage and sewer
systems; or
         b.   When the stockpile of dirt is located on any property with a
residential zoning classification under title 10 of this code for a period of
time longer than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days; unless the stockpile of
dirt is to be solely used for site development or landscaping of the property
where located in which case the period of time shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) consecutive calendar days or after expiration of any applicable
city building permit, whichever time is later; or
         c.   If the stockpile of dirt is located on any property with a
residential zoning classification under title 10 of this code for any period of
time when the stockpile of dirt, in whole or in part, is for the purposes of
sale and/or transport for commercial, industrial, or agricultural uses.
      2.   For purposes hereof, the stockpile of dirt shall include all dirt
initially placed, thereafter added to, or replaced from time to time.
      3.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, there shall be no
"grandfathering" of any stockpile of dirt that existed prior to January 1,
2015. (Ord. 3694, 12-1-2014)
   H.   Driving, Operating, Standing Or Parking Of Motor Vehicles On Certain
Sidewalks Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any motor
vehicle to stand or for any person to drive or operate or park any motor
vehicle on or across any portion of any sidewalk that has a sloped pavement or
sidewalk approach thereto constructed for use by handicapped or disabled
persons. Section
6-3-1 of this code shall be disregarded and shall not apply to this subsection.
Any person or persons found to be in violation of any provision of this
subsection shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 3199, 10-18-2004)
8-1-8: DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Deposits On Streets: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any
material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof or any waste material or
any glass or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or
property. Construction materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to
delivery or use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width
of the roadway at the point to less than eighteen feet (18'); provided further,
that such material, other than material to be used in actual building
construction, shall not be permitted to remain on such street for more than
three (3) hours. Any material shall be guarded by lights if same remains upon
any street after nighttime. (1979 Code § 10-1-15)
   B.   Deposits On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public
sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof or any waste
material or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons,
animals or property. Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on
sidewalks preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width is not
thereby reduced to less than four feet (4'), and provided, that no such article
shall remain on such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour. (1979 Code § 10-1-
16)
8-1-9: BUILDING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Permits Required; Regulations:
      1.   Use Of Streets 1 : The use of streets for the storage of materials
in the process of construction or alteration of a building or structure may be
granted where the same will not unduly interfere with traffic and will not
reduce the usable width of the roadway to less than eighteen feet (18'). No
portion of the street other than that directly abutting on the premises on
which work is being done shall be used excepting with the consent of the owner
or occupant of the premises abutting on such portion. Any person seeking to
make such use of the street shall obtain permission from the mayor and a permit
from the city clerk. (1979 Code § 18-5-1)
      2.   Use Of Sidewalks 2 : No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course
of building construction or alteration without permission from the mayor and a
permit from the city clerk. (1979 Code § 18-5-2)
   B.   Permit Fee: The permit fee for use of streets or sidewalks shall be ten
dollars ($10.00). (1979 Code § 18-5-4; amd. 1993 Code)
   C.   Bond Or Insurance: (Rep. by Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
   D.   Safeguards: It shall be the duty of the person doing any construction,
altering or wrecking work in the city to do the same with the proper care for
the safety of persons and property. Warnings and barricades with amber flashing
lights shall be maintained wherever necessary for the protection of pedestrians
or traffic, and temporary roofs over sidewalks shall be constructed whenever
there is danger from falling articles or materials to pedestrians. (1979 Code §
18-5-6)
   E.   Night Operations: No construction or altering operations shall be
carried on in the nighttime if the same are accompanied by loud noises. (1979
Code § 18-5-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8-1-8A of this chapter.
2 2. See also subsection
   8-1-8B of this chapter.
8-1-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE A. EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Permit Requirements
8-1A-2: Manner Of Excavating
8-1A-3: Barricades And Lights
8-1A-4: Inspections
8-1A-5: Exemptions From Provisions
8-1A-6: Penalty
8-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public
place in the city without having obtained a permit therefor as is herein
required or without complying with the provisions of this article or in
violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit. (1979 Code § 10-4-
1)
   B.   Application For Permit; Issuance: Applications for such permits shall
be made to the city clerk and shall describe the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor and the person
doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person for whom or which
the work is being done and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will
comply with all ordinances relating to the work to be done. (1979 Code § 10-4-
2)
No such permit shall be issued until application is approved by the city
engineer or the superintendent of streets and sewers. (1979 Code § 10-4-3)
   C.   Fees: All persons seeking to make excavations in city streets,
boulevards, or upon other public property shall first be charged a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any excavation. (Ord. 3502, 1-18-2011)
8-1A-2: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any
way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in
excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.
      2.   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits, and no
excavation shall be started where such facilities exist without notice to the
company maintaining them or the proper city department.
      3.   No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub,
or the roots thereof. (1979 Code § 10-4-8)
   B.   Sidewalks: If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users. (1979 Code § 10-4-9)
   C.   Time Limit: Each application for a permit shall state the length of
time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the
restoration of the surface of the ground or until the backfill is made ready
for the pavement to be put on by the city if the city restores such surface
pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation
unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the city council.
(1979 Code § 10-4-10)
   D.   Restoring Surface: The city shall restore the surface thereof to its
original condition. (1979 Code § 10-4-11; amd. 1993 Code)
8-1A-3: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS 1 :
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or alley shall
keep the same adequately guarded by barricades and lights as required in the
current highway standards of Illinois department of transportation, division of
highways. (1979 Code § 10-4-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-1-5 of this chapter.
8-1A-4: INSPECTIONS:
The superintendent of streets and sewers shall, from time to time, inspect all
excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or
other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of
this article. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours before the
work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1979 Code § 10-4-
12)
8-1A-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article relating to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the city engaged in doing work for the city nor to
persons which are operating under a franchise or grant from the city if such
franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels without securing a
permit therefor. (1979 Code § 10-4-13)
8-1A-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-1B-1: Permit Requirements
8-1B-2: Surface Grade
8-1B-3: Construction Materials
8-1B-4: Repair
8-1B-5: Penalty
8-1B-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles across any curb and/or
sidewalk in the city without having first obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be
approved by the superintendent of streets and sewers.
The fee for all such construction permits shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00), and no excavation permit shall be required. (Ord. 3373, 2-19-2008)
8-1B-2: SURFACE GRADE:
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a steep, sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly
as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to
have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk
constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to
pedestrians or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the
sidewalk or be other than level. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. III, § 3)
8-1B-3: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
Any approach from curb and guttering to property line, with or without sidewalk
(s), shall be constructed of concrete or of such other materials as may be
approved by the superintendent of streets and sewers. (Ord. 2888, 12-21-1998)
8-1B-4: REPAIR:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstruction and
openings. (1979 Code Ch. 10, Art. III, § 5)
8-1B-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE C. ENCROACHMENT ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-1C-1: Definitions
8-1C-2: Project Right-Of-Way Lines Established
8-1C-3: Violation; Fine
8-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: The area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits within which the City, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right-of-way lines, will permit the State to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
   ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign (excluding certain signs located
over sidewalks), or any other structure or object of any kind (with the
exception of utilities and public road signs), which is placed, located or
maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project right of way or the
roadway right of way where no project right-of-way line has been established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee or sign advertising
activity on the property, or similar overhanging structure supported from a
building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there
is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free
and safe flow of pedestrian traffic or traffic on the highway. The permissive
retention of overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to
those signs supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way
line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas within the project right-of- way lines
established jointly by the City and State which will be free of encroachments
except as hereinafter defined.
   ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect. (Ord. 2898, 1-19-1999)
8-1C-2: PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or
cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any "encroachment"
(hereinabove defined), except as provided in subsection C of this Section,
within the limits of the project right of way or roadway right of way where no
project right-of-way lines have been established.
   B.   Project right-of-way lines have been established at no locations.
   C.   No revocable permits have been issued by the City for the temporary
retention of permissible encroachments (hereinabove defined). (Ord. 2898, 1-19-
1999)
8-1C-3: VIOLATION; FINE:
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Article shall be fined not less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord.
2898, 1-19-1999)
ARTICLE D. PERMIT AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS AND LIABILITY
SECTION:
8-1D-1: Definitions
8-1D-2: Insurance And Permit Required
8-1D-3: Liability
8-1D-4: Damage To City Property
8-1D-5: Penalty
8-1D-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY PROPERTY: As used herein shall mean and include any and all City
streets, alleyways, roadways, easements, rights of way, public ways,
boulevards, sidewalks, walkways, pavements, curbs and gutters; and the term
"City property" shall also mean and include any and all meters, lift stations,
water and/or sanitary and/or storm pipes, mains, lines, and any and all
equipment, apparatus, fire hydrants, or other property associated with such
City property on, above, or under any such City property; and the term "City
property" shall also include Lake Taylorville and the shoreline of Lake
Taylorville.
   PERSON: As used herein shall mean and include any and all natural person or
persons, corporation(s), firm(s), partnership(s), association(s), organization
(s), joint venture(s), or any other group(s) acting or doing business as a
unit, and the employees and/or agents and/or subcontractors of any of the
foregoing, jointly and severally. The term "person" shall not include the City
of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation, or its officers, officials,
or employees while acting in the course of their office or employment.
   WORK ON CITY PROPERTY: As used herein shall mean and include the performance
of any and all work on City property relating, directly or indirectly, to the
construction, alteration, improvement, maintenance, reconstruction, relocation,
servicing, maintenance, repair, tunneling under, boring under, or excavation of
City property for the City or incident to any work performed or to be performed
for any person or for the construction of any boat dock, boathouse, swimming
dock, ski lift, or any other building, structure or improvement on or within
Lake Taylorville or any alteration to the shoreline of Lake Taylorville. (Ord.
3131, 7-21-2003; amd. Ord. 3944, 2-18-2020)
8-1D-2: INSURANCE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person who performs or desires to perform any work on city property
shall maintain, at all times during such work, and at such person's sole
expense, workers' compensation insurance coverage in the maximum statutory
amount under Illinois laws, general liability insurance coverage in an amount
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per aggregate, and motor vehicle liability insurance
coverage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
accident, including death and property damages, and including, but not limited
to, property damages to city property or property of others. An umbrella policy
can be used to obtain these limits. Such general liability insurance coverage
and such motor vehicle insurance coverage shall each be an "occurrence" type
policy and not a "claims made" type policy and shall each name as an additional
named insured the "city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation, and
its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officials, officers,
employees, and agents". (Ord. 3293, 5-15-2006)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work on city
property without such person having first secured the aforesaid required
minimum insurance coverage and delivered to the city clerk a certificate of
insurance evidencing the aforesaid minimum required insurance coverages and
said additional named insureds and also containing the following statement:
The insurance covered by this certificate shall not be canceled or altered,
except after at least ten (10) days written notice has been received by the
City Clerk.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work on city
property without such person having first secured a permit from the city clerk
to perform work on city property. Such permit shall not be issued until such
person delivers to the city clerk a signed application for such permit
accompanied by the aforesaid required certificate of insurance. Such
application shall be in the form as the city clerk may designate from time to
time. (Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
8-1D-3: LIABILITY:
   A.   Each person who performs any work on city property shall hold harmless,
indemnify, protect, and defend the city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal
corporation, and its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officials,
officers, employees, and agents from and against any and all loss, damages,
costs and expenses (including, but not limited to, the city's attorney fees and
costs), liability, claims, demands, suits and/or causes of action of any kind,
nature or extent whatsoever on account of any and all personal injuries or
death or property damages of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever occurring,
arising, incident to, resulting from, or related directly or indirectly or
consequentially, from such person's work on city property. (Ord. 3131, 7-21-
2003)
8-1D-4: DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   Regardless if performing work on city property or not, any person who
damages any city property, in whole or in part, shall be liable to the city for
any and all damages of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever to city property.
Such person shall pay the city the full amount of such damages, as determined
by the city, within ten (10) calendar days immediately following receipt of a
city bill for such damages.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally damage any city
property, in whole or in part. For purposes hereof, a person acts intentionally
when such person's conscious objective or purpose is to damage city property,
in whole or in part. (Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
8-1D-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall be punished in accordance with and as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
ARTICLE E. IMPROVEMENT OR ENCLOSURE OF ROADSIDE DITCHES OR DRAINAGE DITCHES
ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY
SECTION:
8-1E-1: Definitions
8-1E-2: Prohibition And Permit Requirements
8-1E-3: Penalty
8-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ROADSIDE DITCH OR DRAINAGE DITCH: For purposes of this article, the terms
"roadside ditch" or "drainage ditch" shall mean any existing or hereafter
constructed or created ditch, of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever, that
is adjacent to any roadway or any existing or hereafter constructed or created
drainage ditch providing for surface water drainage or runoff or diversion that
is situated within all or any part of that area of property situated within
that portion of the city's property or right of way or easement area between
the property boundary line (determined exclusive of any city right of way or
easement area) of adjacent private property and the nearest portion of the
pavement or road surface area of any roadway.
   ROADWAY: For purposes of this article, the term "roadway" shall mean any
city owned street, highway, or roadway, or any street, highway, or roadway
under the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 3135, 8-18-2003)
8-1E-2: PROHIBITION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or change the depth of or
change the course or location of or improve or grade or excavate or level or
fill in or enclose any roadside ditch or drainage ditch, in whole or in part or
in any way or manner whatsoever, without first having obtained a written permit
as herein required from the city. This subsection shall not apply to any work
on or within a roadway ditch or drainage ditch that is performed by the city or
any employee or agent or contractor of the city who is engaged in doing such
work for the city; nor to any such work being performed by public utilities or
entitles operating pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city.
   B.   Any property owner(s) within the city who desires the city to improve
or enclose, in whole or in part, any roadside ditch or drainage ditch adjacent
to such owner's private property shall first submit an application for a permit
for such project work. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
superintendent of streets and sewers, shall be signed by all the owners of the
private property adjacent to any such roadside ditch or drainage ditch, and the
application shall show and describe in detail the nature and extent of the
requested project work. Such permit applications shall be in such form as the
superintendent of streets and sewers may determine from time to time. (Ord.
3135, 8-18-2003)
   C.   If the superintendent of streets and sewers recommends approval, he
shall prepare and submit to the applicant(s), a cost estimate for all materials
that may be required to perform such project work.
If such superintendent instead recommends approval of project work different
than that requested by applicant(s), then such superintendent shall prepare and
submit to the applicant(s), a cost estimate for all materials that may be
required to perform such alternate project work and identify the nature and
extent of such alternate recommended work.
If the superintendent of streets and sewers determines, in his sole discretion,
that enclosure of any roadside ditch or drainage ditch, in whole or in part,
would adversely affect surface water drainage or runoff or diversion, then
adequate underground drainage piping or culverts and/or such other measures
shall be required, according to such plans, specifications, and requirements as
the superintendent of streets and sewers shall determine, in his sole
discretion, to provide for the effective surface water drainage or runoff or
diversion at least effective to that which existed prior to any such work on
such roadside ditch or drainage ditch; and if so required, the material costs
for such additional work shall be included in the aforesaid material cost
estimate.
   D.   Any such permit applications can be denied by the superintendent of
streets and sewers in his sole discretion and for any reason or for no reason
whatsoever. If the superintendent of streets and sewers determines to approve
any such permit, he shall notify the permit applicant(s) as to the amount of
the aforesaid material cost estimate and the nature and extent of the project
work as approved by the city. If such permit applicant(s) desires to proceed
with such project, such applicant(s) shall deposit with the superintendent of
streets and sewers, an amount equal to the aforesaid material cost estimate.
Upon receipt thereof, the permit shall be issued; and the city shall thereafter
provide all materials, labor, and equipment and shall perform such project work
at a time or times convenient to the superintendent of streets and sewers and
in a manner as such superintendent shall determine satisfactory, in his sole
discretion.
   E.   If the aforesaid material cost estimate deposit is determined by the
city to be less than the actual cost of materials used to complete such
project, then the permittee(s) shall be jointly and severally liable to and
shall pay the city, within seven (7) days of receipt of a bill therefor, an
amount equal to the difference between the aforesaid material cost estimate
deposit and the aforesaid actual material cost. It shall be unlawful for any
permittee(s) to fail to timely pay the aforesaid bill. If the aforesaid actual
material cost is determined by the city to be less than the aforesaid actual
material cost, then the superintendent of streets and sewers shall refund the
difference to the permittee(s). (Ord. 3181, 7-6-2004)
8-1E-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this article
shall be punished in accordance with and as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3135, 8-18-2003)
ARTICLE F. SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
8-1F-1: Definitions
8-1F-2: Permit Required And Insurance Requirements
8-1F-3: Violations, Release, Hold Harmless And Indemnity, And Liability
8-1F-4: Penalty
8-1F-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY PROPERTY: Shall mean and include, in whole or in part, any and all city
streets, alleyways, roadways, easements, rights of way, public ways,
boulevards, sidewalks, walkways, pavements, curbs and gutters, lakes,
waterways, and real estate and improvements thereon of any kind, nature or
extent whatsoever acquired, owned, or leased by the city, in whole or in part.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any and all individual persons or group of
persons, or public or private or for profit or not for profit or charitable
firms, companies, partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies,
associations, organizations, entities, joint ventures, or fraternal, religious,
veterans, social, service, or civic clubs, organizations, or associations, all
of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever or any and all other groups of any of
the foregoing acting or functioning or participating as a unit, and the owners,
employees, agents, representatives, volunteers, and members of any and all of
the foregoing, jointly and severally and collectively.
The term "person" shall not include the city or its officers, officials, or
employees while acting in the course of their office or employment.
   SPECIAL EVENT: Shall mean and include a for profit or not for profit or
charitable event or activity of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever that
takes place on city property, in whole or in part, and which is open or
available to the general public or to members of the sponsoring entity by free
or paid admission or invitation or participation. A special event shall also
include any and all waterfowl, fishing contests or events, deer hunting, youth
or children activities, or block parties conducted or participated on city
property by any and all persons.
The special event includes all times on city property in preparation for and
during the special event and the dismantling of any equipment or property
associated with the special event after the cessation of the event or activity.
   SPONSORING ENTITY: Shall mean and include any and all persons who sponsors
or organizes or hosts or arranges or conducts or who is in charge of or is
involved with a special event. (Ord. 3656, 1-21-2014)
8-1F-2: PERMIT REQUIRED AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any sponsoring entity who desires a special event to take place on city
property shall first submit a written application signed by a duly authorized
representative of the sponsoring entity for a city permit for such special
event. The application and city permit shall be in such form as the city clerk
may select or prepare from time to time.
   B.   The city council shall consider and decide whether to approve each such
city permit for a special event from time to time, which decision shall be at
the sole discretion of the city council from time to time.
   C.   Unless excused by the city council in its sole discretion from time to
time after the city council considers the kind, nature, and extent of the
special event for which a sponsoring entity is requesting a city permit and any
associated perceived risks of liability to the city if the special event is
allowed to be conducted on city property, the sponsoring entity at its sole
expense, and as a condition of the issuance of a city permit for a special
event, shall furnish to the city a certificate of insurance evidencing
"occurrence" type insurance coverage and not "claims made" type insurance
coverage in at least the following designated amounts (unless a lower amount is
agreed by the city council from time to time) and which shows such insurance
coverage at the sponsoring entity's sole expense is and will and shall be
maintained in force for the duration of the special event:
      1.   Workers' compensation insurance coverage in the minimum statutory
limits under Illinois law, if applicable; and
      2.   General liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) aggregate; and
      3.   Motor vehicle liability insurance coverage in an amount not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit; and
      4.   Such insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, coverage
for personal injuries, including death, and property damages, including, but
not limited to, property damages to city property or property of others.
   D.   After considering the kind, nature, and extent of the special event for
which a sponsoring entity is requesting a city permit and any associated
perceived risks of liability to the city if the special event is allowed to be
conducted on city property, the city council in its sole discretion from time
to time may further require as another condition to the issuance of a city
permit for a special event one or more or all of the following requirements:
      1.   That all said required insurance and the certificate of insurance
name as additional insured the "city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal
corporation, and its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officials,
officers, employees, and agents"; and/or
      2.   The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurer must
give the city notice of cancellation and termination according to the policy
provisions. (Omitted: The certificate of insurance shall also contain the
following statement: "The insurance covered by this certificate shall not be
canceled or altered, except after at least ten (10) days written notice has
been received by the city clerk.")
      3.   That the sponsoring entity, at its sole expense, shall obtain and
maintain a special event policy which will provide the aforesaid insurance
coverage and that will also include coverage for all participants in the
special event.
      4.   That prior to the commencement of the special event on city property
the sponsoring entity shall secure signed releases of liability from all
persons who will participate in the special event. (Ord. 3656, 1-21-2014)
8-1F-3: VIOLATIONS, RELEASE, HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNITY, AND LIABILITY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a sponsoring entity to sponsor or organize or
host or arrange or conduct or be in charge of or involved with a special event
on city property without a city permit for such special event as required in
this article.
   B.   If the aforesaid insurance coverage and certificate of insurance are
required as conditions of a city permit for a special event, then it shall be
unlawful for a sponsoring entity to sponsor or organize or host or arrange or
conduct or be in charge of or involved with a special event on city property
without first having secured and delivered to the city clerk the requisite
certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage and amounts and
additional named insured insurance provisions as may be required by the city
council under this article.
   C.   Each sponsoring entity that is issued a city permit for a special event
shall be deemed to have consented to and to have released and shall hold
harmless, indemnify, protect, and defend the city and its elected and/or
appointed mayor, city council, officials, officers, employees, and agents from
and against any and all loss, damages, costs and expenses (including, but not
limited to, the city's attorney fees and costs), liability, claims, demands,
suits and causes of action of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever on account
of any and all personal injuries or death or property damages of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever occurring, arising, incident to, resulting from,
or related directly or indirectly or consequentially, from such special event.
   D.   Each sponsoring entity of a special event who damages any city
property, in whole or in part, shall be liable to the city for any and all
damages of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever to city property. Such person
shall pay the city the full amount of such damages, as determined by the city,
within ten (10) calendar days immediately following receipt of a city bill for
such damages.
   E.   It is unlawful for any sponsoring entity of a special event to
intentionally damage any city property, in whole or in part. For purpose
hereof, a person acts intentionally when such person's conscious objective or
purpose is to damage city property, in whole or in part. (Ord. 3656, 1-21-2014)
8-1F-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any sponsoring entity or person violating any of the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with and as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3656, 1-21-2014)
ARTICLE G. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-1G-1: Purpose And Scope
8-1G-2: Definitions
8-1G-3: Annual Registration Required
8-1G-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-1G-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-1G-6: Effect Of Permit
8-1G-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-1G-8: Insurance
8-1G-9: Indemnification
8-1G-10: Security
8-1G-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-1G-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-1G-13: General Construction Standards
8-1G-14: Traffic Control
8-1G-15: Location Of Facilities
8-1G-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-1G-17: Vegetation Control
8-1G-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-1G-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-1G-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-1G-21: Variances
8-1G-22: Penalties
8-1G-23: Enforcement
8-1G-24: Severability
8-1G-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights of way and the city as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this article, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to all
facilities now existing or heretofore or hereafter located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the jurisdiction
of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of
this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the
utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise
provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement and/or obtain a permit for the
privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within the city rights of way. Utilities that are not required by
law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such
an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this article.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Articles Or Chapters: This article supersedes all
articles or chapters or parts of articles or chapters adopted prior hereto that
are in conflict herewith, but only to the extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or Illinois laws, statutes, rules or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of
this article to the maximum extent possible without violating applicable
federal or Illinois laws, statutes, rules or regulations.
   H.   Variances: When administering this article, the city may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the city
in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, so determines; provided,
however, nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to
regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare as the city determines in its sole discretion. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
   APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this article.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, a municipal corporation.
   CITY CLERK: The acting elected city clerk for the city or his or her
designee.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The Taylorville city code.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of
a right of way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this article, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this article.
For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any
facility owned or operated by the city.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
city engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any
federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and
video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
   IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
   JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of rights of way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections
 8-1G-4 and
8-1G-5 of this article.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, roadway, alley, easements, other
land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or for utilities or other similar purposes, including, but not limited
to, utility easements, in which the city has the right and authority to
authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of
the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or
personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous
sentence and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the highway or street that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-1G-10 of this article.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND SEWERS: The city's appointed superintendent of
streets and sewers or his or her designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two- way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of "telecommunications" at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this article.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201
(v).
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-
2015)
8-1G-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the city clerk, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty
four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance
as required in section
8-1G-8 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 3706,
4-6-2015)
8-1G-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this article)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this article), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the city clerk and obtaining a permit from the city
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be filed on a form provided by the city from time to time and
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city clerk may
designate from time to time. The applicant may designate those portions of its
application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or
confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking
each page of such materials accordingly, subject however to the applicability
of the Illinois freedom of information act 1  as now enacted or hereafter
amended.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-1G-8 of this article;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
8-1G-10 of this article;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
article (see section
8-1G-21 of this article); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation
district or other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 3742, 3-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
8-1G-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be referred to and examined by the
city engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the city engineer shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the city engineer is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city clerk shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that
the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance
with the requirements of this article.
   B.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city
that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city engineer
shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the city engineer fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this article.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
8-1G-4 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided
the holder has complied with all applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article on city rights of way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives
in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord.
3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
8-1G-21 of this article. If the city denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the rights of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
representatives, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city clerk within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City's Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-
insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-
insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to and shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever
arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct
of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, representatives,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of
the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses to the extent
they arise out of or result from the negligence or misconduct by the city, its
officials, officers, employees, agents, or representatives. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-
2015)
8-1G-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this article;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this article; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this article or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities
in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in
another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city engineer may, in the
exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of
security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the
permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal
to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of
this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved
by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights that
may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this article;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon
not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to
the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-
2015)
8-1G-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the city engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the city engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-1G-20 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the city engineer determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city's
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction Of Electric Power And Communication Lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   F.   Facilities Installed Above Ground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 3706,
4-6-2015)
8-1G-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the city engineer.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the city engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the city engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection is
permitted under section
8-1G-21 of this article, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30" (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24" (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products                30" (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"Rules For Construction Of Electric Power And Communication Lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities: 1) cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads; 2) if a
crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the
crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or
b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior
to roadway construction; 3) cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
national electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the superintendent of streets and sewers. With the
approval of the superintendent of streets and sewers, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the city engineer. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from
the city.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when emergency work
is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Mondays
through Saturdays.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 3706,
4-6-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-1G-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, in accordance with such local franchise,
license, or other agreement with the city as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this article.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society Of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the superintendent of streets and sewers that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city,
a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this article; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the superintendent of streets and
sewers determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the
utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to
the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the superintendent of streets and sewers.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the superintendent of streets and sewers for good cause shown.
(Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
superintendent of streets and sewers or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city engineer as
a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of
this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance
should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The city engineer shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city engineer may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city engineer may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of
this article.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city
engineer under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to
the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within
thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at a regularly scheduled city council meeting occurring within thirty (30) days
after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the
appeal. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the general penalty provisions of
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. There may be times when the city will incur
delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the
utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utility shall bear and pay the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. (Ord.
3706, 4-6-2015)
8-1G-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect or otherwise impair or
affect the applicability of the remaining or any other section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article which is not, in or of
itself, invalid or unconstitutional. Each unconstitutional or invalid section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion, or application of such
provision, shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent and severable
provision. (Ord. 3706, 4-6-2015)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Planting And Removal Permits
8-2-3: Street Tree Species
8-2-4: Location And Spacing
8-2-5: Public Tree Care; Dangerous Conditions
8-2-6: Tree Topping
8-2-7: Removal Of Stumps
8-2-8: Protection Of Trees
8-2-9: Interference With Tree Board Prohibited
8-2-10: Appeals
8-2-11: Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   PUBLIC TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
areas and all areas owned or maintained by the city or to which the public has
free access.
   STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
8-2-2: PLANTING AND REMOVAL PERMITS:
   A.   Planting Permit: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree, shrub, or bush
in any public street or parkway or other public place. It shall be unlawful to
plant any tree, shrub, or bush in residential, commercial, and industrial
boulevards without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for
such permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be referred by the clerk
to the city tree board 1 , or to the street and sewer committee if the city
tree board does not then have sufficient members to act. If a permit is issued,
all trees, shrubs, and bushes so planted shall be planted subject to the
directions and approval of the city tree board, or the street and sewer
committee, as the case may be.
   B.   Removal Permit: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree,
shrub, or bush or portion thereof in any public street or parkway or other
public place. It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree, shrub, or
bush in residential, commercial, and industrial boulevards without having first
secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
city clerk and shall be referred by the clerk to the city tree board 2 , or to
the street and sewer committee if the city tree board does not then have
sufficient members to act, before permission is granted. If a permit is issued,
all trees, shrubs, and bushes so removed or cut down shall be removed or cut
down subject to the directions and approval of the city tree board, or the
street and sewer committee, as the case may be. (Ord. 3151, 11-3-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
2 1. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
8-2-3: STREET TREE SPECIES:
The city tree board shall prepare and file with the city council a list which
shall constitute the official street tree species for Taylorville. Species on
the list shall be classified as small trees, medium trees and large trees. No
species other than those included in said list may be planted as street trees
without written permission of the city tree board 1 . (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
8-2-4: LOCATION AND SPACING:
   A.   Spacing: The spacing of trees will be in accordance with the three (3)
species size classes listed in section
8-2-3 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following without written permission of the city tree board:
 
Small trees  30 feet
Medium trees 40 feet
Large trees  50 feet
 
   B.   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from
curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3)
species size classes listed in section
8-2-3 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following without written permission of the city tree board:
 
Small trees  2 feet
Medium trees 3 feet
Large trees  4 feet
 
   C.   Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs: No street tree shall be
planted closer than thirty five feet (35') from any street corner, measured
from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines, and no street tree
shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') from any fireplug. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-
1988)
8-2-5: PUBLIC TREE CARE; DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
   A.   Generally: The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds.
The city health and building officer 1 , upon recommendation of the city tree
board 2 , may order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements or is
affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners; providing,
that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with sections
8-2-3 and
8-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
   B.   Pruning: Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way
within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of fourteen feet (14')
above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
the light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of
any traffic control device or sign. (Ord. 3620, 4-15-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 9, article B of this code.
2 2. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
8-2-6: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the city tree board 1 . (Ord. 2300, 9-6-
1988)
 
Notes
1 3. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
8-2-7: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street and public trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
8-2-8: PROTECTION OF TREES:
   A.   Injury To Trees Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or
shrub planted in any such public place. (1979 Code § 10-5-4)
   B.   Advertisements Or Notices: It shall be unlawful to attach any sign,
advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway, public
boulevard or other public place. (1979 Code § 10-5-5)
   C.   Wires: It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or
shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the superintendent of streets and sewers. Any person or company
given the right to maintain the poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other
public places in the municipality shall, in the absence of provisions in the
franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away
from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and shall
keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of
the superintendent of streets and sewers so that no injury shall be done either
to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. (1979 Code §
10-5-7)
   D.   Gas Pipes: Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the
municipality shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the
subject, keep such pipes free from leaks to prevent injury to trees or shrubs.
(1979 Code § 10-5-8)
   E.   Excavations 1 : In making excavations in streets or other public
places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or
shrub whenever possible. (1979 Code § 10-5-9)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1, article A of this title.
8-2-9: INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city tree board 1  or any of its agents while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees or public trees as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
8-2-10: APPEALS:
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the
city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make final
decision. (Ord. 2300, 9-6-1988)
8-2-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or a
plea of guilty, for each offense, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CITY CEMETERY
SECTION:
8-3-1: Cemetery Established; Control And Operation
8-3-2: Cemetery Sexton
8-3-3: Sale Of Lots
8-3-4: Burials
8-3-5: Level Graves And Footstones
8-3-6: Fees
8-3-7: Plat And Records Kept
8-3-8: No Trespassing
8-3-1: CEMETERY ESTABLISHED; CONTROL AND OPERATION:
There is hereby established a city cemetery which shall be the cemetery now in
use and which is known as Oak Hill Cemetery. (1979 Code § 9-5-1)
The cemetery shall be controlled and operated by the board of cemetery managers
1 . (1979 Code § 9-5-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 7 of this code.
8-3-2: CEMETERY SEXTON:
   A.   Appointment: The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, a Cemetery Superintendent to care for the Oak Hill Cemetery.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Cemetery Superintendent shall have charge of the care
and the maintenance of Oak Hill Cemetery ("cemetery") and shall perform his
duties under the supervision of the Board of Cemetery Managers for Oak Hill
Cemetery ("Board of Cemetery Managers") and according to the rules and
regulations established by such Board, from time to time, for such care and
maintenance. In addition, the Cemetery Superintendent shall perform such other
duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the Mayor and City
Council.
      2.   Dig Graves: The Cemetery Superintendent shall dig or cause to be dug
all graves for burials in the cemetery. Such graves shall be constructed
according to the rules and regulations of the Board of Cemetery Managers.
      3.   Records and Reports: The Cemetery Superintendent shall keep a plat
and purchase price of each lot which shall conform to that required to be kept
by the City Clerk. The Cemetery Superintendent shall make a report to the City
Clerk each month of lots sold so that the City Clerk's records can be suitably
marked and kept up to date. The Cemetery Superintendent shall make an entry
into an appropriate book of the name, sex and color of each body interred in
the cemetery, with the date of death, cause of death, age and residence of
deceased.
   C.   Salary: The hours of employment, salary, benefits, and associated costs
of the Cemetery Superintendent shall be as determined by the City Council from
time to time.
(1979 Code §§ 8-2-8, 9-5-5, 9-5-6; amd. Ord. 3018, 5-21-2001; Ord. 3569, 7-2-
2012; Ord. 3982, 8-17-2020)
8-3-3: SALE OF LOTS:
The sale of lots for burial purposes, exclusively, shall be made by the
treasurer on behalf of the city upon such terms as may, from time to time, be
fixed by the city council 1 , and upon payment made to the city treasurer, the
mayor shall execute a deed for such lot or lots to the purchaser. (1979 Code §
9-5-4)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-3-6 of this chapter for cost.
8-3-4: BURIALS:
Burials in the city cemetery shall conform to the regulations established by
the board of managers 1 . No burial shall be permitted to be made without a
proper burial permit authorized by the board of managers or by some person
delegated by it to issue such permit and without paying the necessary fees.
(1979 Code § 9-5-9)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 7 of this code.
8-3-5: LEVEL GRAVES AND FOOTSTONES:
In block 34 and in all blocks laid out hereafter in the cemetery, the tops of
footstones and graves shall be level with the surrounding ground so as to
permit easy mowing and care of the same. (1979 Code § 9-5-7)
8-3-6: FEES:
The fees for lots, internments, cremations, disinterments and other services
shall be as follows:
Gravesites:                                                              
   Gravesites (other than baby gravesites):                          $700.00
   Baby Gravesites:                                                  $350.00
Interment services rendered:                                             
   Opening and closing for cremated remains (weekdays):              $500.00
   Opening and closing for cremated remains (Saturdays and holidays):$600.00
   Opening and closing for limbs, etc. (cremated or not):            $150.00
   Opening and closing for regular (non-baby) burial (weekdays):     $700.00
   Opening and closing for regular (non-baby) burial (Saturdays and  $800.00
holidays):
   Opening and closing for baby burial (weekdays):                   $300.00
   Opening and closing for baby burial (Saturdays and holidays):     $400.00
   Double deep interments (weekdays):                                $600.00
   Double deep interments (Saturdays and holidays):                  $700.00
   Tent service:                                                     $100.00
Disinerment services rendered:                                           
   Graves (other than baby graves):                                  $1,000.00
   Baby graves:                                                      $300.00
Misc. services:                                                          
   Foundation for monuments (base) length x width - price per square $0.75
foot:
   Removal of shrubs (per shrub fee):                                $50.00
 
(Ord. 3559, 4-16-2012; amd. Ord. 3975, 7-20-2020)
8-3-7: PLAT AND RECORDS KEPT:
The city clerk shall keep a plat of the cemetery grounds and also a record, in
numerical order, of the blocks or squares in each division, with separate
column ruled therein for the entry of the amount of purchase price, the name of
the purchaser and the date of sale. (1979 Code § 9-5-3)
8-3-8: NO TRESPASSING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person (other than an official, officer,
employee or authorized representative or contractor of the City) to enter the
City Cemetery from the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
   B.   Any person violating paragraph A. of this Section
8-3-8 shall be fined, upon conviction, an amount of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   C.   The Cemetery Sexton shall place "No Trespassing" signs at the three (3)
entrances to the City Cemetery. (Ord. 3976, 7-20-2020)
CHAPTER 4
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Water Service And Connections
8-4-2: Service Pipes And Appurtenances
8-4-3: Water Meters
8-4-4: Resale Of Water Prohibited; Service To More Than One Dwelling
8-4-5: Sale Of Bulk Water
8-4-6: Fire Hydrants
8-4-6-1: Fire Hydrants Outside City Limits
8-4-6-2: Fire Hydrants Inside City Limits
8-4-7: Emergency Conservation Measures
8-4-8: Water Use During Construction
8-4-9: Water Rates
8-4-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-4-11: Service Outside City Limits
8-4-12: Definitions
8-4-13: Plumbing Installation
8-4-14: Backflow Prevention Device Required; Maintenance 1  (Rep. by Ord. 3261,
12-5-2005)
8-4-15: Contamination; Liability 2  (Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4-16: Right Of Entry For Inspection 3  (Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4-17: Disconnection; Reconnection Fee 4  (Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4-18: Violation; Penalty
8-4-19: Annual Review
8-4-20: Revenues
8-4-21: Accounts
8-4-22: Access To Records
8-4-23: Appeals
 
Notes
1 1. See Article A of this Chapter.
2 2. See Article A of this Chapter.
3 3. See Article A of this Chapter.
4 4. See Article A of this Chapter.
8-4-1: WATER SERVICE AND CONNECTIONS:
City water will be supplied to premises within and without the City as provided
in this Chapter, and such water service shall not commence without being
authorized by the Water Superintendent or his designee 1 .
   A.   Application For Service: Applications for water service shall be made
to the Water Collection Office and shall contain an agreement by the applicant
to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this Chapter as conditions
governing the use of the City water supply by the applicant.
   B.   Customer Activation Fee: The City shall charge a customer activation
fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) to residents and sixty dollars
($60.00) to nonresidents for initial water service; except, that a service fee
of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for residents and one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for nonresidents shall be charged for work requests outside posted
business hours.
   C.   Deposit: The Water Collection Office Manager may, at his/her
discretion, should any water customer be delinquent in paying a water account,
cause such person to make a deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more to
ensure payment of the account at the time of application for service.
   D.   Plumbing: There shall be no water service to any premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with ordinances of the City; except, that water
service may be provided for construction purposes in unfinished buildings,
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
   E.   Tapping Water Main:
      1.   Permit Required: No connection with the City water main shall be
made without a tapping permit being issued by the City.
      2.   Specifications:
         a.   Before any new connection is made to the water distribution
system of the City, the premises to be served shall be equipped with a water
meter and water meter well that is properly installed on the service pipe; and
such water meter and water meter well shall be located outside of the structure
(s) at said premises and at such outside location that is approved by the Water
Superintendent and/or his designee. Type K copper shall be installed a minimum
of five feet (5') beyond the water meter well. All services shall be installed
with a minimum ground cover of forty eight inches (48"). Solder joints shall
not be used where the piping will be underground. No installation shall be
covered until it has been inspected by the Water Superintendent and/or his
designee and found satisfactory. Any exceptions to the foregoing requirements
must receive the prior written approval of the Water Superintendent which
approval or disapproval shall be determined as the Water Superintendent, in his
sole discretion, deems appropriate and in the best interest of the City's Water
Department.
         b.   No premises shall be connected with the water distribution system
of the City unless the premises have a shutoff valve and a drain located inside
the structure(s) to be served, so that the supply of water may be shut off and
the water pipes drained inside the structure(s). When it is deemed necessary by
the Water Superintendent and/or his designee, a shutoff valve shall be
installed on both inlet and outlet sides of the water meter. No connection
shall be covered until the Water Superintendent and/or his designee has
inspected the work.
   F.   Service Connection Fee: Applications for permits to connect service
pipes with any supply pipe must be made, in writing, to the Water Collection
Office. There shall be a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per front foot for
residents and nonresidents with a minimum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) unless there is an agreement approved by the Mayor and City Council.
"Front foot", as mentioned in this subsection, shall mean the shortest side of
the lot when it is located on a street intersection and is a corner lot. Full
front footage shall be charged on curve fronted lots. If a structure spans two
(2) or more lots tapping fees are required for each lot.
   G.   Inspection Fee: There shall be an inspection fee of fifty five dollars
($55.00) for residents and one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) for nonresidents
in addition to the tapping fee for tapping any City water line.
   H.   Extensions/Connections:
      1.   If an extension of one of the water mains is required for
connection, the city council shall first determine if an extension of a water
main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and
the number of existing or potential users that will use the water along the
extension and if such extension will enhance the overall economic benefit to
the city.
If the extension is approved, the city may, in its sole discretion, install and
pay, in whole or in part, the cost of such extension to the nearest property
boundary line of the first property to be serviced from such extension. If the
city elects, in its sole discretion, not to pay such cost, in whole or in part,
then the property owner(s) shall pay the cost, which the city has elected not
to pay, to extend such water main from the nearest location of the then
existing water main to the property to be serviced.
In any event, and in all cases in which there is to be any connection to the
city's water main, the property owner(s) shall pay the cost to extend the water
main the entire width or length (depending upon the direction of such
extension) of the property owner's property to be serviced and/or for such
additional distance or direction along the property owner's property to be
serviced, as determined by the city council from time to time, so that such
extension, after completion thereof, immediately borders adjacent property in
such a manner that future extensions can directly be made to service adjacent
property or properties.
Such "costs", as referred to herein, shall include, but not be limited to, all
engineering fees, the city's attorney fees, all recording fees, all costs for
survey and easement plats, all costs relating to easement instruments, all
title insurance fees and all costs, materials, equipment, and labor relating to
and for the construction of such water main extension.
Such water main extension shall be constructed according to such plans and
specifications as may be determined by the city council from time to time. If
the city elects not to perform the work to install such extension or have
others do so on behalf of the city, then the property owner(s) must obtain the
written consent and approval of the city as to the contractor(s) who will
install such water extension. Any such "costs" owed to the city shall be paid
to the city by such property owner(s) within fourteen (14) days of mailing of a
bill therefor to such property owner(s) or their representative, or prior to
any connection to such extension, whichever event first occurs. Prior to any
such extension, the property owner(s) shall sign and provide the city with
permanent easements and temporary construction easements for such water main
extension in such form as the city council may determine from time to time. The
foregoing requirements shall also be deemed as additional requirements under
title 11 of this code.
      2.   All subdivision developers shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
water tap-on fee per subdivision.
   I.   Water Tap-On Fee Waiver: When a subdivision developer installs a
subdivision water main and pays to tap the subdivision water main onto the
city's water main, any tap-on fees within the subdivision on the developer's
installed subdivision water main shall be waived for a period of five (5) years
from the date the subdivision EPA operating permit is issued. After the five
(5) year period noted herein, tap-on fees within the subdivision shall be
charged to the respective residents.
      1.   The waiver of tap-on fees as set forth herein shall only apply to
residential tap-ons.
      2.   This subsection I shall apply to any existing subdivisions,
subdivisions currently being developed, and those subdivisions to be developed
in the future. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011; amd. Ord. 3779, 11-7-2016; Ord. 3847, 5-
7-2018; Ord. 4034, 5-3-2021)
 
Notes
1 5. See Title 1, Chapter 9, Article F of this Code.
8-4-2: SERVICE PIPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   A.   Responsibility For Installation; Supervision: All service pipes from
the water main to the premises to be served shall be installed by a licensed
plumber and at the cost of the owner of the premises or the applicant for the
service. Such installations shall be under the supervision of the water
superintendent and/or his designee. Property owner is responsible for
maintenance for one year from the date the service is commenced.
   B.   Pipe Specifications And Installation:
      1.   All water mains hereafter laid and connected with the city water
distribution system shall be of sufficient size to meet all necessary
requirements as determined by the water superintendent and/or his designee and
shall be of cast or ductile iron or an approved plastic pipe of sufficient
strength to withstand a working pressure of at least one hundred fifty (150)
pounds to the square inch and shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications given by the manufacturer of such pipe. All such pipe shall meet
AWWA specifications.
      2.   The pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of forty eight inches
(48") from the level of the grade to the top of the pipe and, whenever
practicable, shall be laid along the boulevard so as not to interfere with the
traveled part of the street. All work done in installing the pipe shall be
under the inspection and supervision of the water superintendent and/or his
designee. After the pipe is installed, it shall be tested by pressure pump
under the supervision of the water superintendent and/or his designee.
   C.   Sterilization: All newly installed water mains shall be chlorinated as
specified by standard specifications of the state EPA as directed by the water
superintendent and/or his designee. All costs of such sterilization are to be
borne by the subdivider or contractor until new lines are chlorinated and found
to be free of contamination or pollution. Bacterial sampling and testing is to
be by and at the cost of the city water department; however, if it is necessary
to use a certified, privately owned laboratory, costs are to be borne by the
subdivider or contractor.
If the contractor is under contract to the city, the cost of the chlorination
and sterilization is to be borne by the city.
   D.   Repairs And Maintenance:
      1.   All repairs on service pipes from the water mains to property line
shall be made by the city water department after the line has been in service
one year. All repairs inside the property line in the plumbing system of the
building shall be maintained by and at the expense of the owners of the
premises served.
      2.   All water customers must, at their own expense, keep their service
pipes and all fixtures (within their property line) connected therewith in good
repair and protected from frost. The owner must arrange for necessary repairs
to his service pipe or fixtures within forty eight (48) hours after
notification by the city water department.
      3.   The city may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipes, and if
this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the city by the
owner of the premises served.
   E.   Excavations: Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the
same shall be made in compliance with the ordinance provisions relating to
excavations in streets 1 . The excavation permit fee for residents shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   F.   Service Or Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff or service boxes shall be placed on
every service pipe and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk
line or on the inside of property line within two feet (2') of property line
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be located where they will be
easily accessible and shall be protected from frost.
   G.   Meter Vaults: Meter vaults shall be installed so that a minimum of
clearance of one and one-half inches (11/2") shall be maintained between
sidewalks of vault tile and any pipe or fitting rising inside the vault. Such
vaults shall be constructed of type and design approved by the water
superintendent and shall be covered with an approved lid. Such lid shall be so
placed as to be flush to one inch (1") above sod, ground or other finish grade
material. Such a vault shall be so constructed that it shall be open and clear
for forty four inches (44") below surrounding finished surface. When adjustment
or changes are made to surrounding surface area, the property owner shall be
responsible for necessary adjustments to meter vaults. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1, article A of this title.
8-4-3: WATER METERS:
   A.   Metered Water Required: All properties, buildings, or structures or
dwelling houses, apartments, mobile homes or trailers using water from the city
water supply must be equipped with a water meter. Water services may be
supplied by the city at a flat rate of charge until a meter is installed.
   B.   Location; Accessibility: All water meters shall be so located as to be
easily accessible by meter readers. Outside water meters shall be located in
meter vaults and located in areas free of any motor vehicle traffic. The
location of all meters and meter vaults shall be determined by the water
superintendent.
In the case of new construction or new water service the premises shall have
installed a remote reader and associated wiring as prescribed by the water
superintendent and/or his designee; the city shall furnish and install a remote
reader and associated hardware and appurtenances, but the water customer shall
install and pay for the wiring, which wiring may be purchased by the water
customer from the city.
If the water consumer shall fail to permit the installation of or shall fail to
provide the city access for the installation of said remote reader and wiring
within thirty (30) days of written notice of this requirement, such water
consumer's water service shall be discontinued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter as a delinquent account.
   C.   Size And Type Of Water Meter: The city shall furnish water meters of
proper size up to and including one inch (1") meters. Water meters larger than
one inch (1") inlet and outlet shall be furnished and paid for by the water
consumer. Unless otherwise approved by the water superintendent, all larger
meters shall be of the type known as "compound meters" or approved equivalent.
All water meters shall be frost free. The water consumer shall furnish and pay
for all meter vaults. The city shall install all water meters and remote
readers.
   D.   Meters To Be Sealed; Tampering Prohibited: No water shall be used by
any consumer unless and until such meter is sealed by the city water
department. After the meter is placed, only officers or employees of the city,
properly authorized, shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner
interfere with the same. The user of any meter shall, at all times, be
responsible for any damage done to such meter. If seal is found broken, or
meter has been tampered with, the meter may be relocated by the city water
department, and the cost of all labor and materials used in the relocation
shall be paid by the consumer.
   E.   Reading Meters: The meter reader shall read or cause to be read every
meter used in the city at such times as are necessary so that the bills may be
sent at the proper time.
   F.   Penalty: See section
8-4-18 of this chapter for penalty provisions. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-4: RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED; SERVICE TO MORE THAN ONE DWELLING:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city
supply to any other home, mobile home or trailer other than that for which
application has been made and the water installed, except in case of emergency.
Service pipes intended to supply two (2) or more distinct houses, dwelling
places, mobile homes or trailers must be provided with separate and distinct
stopcocks for each unit. Such stopcocks shall be ahead of the inlet side of the
meter. Each house, dwelling place, mobile home or trailer must be individually
metered. In no instance may a service connection supply a house, mobile home or
trailer unless the necessary tapping and inspection fees have been paid and all
other necessary agreements signed and filed with the city treasurer. (Ord.
3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-5: SALE OF BULK WATER 1 :
The city may sell bulk water to customers at the water plant or from hydrants.
Such sale shall be authorized only by the water superintendent and/or his
designee. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
   8-4-9A2f of this chapter.
8-4-6: FIRE HYDRANTS:
No person not duly authorized shall turn on the water at any fire hydrant or
service cock or use water therefrom. Use of any fire hydrant for purposes other
than firefighting shall be done only with the consent and under the supervision
of the water superintendent and/or his designee. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-6-1: FIRE HYDRANTS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Application For Fire Hydrant Permit: Any city water customer whose
property is furnished city water outside of the corporate limits of the city
may apply for a fire hydrant permit for the installation of a fire hydrant to
be installed and located at or near the applicant's property. The water
superintendent in his sole discretion shall determine the form and requirements
of such application and permit from time to time; provided however, such
application shall include at least the following information and documents:
      1.   The identity of the specific requested location of the fire hydrant.
      2.   A description of the nature and kind of property to be initially
serviced by such fire hydrant.
      3.   The name and address of the excavator and licensed plumber who would
be excavating, installing, and connecting the fire hydrant to the city's water
main or service line.
      4.   All owners of the property where the fire hydrant is to be located
must sign the application.
   B.   Issuance Of Fire Hydrant Permit; Insurance; Hold Harmless And
Indemnity:
      1.   The decision whether to issue a fire hydrant permit to install and
locate any fire hydrant to any city water customer to service property located
outside the city limits is subject to the sole discretion of the water
superintendent.
      2.   However, no fire hydrant permit shall be issued until and unless the
applicant provides the city clerk with certificates of insurance provided by a
reputable insurance company that provides "occurrence" type policy insurance
coverage for each excavator and Illinois licensed plumber who will be doing any
work concerning the fire hydrant; and such insurance coverage shall be of the
kind and at least in the amounts as set forth in section
8-1D-2 of this title and such insurance further names as an additional named
insured the "city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation, and its
elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, aldermen, officials, officers,
employees and agents".
      3.   As a condition of issuance of each fire hydrant permit, each
property owner who is issued a fire hydrant permit and their respective
excavators and Illinois licensed plumbers shall agree to and shall hold
harmless and indemnify the city from any and all claims, demands, suits or
causes of action of any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever that relates
directly or indirectly or consequentially from any and all excavation or
installation work or activities concerning such fire hydrant.
   C.   Fire Hydrant, Excavation, Installation, Inspection Costs And Fees, And
Ownership Of Fire Hydrant:
      1.   Each property owner who is issued a fire hydrant permit shall pay
the city for the cost of the fire hydrant and all other materials and shall
further pay for all costs and expenses relating to the excavation,
installation, and connection of the fire hydrant to the city's water supply,
and all city inspection fees.
      2.   Before such fire hydrant is made operational, the property owner(s)
shall provide the city with properly executed full and final mechanics' lien
waivers for all work and materials associated with the excavation and
installation of such fire hydrant.
      3.   The subject fire hydrant shall be installed in the location that is
approved by the water superintendent or his designee. The installation and
connection of the subject fire hydrant shall be made according to any plans and
specifications that are approved or required by the water superintendent or his
designee.
      4.   Upon completion of the installation of the subject fire hydrant and
its connection to the water supply to the satisfaction of the water
superintendent, the subject fire hydrant shall become and remain the sole
property of the city. (Ord. 3635, 9-3-2013)
8-4-6-2: FIRE HYDRANTS INSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Application For Fire Hydrant Permit: Any city water customer whose
property is furnished city water inside of the corporate limits of the city may
apply for a fire hydrant permit for the installation of a fire hydrant to be
provided and installed by the city, at the city's expense, and located at or
near the applicant's property. The water superintendent in his sole discretion
shall determine the form and requirements of such application and permit from
time to time; provided however, such application shall include at least the
following information and documents:
      1.   The identity of the specific requested location of the fire hydrant.
      2.   A description of the nature and kind of property to be initially
serviced by such fire hydrant.
      3.   All owners of the property where the fire hydrant is to be located
must sign the application.
   B.   Issuance Of Fire Hydrant Permit, Installation, And Ownership Of Fire
Hydrant:
      1.   The decision whether to issue a fire hydrant permit to install and
locate any fire hydrant to any city water customer to service property located
inside the city limits is subject to the sole discretion of the water
superintendent.
      2.   The subject fire hydrant shall be installed in the location that is
approved by the water superintendent or his designee. The installation and
connection of the subject fire hydrant shall be made according to any plans and
specifications that are approved or required by the water superintendent or his
designee.
      3.   Upon completion of the installation of the subject fire hydrant and
its connection to the water supply to the satisfaction of the water
superintendent, the subject fire hydrant shall become and remain the sole
property of the city.
   C.   Not Applicable To Future Subdivisions Of Land:
      1.   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to future subdividers of land or to
subdivisions that the city requires the installation of fire hydrants at the
cost and expense of the subdivider(s) or owner(s) of the subdivision as a
condition for approval of such subdivision or subdivisions under applicable
city code provisions in existence from time to time. (Ord. 3653, 12-2-2013)
8-4-7: EMERGENCY CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Authority To Declare Water Conservation Warning: The mayor, or person
appointed to act in the mayor's stead, or in the absence of the mayor or any
person acting in his stead, the city water superintendent and/or his designee,
shall have authority to declare a water conservation warning if for any cause
the water supply to the city has become depleted so that, in their judgment,
conservation measures are needed to protect the public water supply.
   B.   Notice Of Water Shortage; Restrictions: Upon declaring a water
conservation warning, it shall be the duty of the mayor, or the person acting
in his stead, or city water superintendent and/or his designee, to immediately
give public notice of said water shortage and to impose any of the following
water use restrictions. During the course of the water shortage, the mayor or
water superintendent shall have the authority to impose any lesser or greater
restriction allowed by this section upon public notice in the news media. The
public notice will include a description of provisions in effect. If stages 3
through 5 are imposed, the city council will consider the action at the next
meeting at which the matter can be considered, and the city council may
continue the stage in effect, continue it with changes or discontinue the
stage.
The stages of restrictions which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter are as
follows:
      1.   Stage 1: A request for voluntary water conservation will be made
through the news media. People will be urged to conserve water in every way
possible in their homes and businesses. Major users shall be requested to
review means by which they can reduce water usage during the emergency.
      2.   Stage 2: Includes stage 1 restrictions and the following:
         a.   The use of open ended hoses, sprinklers or tube sprinkler hoses
for lawn and garden irrigation is banned, except for new sod or newly
constructed turf areas installed before the ban inception.
         b.   Only buckets, sprinkler cans or drip irrigation methods are
allowed to water trees, shrubs, outside flowers and gardens.
         c.   Commercial establishments holding or growing plant materials for
resale may only use a handheld hose, drip, tube or recycling irrigation system
to water. All irrigation is restricted to the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
until six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
         d.   The operation of all water demanding amenities such as ornamental
fountains, waterfalls or reflecting pools is banned.
         e.   The use of water for cleaning exterior walls of buildings,
windows, sidewalks, driveways, etc., except where necessary for sanitation or
safety reasons, is banned.
         f.   Water usage for swimming and wading pools, private and public, is
limited to the amount needed to compensate for evaporation or spillage.
         g.   The use of water for washing vehicles, motor or nonmotor, is
banned, except these restrictions would not apply to high pressure commercial
washing establishments or to places of business where autos are washed
regularly by attendants with automatic equipment or by self-service.
      3.   Stage 3: Includes restrictions in stages 1 and 2 and, additionally,
the following:
         a.   Commercial car washing and car washing at places of business
where autos are washed regularly would be prohibited, except on even calendar
days for no more than ten (10) hours per day.
         b.   No water shall be withdrawn from Lake Taylorville 1  for lawns,
gardens, irrigation or golf courses.
      4.   Stage 4: Includes restrictions in stages 1, 2 and 3 and,
additionally, the following:
Ban the sale of bulk water except for livestock and human consumption and
health uses.
      5.   Stage 5: Includes restrictions in stages 1, 2, 3 and 4 and,
additionally, the following:
Would additionally prohibit all uses of water, except for human consumption and
health uses.
   C.   Effect Of Water Shortage Restrictions: It is the policy of the city to
keep stages 3, 4 and 5 in effect for no longer than absolutely necessary. The
water superintendent and city council shall take steps to lift these
restrictions as soon as they believe the water supply adequate to meet the
demand.
   D.   Reports And Review Of Rationing: The water superintendent will make
reports to the city council at least once a week while water conservation is in
effect. The city council will review the reports and consider any changes that
may be desirable in the regulations set out in this section.
   E.   Responsibility For Violations: No person shall be convicted of
violating this Section unless such person, in fact, turned on water, directed
the turning on of water or kept water turned on after learning it was turned on
in violation hereof or failed to turn off automatic devices capable of turning
on water in violation hereof. It will not be necessary, however, to present a
witness who saw the accused turning on the water, if the circumstances
indicated the accused did turn on the water.
   F.   Explanations: The Water Superintendent may, from time to time, send,
along with monthly water bills, an explanation of the regulations set out in
this Section when in effect.
   G.   Penalties: See Section
8-4-18 of this Chapter for penalty provisions. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7 of this code.
8-4-8: WATER USE DURING CONSTRUCTION:
During construction of any building and before any water is installed as is
herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted
to use the City water supply by making application therefor and using a
temporary meter in a temporary setting as prescribed by the Water
Superintendent.
See Section
8-4-18 of this Chapter for penalty provisions. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-9: WATER RATES:
   A.   Rates Established; Definitions:
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following definitions
apply:
         CITY'S CORPORATE LIMITS: The City's corporate limits as now existing
or as may be hereafter established through annexation or disconnecting
procedures.
         INDUSTRIAL USER: Any entity whose monthly use of City water averages
(over each preceding consecutive 6 month period) at least five hundred thousand
(500,000) cubic feet of water, or at least four million (4,000,000) gallons of
water, and such entity regularly and continually employs at least fifty (50)
full time employees in Christian County, Illinois, during each monthly billing
period for water usage.
         MUNICIPAL USER: Any other city or village or public water district who
is purchasing water under a written contract with the City. As of February 1,
2019, such "municipal users" only include the Village of Kincaid, Illinois and
the Langleyville Public Water District, in Christian County, Illinois.
         NONINDUSTRIAL USER: Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or entity that does not meet the definition of an "industrial
user" and excluding the "Park District".
         PARK DISTRICT: Manners Park, Don Bragg Field, Jaynes Park, and
Lakeshore Golf Course owned by the Taylorville Pleasure Driveway and Park
District.
         PREMISES: The "industrial user's" or "nonindustrial user's" site where
the City water is delivered and distributed to for consumption or use or where
the City water is used by the "industrial user" or by the "nonindustrial user".
      2.   Rates:
         a.   Water Rates For Each Nonindustrial User And Billing Period:
            (1)   For each "nonindustrial user" whose "premises" are located
inside the City's corporate limits, the billing period shall be monthly
commencing March 1, 2019 for the City's east side customers and commencing
April 1, 2019 for the City's west side customers. The water rates for each
"nonindustrial user" during each applicable billing period shall be as follows
until such water rates are changed by the City Council:
         Commencing May 1, 2018 through February 28, 2019 or through March 31,
2019, as the case may be, the bi-monthly water rates shall be:
 
The first 400 cubic feet or less        $30.00 minimum charge
Over 400 cubic feet to 2,000 cubic feet $6.30 per 100 cubic feet or part
                                        thereof
Over 2,000 cubic feet                   $5.24 per 100 cubic feet or part
                                        thereof
 
         Commencing March 1, 2019 for City's east side customers billable
monthly, and commencing April 1, 2019 for the west side customers the water
rates billable monthly shall be as follows:
 
The first 1,500 gallons or less       $15.00 minimum charge
Next 6,000 gallons over 1,500 gallons $8.50 per 1,000 gallons or part thereof
Over 7,500 gallons                    $7.00 per 1,000 gallons or part thereof
 
            (2)   For any "nonindustrial user" whose use of water prior to
March 1, 2019 or April 1, 2019, as the case may be, is or was metered or
measured in gallons, then the foregoing rates for cubic feet shall be
translated into gallons and billed accordingly.
            (3)   Where multiple services exist at a particular premises,
amounts to be charged for water used in these circumstances shall be computed
as if separate services existed, based upon application of the minimum water
rates set forth in this Section.
         b.   Water Rates For A Nonindustrial User Outside The City's Corporate
Limits: For City water service to "premises" located outside the City's
corporate limits, the applicable water rates for water furnished to each
"nonindustrial user" (as set forth in subsection A2a of this Section) shall be
one hundred percent (100%) higher than the rates for water furnished to a
"nonindustrial user" inside the City's corporate limits.
         c.   Water Rates For Each Industrial User And Billing Period:
            (1)   Each "industrial user" whose "premises" are located inside
the City's corporate limits shall be billed monthly and the applicable water
rates shall be as follows:
         Commencing May 1, 2014, until such water rates are changed by City
Council:
 
Flat rate  $1.91 per 100 cubic feet or part thereof
 
         Commencing with the March 2019 monthly billing period, the water rates
shall be:
 
Flat rate  $2.55 per 1,000 gallons or part thereof
 
            (2)   Each "industrial user" whose "premises" are located outside
the City's corporate limits shall be billed monthly, and the applicable water
rates shall be as follows:
         Commencing May 1, 2017, the water rates shall be:
 
Flat rate  $2.32 per 100 cubic feet or part thereof
 
         Commencing with the March 2019 monthly billing period, the water rates
shall be:
 
Flat rate  $3.10 per 1,000 gallons or part thereof
 
            (3)   For any "industrial user" whose use of water is now or
hereafter metered or measured in gallons, then the foregoing rates for cubic
feet shall be translated into gallons and billed accordingly.
            (4)   The foregoing water rates shall only apply to an "industrial
user" for so long as such "industrial user" obtains and purchases its total
water needs from the City and does not develop, repair, refurbish, or use
private water wells or purchase or obtain water from other sources. If the
"industrial user" fails to obtain and purchase its total water needs from the
City or uses water from private wells or from any other source, then the
"nonindustrial user" rates set forth in subsections A2a and A2b of this
Section, as the case may be, shall apply.
         d.   Water Rates For Each Municipal User And Billing Period: The
applicable water rates and billing period for each "municipal user" shall be as
established, from time to time, in accordance with the written contract or
intergovernmental agreement then in effect between the City and such "municipal
user".
         e.   Water Rates And Billing Period For The Park District: The billing
period shall be monthly commencing May 1, 2018 and the water rate shall be the
applicable nonindustrial rates for the swimming pool, Chautauqua Building,
dining hall, restrooms, faucets, maintenance building, and the house located in
Manners Park, the Don Bragg Field, and Jaynes Park.
         f.   Sale Of Bulk Water 1 : Sale of bulk City water to tankers at the
City's water treatment plant or from fire hydrants shall be for the sum of one
dollar twenty five cents ($1.25) per one hundred (100) gallons or part thereof.
         g.   Estimated Charges: Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out
of repair or service or if the seal is broken or for any other cause, fails to
properly and accurately register or measure the water passing through the
meter, the Water Office Manager or the Water Superintendent and/or his designee
shall estimate the amount of water consumed during the time the meter failed to
operate, and the consumer shall be charged and pay such estimated amount.
         h.   Special Water Rates And Incentives: The City Council reserves the
right, from time to time, to make and provide for special water rates to users
for water supplied to "premises" not covered by the water rates set forth in
this Section or to provide free water service, from time to time, to any user
(s) which, in each case and in the judgment of the City Council, by affirmative
majority vote of the Corporate Authorities then in office, such user(s) should
be charged special water rates or provided free water service, from time to
time, to enhance, induce, or encourage economic or business preservation,
employment, development, or growth within the City.
         i.   No Charge For Water Service To City Owned Property: There shall
be no charge for water service to any City owned property and which water is
used by the City.
         j.   Services, Benefits And Advantages: The City of Taylorville, in
order to promote and foster a stronger economic climate in its community, is
authorized to grant those Municipal services, benefits and advantages set forth
below to qualified industrial and other business enterprises located in
Taylorville. Each newly established enterprise must employ not less than
fifteen (15) persons. The word "persons", as used herein, is intended to refer
to, mean and be limited to those persons who are employed full time working not
less than thirty seven (37) hours per week. Presently existing enterprises
must, within a twelve (12) month period immediately preceding authorization of
such grant, employ not less than fifteen (15) additional persons. The City of
Taylorville is authorized to grant such qualified enterprises those Municipal
services, benefits and advantages set forth as follows:
            (1)   Free water not to exceed seventy five thousand (75,000)
gallons per month for a period of two (2) years.
            (2)   Free fire protection for a period of two (2) years.
            (3)   Real Estate Tax abatement for a period of two (2) years.
            (4)   Free building permits for a period of two (2) years.
         k.   Reservation Of Rights: The City reserves the right, from time to
time, to increase or decrease the aforesaid water rates and/or to amend,
modify, substitute, delete, or revise, in whole or in part, any one or more or
all of the provisions set forth in this subsection A. Nothing contained in this
subsection A shall be construed as creating any contract or agreement or
understanding with any "industrial user", "nonindustrial user", "municipal
user", the "Park District", or any other water customer(s) of the City.
         l.   Clearwater Organic Farms: In order to enhance, induce, and
encourage economic and business preservation, employment, development and
growth within the City and pursuant to subsection A2h of this Section
Clearwater Organic Farms (a current City water customer located outside the
City's corporate limits) is granted, effective October 15, 2018 free water not
to exceed seventy five thousand (75,000) gallons per month for a period of two
(2) years, subject to and provided Clearwater Organic Farms employs and
maintains at least fifteen (15) full time employees who each work not less than
thirty seven (37) hours per week during all times during such two (2) year
period; and failing that contingency at any time such free water shall thereby
immediately cease.
   B.   Bills For Service; Delinquencies:
      1.   Payment Of Bills: All water bills are due and payable on or before
the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which they are billed. A
penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the amount due and unpaid shall
be added thereto with respect to water bills not timely paid. Water bills and
penalties shall be paid at the Water Collection Office. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, the applicable penalty or chargeable interest
for delinquent water and/or sewer bills to the State of Illinois or any
political subdivision or agency thereof shall be at the maximum penalty and/or
interest rate as may be provided and allowable by law at the time of each such
delinquent water and/or sewer bill.
      2.   Delinquent Bills; Hearing; Discontinuance Of Service: All water
bills are due as prescribed in subsection B1 of this section. On or after the
twenty second day of the same month following each due date, a notice shall be
given to all delinquent customers of disconnection of service on the seventh
day after date of this notice. This final notice prior to disconnection shall
state the amount due and the date the bill must be paid prior to disconnection
of service. The notice will also state that before service is restored, the
total amount due must be paid, including interest, plus a security deposit may
be required, plus a processing fee for reconnection will be charged.
The final notice of termination prior to disconnection shall be accomplished by
actual personal service upon the owner and/or occupant of the premises
concerned or, to the extent such notice shall be reasonably impossible or
otherwise impractical, by such other means as then appear appropriate,
including posting of the notice on the front or back door of the premises.
      3.   Uniform Shutoff Time: As of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the day of
disconnection of services, the Water Collection Department shall charge the
processing fee, even if service has not yet been disconnected by Water
Department personnel.
      4.   Restoration Of Service: Before water service is restored to such
premises, the customer shall pay all delinquent water bills. In addition,
thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid by residents and seventy dollars
($70.00) shall be paid by nonresidents as fees for restoration of service.
      5.   Collection Costs And Fees For Final Bills: If a final bill is not
fully paid within sixty (60) calendar days or more after its stated due date,
then the Water Collection Office Manager or his/her designee shall have the
right, in addition to and not in lieu of any other legal remedies, and without
any further notice to the water customer(s) of the subject premises to: a) turn
the final bill over to a debt collection agency for collection and in such
event each such debtor shall be obligated and shall pay immediately upon demand
all debt collection agency fees and costs incurred by the City in addition to
the amount of the final bill; and/or b) turn the matter over to the City
Attorney for collection of such bill and in such event such debtor shall be
obligated and shall pay the City immediately upon demand all attorney fees,
costs, and expenses incurred by the City relating to the collection and/or
prosecution of any litigation regarding such final bill. Each such water
customer shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the water service on
such premises, and the water service is furnished to the premises by the City
only upon the condition that each such customer is jointly and severally liable
therefor to the City. For purposes of this section, "water customer" shall mean
and include each person and/or entity in whose name the water service is in
and/or who has signed any City document to provide for water service for the
subject premises according to the City's records at the time of the rendering
of such final bill.
   C.   Water Rate Increase For Lake Restoration Fund:
      1.   Commencing January 1, 2025 and continuing until January 1, 2029, the
water rates for each billing period for each industrial user and for each
nonindustrial user and for each municipal user as set forth in subsection
8-4-9A shall be increased by $0.0005 per gallon; provided, however, such
$0.0005 per gallon water rate increase shall be capped at two hundred dollars
($200.00) per month for each industrial user or nonindustrial user or municipal
user who uses more than 400,000 gallons of water per month.
      2.   All revenue generated by such $0.0005 per gallon water rate increase
shall be earmarked for the Lake Restoration Fund. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011; amd.
Ord. 3728, 9-9-2015; Ord. 3743, 3-21-2016; Ord. 3875, 11-5-2018; Ord. 3887, 3-
4-2019; Ord. 4034, 5-3-2021; Ord. 4286, 12-16-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  8-4-5 of this Chapter.
8-4-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Electrical Ground Wires: It shall be unlawful for any person to install
an electrical ground wire on any water service connection.
   B.   Tampering With Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by the City Water Department to tamper with, alter or injure any
part of the City water system, supply system or any meter. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-
2011)
8-4-11: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   No territory or premises located outside the City's corporate limits
which is contiguous to the City's corporate limits shall be connected with the
City's water distribution system until and unless a valid petition for
annexation of said territory or premises is presented to the City Clerk and
such territory or premises is actually annexed to the City, which annexation
can be denied for any reason or for no reason whatsoever in the sole discretion
of the city council from time to time.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, if the city council
elects not to annex contiguous territory or premises at the time city water
service is requested by the record owner(s) of such contiguous territory or
premises, then the city council may, in its sole discretion, approve water
service for such contiguous territory or premises provided each then owner of
record of such contiguous territory or premises signs an annexation petition
and enters into and signs an annexation agreement with the city in forms
approved by the city council from time to time, whereby each said owner and
their respective heirs, devisees, legal and personal representatives,
successors and assigns, agree to and shall immediately annex said contiguous
territory or premises to the city when and if at any time thereafter during the
remaining term of said annexation agreement or renewal thereof the city council
determines in its sole discretion that such contiguous territory or premises
shall be annexed into the city.
   B.   No territory or premises located outside the city's corporate limits
which is not contiguous to the city's corporate limits shall be connected with
the city's water distribution system until and unless each owner of record of
such territory or premises signs an annexation petition and enters into and
signs an annexation agreement with the city, whereby said owners agree to and
shall immediately annex said territory or premises to the city when and if said
territory or premises has become contiguous to the city's corporate limits and
at any time thereafter during the remaining term of said annexation agreement
or renewal thereof the city council determines in its sole discretion that such
contiguous territory or premises shall be annexed into the city.
   C.   At the time of annexation as set forth in subsections A and B of this
section, the annexing party or parties as the case may be shall pay any and all
expenses related to said annexation and all other fees as set forth in this
code including, but not limited to, the recording fee for said annexation,
which fee shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) or the fee actually assessed
by the recorder's office for Christian County, Illinois, at the time of
recording, whichever amount shall be greater.
   D.   Unless said annexation petition and annexation agreement has been
signed and filed with the city clerk as provided in subsection A or B of this
section, then in the event a territory or premises located outside the city's
corporate limits is connected with the city's water distribution system and is
contiguous to the city's corporate limits, the city clerk shall send notice to
the owner of said territory or premises that if a petition to annex the
territory or premises into the city's corporate limits is not properly signed
by all record owners of said territory or premises and filed with the city
clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the territory or
premises shall be disconnected from the city's water distribution system; and
if a proper petition to annex is signed and filed, but annexation of the
territory or premises into the city's corporate limits is not completed within
sixty (60) days of the date of the notice by the city clerk as set forth
herein, said territory or premises shall be disconnected from the city's water
distribution system; and the water superintendent, or his designee, shall make
such disconnection.
   E.   Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the city council may in
its sole discretion waive the requirement of such annexation agreement with the
owners of record of territory or premises, not contiguous to the city's
corporate limits, if the city water connection to be provided for such
territory or premises is made pursuant to an easement agreement with the owners
of such territory or premises in a form acceptable to the city which, inter
alia, grants the city an easement which allows the city to extend the city's
water distribution lines and mains and appurtenances through such territory or
premises for the primary purpose of providing water service to another
municipality pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement with such
municipality; and such water connection allowed to such territory or premises,
providing such easement, is limited to allowing such territory or premises only
one private water service line, not exceeding one inch (1") diameter in size,
for the sole purposes of only providing water service for a single-family
residence on such territory or premises and/or providing water service for
farming related purposes conducted on such territory or premises by the record
owners or tenants thereof. In the event the record owners of such territory or
premises desire water service to such territory or premises for any other
purposes and/or additional water service lines and/or larger water service
lines, then subsections A or B and C of this section, as may then be
applicable, shall apply and must be first complied with by the record owners of
such territory or premises. (Ord. 3720, 7-20-2015)
8-4-12: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
   CITY: The corporate limits of the city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   WATER CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the city's public water
system. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-13: PLUMBING INSTALLATION:
All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois plumbing code, as now enacted or as then in effect at the time of
such installation. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-14: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED; MAINTENANCE 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See article A of this chapter.
8-4-15: CONTAMINATION; LIABILITY 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
 
Notes
1 2. See article A of this chapter.
8-4-16: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
 
Notes
1 3. See article A of this chapter.
8-4-17: DISCONNECTION; RECONNECTION FEE 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
 
Notes
1 4. See article A of this chapter.
8-4-18: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition, and not in lieu of any other provisions of this chapter, any
person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-19: ANNUAL REVIEW:
The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than
annually, by certified public accountants for the city of Taylorville in their
annual audit report. The water service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or operation, maintenance and
replacement costs. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-20: REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be
deposited in the water account of the water fund. All such revenues and monies
shall be held by the city treasurer separate and apart from his/her private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city treasurer not
more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and city council.
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him/her and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "water fund of the city of Taylorville". Said treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the
"revised cities and villages act", effective January 1942. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-
2011)
8-4-21: ACCOUNTS:
The city treasurer shall establish and maintain a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at
regular annual intervals he/she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
In addition to the customary operation statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities,
including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
   A.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the
current fiscal year.
   B.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
   C.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
   D.   Number of users connected to the system.
   E.   Number of nonmetered users. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-22: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representatives shall have access to any books,
documents, papers, and records of the city which are applicable to the city
system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts,
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the loan
agreement and rules or any state loan. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
8-4-23: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges shall be made available to a user within seven (7) business days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the water committee within
thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. 3503, 1-18-2011)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4A-1: General Policy
8-4A-2: Definitions
8-4A-3: Water System
8-4A-4: Cross Connection Prohibited
8-4A-5: Surveys And Investigations
8-4A-6: Where Protection Is Required
8-4A-7: Type Of Protection Required
8-4A-8: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-4A-9: Inspection And Maintenance
8-4A-10: Booster Pumps
8-4A-11: Disconnection
8-4A-12: Violations
8-4A-1: GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   B.   Application: This article shall apply to all premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the city of Taylorville.
   C.   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If in the judgment of the water superintendent or authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the water superintendent shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install
such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in
subsection
8-4A-5D4 of this article for a period of at least five (5) years. The water
superintendent may require the consumer to submit a cross connection inspection
report to the city of Taylorville to assist in determining whether or not
service line protection will be required. All cross connection inspections
shall be conducted by a cross connection control device inspector certified by
the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
   AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
   APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitary Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any source or system on or available to the premises
other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by
the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or
streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or
contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which
the purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or other substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into the potable water system. All devices used
for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building's plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers.
The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the
health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant
reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
   NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604.
   PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and
related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building
drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5')
beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois
administrative code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUIDS: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited
to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   B.   Process waters;
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   D.   Cooling waters;
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days
per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date
of all cross connection control devices and methods located within the
customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be
an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-3: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   B.   The public water supply system shall consist of the distribution
system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system
under the control of the water superintendent up to the point where the
consumer's water system begins.
   C.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   D.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-4: CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   1. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the agency.
      2.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-5: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   B.   On request by the water superintendent, or his/her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The refusal of
such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the water
superintendent, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this article. The consumer's premises shall be open at all
reasonable times to the water superintendent for the verification of
information submitted by the inspection consumer to the public water supply
custodian regarding cross connection inspection results.
   C.   1. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his/her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his/her water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his/her water
system or the public potable water system. All cross connection control or
other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 320/3.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the water superintendent to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every
two (2) years, or as often as the water superintendent shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a
period of at least five (5) years.
   D.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a
cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      4.   Testing is done and records are maintained.
         a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         b.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-105.
         c.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test;
            (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            (3)   Test results;
            (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
            (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
            (6)   Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-
2005)
8-4A-6: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises,
where in the judgment of the water superintendent, actual or potential hazards
to the public water supply system exist.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the water superintendent and the
source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This can include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the water superintendent.
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of
the water superintendent and/or the cross connection control device inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   C.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the water
superintendent determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-
2005)
8-4A-7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   The type of protection required under this subsection shall depend on
the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   B.   The type of protection required under subsection A of this section
shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   C.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   D.   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered lines. (Ord. 3261, 12-
5-2005)
8-4A-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this article
shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross- Connection Control of
the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association,
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   B.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on site. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this article are installed to have inspection,
tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following schedule or
more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's
specifications:
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   B.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   C.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   D.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   E.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this article are found
to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection A of this section.
   F.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
water superintendent. (Ord. 3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line or within
any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the water
superintendent, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 3261,
12-5-2005)
8-4A-11: DISCONNECTION:
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the water
superintendent is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the water superintendent or the Illinois environmental
protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential
contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water
supply, the water superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to
any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of
this article, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord.
3261, 12-5-2005)
8-4A-12: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The water superintendent shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested,
maintained, and repaired in a manner acceptable to the water superintendent, or
if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cutoff required by this article is not installed and maintained in
working order.
   B.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
article and to the satisfaction of the water superintendent, and the required
reconnection fee is paid.
   C.   Neither the city of Taylorville, the water superintendent, or its
agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the city of Taylorville
for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of
said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this article,
whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice.
   D.   The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   E.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be
served with written notice stating the notice of violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   F.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city of Taylorville for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city of Taylorville by reason of such
violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. (Ord. 3261, 12-
5-2005)
ARTICLE B. USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
SECTION:
8-4B-1: Definitions
8-4B-2: Prohibited; Exception; Connection Required
8-4B-3: Memorandum Of Understanding
8-4B-4: Penalties
8-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods. (Ord. 3463, 5-3-2010)
8-4B-2: PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION; CONNECTION REQUIRED:
Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date hereof,
the use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from within the
corporate limits of the city of Taylorville, as a potable water supply, by the
installation of drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited.
This prohibition does not include the city of Taylorville.
Upon information and belief, the city of Taylorville believes that there are
only two (2) parcels within the corporate limits of the city of Taylorville
which have wells in use for potable water. Those two (2) parcels are located at
1324 West Franklin Street and 1504 West Park Avenue.
If a property is annexed into the city of Taylorville, has a well in use for
potable water, and a city of Taylorville water main is accessible, said
property owner must tap onto the city's water main within one hundred twenty
(120) days of annexation. (A city water main is accessible if it crosses the
property in question.)
If a property is annexed into the city of Taylorville, has a well in use for
potable water, and a city of Taylorville water main is not accessible, the
property owner of said property shall tap onto a city water main within one
hundred twenty (120) days of a water main becoming accessible and operational.
If a property currently within the city of Taylorville limits has an existing
well in use for potable water, and the house is sold, the new property owner
must tap onto a city of Taylorville water main if one is accessible within
twenty one (21) days of the closing of the sale. If a city of Taylorville water
main is not accessible, the owner of said property must tap onto a city water
main within one hundred twenty (120) days of a city water main becoming
accessible and operational. (Ord. 3463, 5-3-2010)
8-4B-3: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING:
The mayor of the city of Taylorville is hereby authorized and directed to enter
into a memorandum of understanding with the Illinois environmental protection
agency ("Illinois EPA") in which the city of Taylorville assumes responsibility
for tracking all sites that have received no further remediation determinations
from the Illinois EPA, notifying the Illinois EPA of changes to this article,
and taking certain precautions when siting public potable water supply wells.
(Ord. 3463, 5-3-2010)
8-4B-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day for each violation.
(Ord. 3463, 5-3-2010)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-5-3: Private Sanitary Sewage Disposal
8-5-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-5-5: Use Restrictions
8-5-6: Wastewater Service Rates And Charges
8-5-7: Protection From Damage
8-5-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-5-9: Violations And Penalties
8-5-10: Surface Water Runoff
8-5-11: Service Outside City Limits
8-5-12: Policy For Maintenance And Repair Of City's Sewer Main And Property
Owner's Sewer
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
      Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection
agency.
      Federal Act: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the federal water pollution control acts of amendments of
1972 (Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243).
      Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by title II - grants for
construction of treatment works of the act and implementing regulations.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
      Approving Authority: The superintendent of streets and sewers of the city
of Taylorville.
      City: The city of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
   NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the administrator or, where appropriated, by the director, after enactment of
the federal water pollution control amendments of 1972, to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
   PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
      Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
      Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
      Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city of Taylorville. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city
limit boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into
the city of Taylorville sanitary system even though those sewers may not have
been constructed with city of Taylorville funds.
      Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
      Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
      Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
      Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
      Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
   STATE GOVERNMENT:
      Director: The director of Illinois environmental protection agency.
      State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970 1 .
      State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
   SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of streets and sewers.
   TREATMENT:
      Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
      Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
   TYPES OF CHARGES:
      Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
      Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding
and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of
users connected to the wastewater facilities.
      Operation and Maintenance Costs: All costs, direct and indirect (other
than debt service), necessary to insure adequate wastewater treatment on a
continuing basis, conform with at related Federal, State and local requirements
and assure optimal long-term facility management. (These costs include
replacement.)
      Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
      Surcharge: The assessment, in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge, which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in subsection
8-5-6A of this Chapter.
      Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/
or treatment works will be operated and shall be thirty (30) years for
treatment works and fifty (50) years for the collection system from the date of
start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a State grant.
      User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to section 204(b) of PL 92-
500.
      Wastewater Service Charge: The charge, per month or two (2) month period,
levied on all users of wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be
computed as outlined in subsection
8-5-6A of this Chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge,
the debt service charge or a surcharge, if applicable.
   USER TYPES:
      Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
      Industrial User: Any nongovernmental user of publicly- owned treatment
works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
         Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
         Division B - Mining
         Division D - Manufacturing
         Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services
         Division I - Services
      A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the
Superintendent of Streets and Sewers that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      Residential or Commercial or Nonindustrial User: Any user of the
treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for in this category "user types".
      User Class: The type of user either "residential or commercial"
(nonindustrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
      BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) centigrade, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
      Effluent Criteria: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
      Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
      Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly-owned
treatment works that:
         A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average
work day; or
         B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by
the Municipal system receiving the waste; or
         C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
         D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
      Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
      Normal Domestic Sewage: Is defined for the purpose of determining
surcharge and shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended
solids concentration of not more than two hundred forty milligrams per liter
(240 mg/l) and average daily BOD of not more than two hundred milligrams per
liter (200 mg/l).
      ppm: Parts per million by weight.
      pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard
Methods".
      Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or streams. One population equivalent is
one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen one-
hundredths (0.17) pound of BOD and twenty one-hundredths (0.20) pound of
suspended solids.
      Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
      Sanitary Sewage:
         A.   Domestic sewage with storm and surface water excluded;
         B.   Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings,
apartment houses, hotels and motels, office buildings, factories or
institutions; and
         C.   The water supply of the community after it has been used and
discharged into a sewer.
      Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
      Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
      Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in
the most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
      Suspended Solids: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
      Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
      Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of
course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
      Water Quality Standards: Are defined in the water pollution regulations
of Illinois 1 .
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and process required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
      Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
      Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 2078, 11-15-1982; amd. Ord. 2089, 4-4-
1983; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/11 et seq.
8-5-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to permit the maintenance of any privy unit or
cesspools in the city except privy units in recreation areas at Lake
Taylorville and on job sites for construction purposes.
   D.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, work, recreation, assembly, or other purposes situated
within the city and abutting on any private or public property, street,
roadway, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located any public sanitary (or combined sewer) are hereby required
to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the nearest property line of the subject property. (Ord. 3683, 9-2-
2014)
8-5-3: PRIVATE SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Installation Of Private Systems: Septic tanks or private sanitary
sewage disposal systems shall be installed or constructed to receive sewage
from any dwelling unit or any building having sanitary sewage waste where the
property line of the building site is greater than one hundred fifty feet
(150') from existing sewer unless the owner elects to extend a private sewer
line to an existing public sewer.
   B.   Compliance: Such private sanitary sewage disposal system shall be
installed, constructed, repaired, modified, altered, extended, operated, and
maintained in compliance with this section and in accordance with all then
applicable provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/1 et al. ("private
sewage disposal licensing act") and rules, codes, and regulations adopted by
the Illinois department of public health in effect from time to time; and in
compliance with any and all other applicable provisions of this code in effect
from time to time.
   C.   Owner Responsible For Inspection: Within six (6) months after each
installation, construction, repair, alteration, modification, or extension and
annually thereafter, the owner of a private sanitary sewage disposal system
shall have such private sanitary sewage disposal system inspected by and a
written report prepared by an Illinois licensed private sewage disposal
installation contractor certifying compliance with this section and with the
applicable provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/1 et al. ("private
sewage disposal licensing act") and rules, codes, and regulations adopted by
the Illinois department of public health in effect from time to time, and in
compliance with any and all other applicable provisions of this code in effect
from time to time; and each such inspection report shall be filed by the owner
of such private sanitary sewage system with the city clerk's office within ten
(10) days following each such inspection.
   D.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to use,
install, construct, modify, alter, or extend a private sanitary sewage disposal
system within the city unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the
health and building officer in the name of such person who owns or will own the
private sanitary sewage system for the specific installation, construction,
modification, alteration, or extension proposed. The owner of the private
sanitary sewage system shall be bound by and comply with all the terms and
provisions set forth in the application for permit.
      2.   Application For Permit; Issuance Or Denial; Fee:
         a.   All applications for permits shall be made to the health and
building officer who shall issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations adopted hereunder. The
health and building officer may refuse to grant a permit for the construction
of a private sanitary sewage disposal system where public or community sewerage
systems are reasonably available and shall refuse to grant a permit if a public
sewer is within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the nearest property line of
the subject property.
         b.   Applications for permits shall be made on the appropriate form
available from the city clerk, shall be in writing, shall be signed by the
applicant and shall include at least the following:
            (1)   Name and address of the applicant, lot and block number of
property on which installation, construction, alteration, or extension is
proposed.
            (2)   Complete plan of the proposed disposal facility, with
substantiating data, if necessary, attesting to its compliance with the minimum
standards of the health and building officer.
            (3)   Such further information as may be required by the health and
building officer to substantiate that the proposed construction, alteration or
extension complies with rules and regulations promulgated by the health and
building officer.
         PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPLICATION
         TO THE CITY OF TAYLORVILLE
 
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the    
                                                                 (Owner,
Owner's Agent)
of the property located at    
            Number Street
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install a private sanitary sewage disposal
facilities to serve the    
            (Residence, Commercial Building, etc.)
at said location.
1. The proposed facilities include:    
to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and specifications
attached hereunto as Exhibit "A".
2. The area of the property is                                 square feet or
(                                                        square meters).
3. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work is:
                                                              .
4. The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities is
                                      .
5. The location and nature of all sources of private or public water supply
within the one hundred fifty feet (150') of any boundary of said property are
shown on the plat attached hereunto as Exhibit "B".
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work that
shall be requested by the Sewer Superintendent.
2. To accept and abide by section
8-5-3 and all other applicable provisions of the Taylorville City Code, and of
all other pertinent ordinances or rules or regulations that now exist or as may
hereafter be enacted, adopted, amended, or added; and to comply with all
applicable provisions of 225 ILCS 225/1 et al. ("Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act") and rules, codes, and regulations adopted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, in effect from time to time.
3. To install, construct, repair, modify, alter, extend, operate, and maintain
the private sanitary sewage disposal system covered by this application in a
sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all requirements of the City,
and at no expense to the City.
4. To notify the Sewer Superintendent at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
commencement of the work proposed, and again at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to the covering of any underground portions of the installation.
5. Within six (6) months after installation, construction, repair, alteration,
modification, or extension and annually thereafter, to have the private
sanitary sewage disposal system covered by this application inspected by and a
written report prepared by an Illinois licensed Private Sewage Disposal
Installation Contractor certifying compliance with this Section
8-5-3 and with the applicable provisions of 225 ILCS 225/1 et al. ("Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act") and rules, codes, and regulations adopted by
the Illinois Department of Public Health in effect from time to time; and each
such inspection report shall be filed with the City Clerk's office within ten
(10) days following each such inspection.
DATE:                       SIGNED:    
               (Applicant)
               
               (Address Of Applicant)
$                           inspection fee paid.
         
Certification by City of Taylorville City Clerk.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                       SIGNED:    
               (Approving Authority)
         c.   A complete plan for the purpose of obtaining a permit to be
issued by the health and building officer shall include:
            (1)   The number, location and size of all sewage disposal
facilities to be constructed, altered or extended.
            (2)   The location of water supplies, water supply piping, existing
sewage disposal facilities, buildings or dwellings and adjacent lot lines.
            (3)   Plans of the proposed sewage disposal facilities to be
constructed, altered or extended.
         d.   Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has
been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
health and building officer within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
request.
         e.   All applications for permits shall be made to the health and
building officer who shall issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with
the provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto. The applicant shall pay the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the
time the application is submitted as a charge for the review and issuance of a
permit.
   E.   Inspections By City: The health and building officer or his delegate is
hereby authorized but is not obligated to make such inspections as are
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter and rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder. It shall be the duty of the owner or
occupant of a property to give the health and building officer or his delegate
free access to the property at reasonable times for the purpose of making such
inspections. (Ord. 3683, 9-2-2014)
8-5-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to make connection with any
city sewer without having first obtained a permit therefor.
      2.   Classification Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits:
         a.   For residential and commercial service, and
         b.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city and on file in the city clerk's office.
      3.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made
to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of
the connection, the premises to be served and the specifications of such pipe
to be connected and the drain from house to sewer pipe. Such applications shall
be referred to the city engineer or superintendent of streets and sewers and no
such permit shall be issued unless he shall have found that the ordinances of
the city would be complied with by making of such connections. (Ord. 2078, 11-
15-82)
   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION
TO THE CITY OF TAYLORVILLE
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the
                                                                                   
(Owner, Owner's Agent)
property located at
                                                                                                    
Number Street
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install and connect a building to serve the
                                                                                                                                           
(Residence, Commercial Building, etc.)
at said location.
1. The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed building
sewer:
      Number   Fixtures       Numbers      Fixtures
                             Kitchen sinks                         Water
closets
                             Lavatories                         Bath tubs
                             Laundry tubs                         Showers
                             Urinals                         Garbage grinder
   Specify other fixtures
                                                                                                 
2. The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
                       .
3. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed
work is
                                                                                                                                     
Plumber License #
                                                                                                    
4. Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as Exhibit "A".
Type of Pipe
Proposed                                                                                     .
Length of Sewer
Service                                                                                  .
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To accept and abide by all provisions of the Code of the City of Taylorville
and Christian County, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the future.
2. To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the City.
3. To notify the Sewer Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the
work is covered.
DATE:                     SIGNED:
                                                                                                                  
(Applicant)
                                                                                                                                         
(Address of Applicant)
                                                              
Certification by City of Taylorville City Clerk
$                                      connection fee paid.
$                                      inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit is issued.
DATE:                       SIGNED:
                                                                                            
(Sewer Superintendent)
   INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION
TO THE CITY OF TAYLORVILLE
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the
                                                                                                    
(Owner, Lessee, Tenant, etc.)
of the property located at
                                                                                           
Number Street
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to
                                                   an industrial (install, use)
connection serving the
                                                                                                        
(Name of Company)
which company is engaged in
                                                                                     at
said location.
1. A plat of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains now existing
is attached hereunto as Exhibit "A".
2. Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed under
this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit "B".
3. A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or
expected to be produced at said property, including a description of the
character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of discharge, and
representative analysis, is attached hereunto as Exhibit "C".
4. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work covered
by this permit is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use of
the industrial sewer for which this permit is sought as may be adopted in the
future.
2. To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment
facilities, as may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the public
sewer of the industrial wastes involved in an efficient manner at all times,
and at no expenses to the City.
3. To cooperate at all times with the Sewer Superintendent, and his
representative in their inspecting, sampling, and study of the industrial
wastes, and any facilities provided for pretreatment.
4. To notify the Sewer Superintendent immediately in the event of any accident,
negligence, or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers
of any wastes or process waters not covered by this permit.
DATE:                            SIGNED:
                                                                                       
(Applicant)
                                                                                                                                                     
(Address of Applicant)
                                                               
   Certification by City of Taylorville City Clerk.
$                           connection fee paid.
$                           inspection fee paid.
   Application approved and permit is issued.
DATE:                     SIGNED:
                                                                                              
(Sewer Superintendent)
      4.   Sewer Tap Permit Fees:
Description Amount
Description                                                             Amount
Apartments                                                              $300.00
  This fee shall be for each building and 1 apartment therein, and an
  additional $50.00 fee shall be charged for each additional apartment
 therein; provided, however, that the superintendent of streets and     
  sewers must certify that the sewer is adequate prior to issuance of a
  permit
Condominium units - per unit within the condominium, each unit requires $300.00
a separate tap
Conversion condominium (adjustment fee per unit)                        $300.00
Duplexes - per unit, each unit requires a separate tap                  $300.00
Industrial and commercial                                               $300.00
Mobile home park                                                        100.00
 An additional fee of $50.00 shall be charged for each pad within the
  park
Residential                                                             $300.00
Subdivisions                                                            $400.00
 An additional fee of $300.00 shall be charged for each lot within the
  subdivision
 
In areas and circumstances involving special assessments for sewers, rates and
provisions as are determined incident thereto shall apply.
      5.   Restrictions On Issuance Of Permit: A building sewer permit will
only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   Private Sewers: All new private sewers within a building or within
five feet (5') of any part of a building or within ten feet (10') of a water
service pipe shall be cast iron soil pipe ASTM specification (A 74) and shall
comply with the Illinois state plumbing code, latest edition 1 . New private
sanitary sewers beyond the limits described above for connection with the
public sewer shall be one of the following:
         a.   Cast iron soil pipe - ASTM specification A 74.
         b.   Vitrified clay sewer pipe - ASTM specification C 13 or C 700.
         c.   Concrete sewer pipe - ASTM specification C 14, C 75 or C 76.
         d.   ABS sewer pipe.
         e.   PVC sewer pipe - ASTM D-3033, SDR 34 for 4", SDR 41 for 6",
schedule 40.
Any pipe material not conforming to the requirements of the above ASTM
specifications will not be permitted unless specific approval is granted by
vote of the city council.
      2.   Public Sewers:
         a.   Joints on all house sewers shall be made permanently gastight and
waterproof.
         b.   Cast iron soil pipe shall be jointed with lead and jute by a
competent plumber.
         c.   Vitrified clay pipe shall be fitted with factory made plastic
joint conforming to ASTM specifications C-425.
         d.   Concrete pipe shall be fitted with factory furnished rubber
gaskets which shall conform to ASTM specification 361, section 13. Rubber
gasket joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall provide a watertight and gastight joint.
         e.   Joints between vitrified clay and concrete pipe or metal shall be
made with jute and a bituminous jointing material. Bituminous material for such
joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joints
when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty degrees Fahrenheit (160°F)
nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The
superintendent of streets and sewers may, at his discretion, require the
additional protection of a concrete envelope on such joints.
         f.   ABS pipe shall be chemically welded joints conforming to ASTM
specification D2680-72 and latest revisions.
         g.   PVC pipe shall have rubber gasketed joints.
   D.   Connections To Public Sewers:
      1.   The applicant for a permit to tap a public sewer shall notify the
city when such sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent
of streets and sewers or his authorized representative.
      2.   The connection of the building or property sewer shall be made at a
"Y" or "T" branch if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If no
properly located "Y" or "T" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into
the public sewer to receive the building or property sewer, with entry in the
downstream direction, at an angle of about forty five degrees (45°). A "saddle"
shall be used to make such connections, the spigot end to extend not past the
inner surface of such sewer. The centerline of the building sewer at the point
of connection shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the centerline of
the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection made
secure and watertight by encasement, if necessary, in concrete. Other fittings
may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent of
streets and sewers.
      3.   The sewer systems from any residences or commercial establishments
constructed after the effective date hereof shall be constructed and connected
with the public sewer in full compliance with this chapter. Where existing
septic tanks combine sanitary sewage with roof drains or foundation drains or
drain tile capable of collecting surface or subsurface water, a complete
separation shall be made so that only sanitary sewer wastes are carried
directly in watertight joints to the public sewer. Where any doubt exists on
the type or quality of construction, the superintendent of streets and sewers
may require the owner to uncover the existing service for inspection. Where any
doubt exists on the complete separation of roof drains, surface drains or
surface drain tile, the superintendent of streets and sewers may require the
owner of the establishment to prove, by excavation and exposure, that complete
separation exists.
      4.   Where a building presently connected to a septic tank desires to
connect to the public sewer, the connection shall be made from the public sewer
to the service piping upstream of the septic tank if it is demonstrated that
the existing service piping is in satisfactory condition. Under no
circumstances shall the connection be made on the downstream side of the septic
tank nor shall any septic tank laterals be connected to the public sewer.
      5.   No basement, half basement or any other portion of a building having
a floor elevation beneath the ground surface over the public sewer at the point
of connection may be connected into the public sewer by gravity. In areas where
the ground line over the public sewer is to be altered, the proposed final
ground elevation shall be used. The maximum depth to the top of the building
service sewer shall be three feet (3') below finished grade at the point where
it enters such building. In all buildings in which the building drain is too
low to provide gravity flow to the public sewer, all sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved mechanical means and discharged into the
building sewer. No water operated sewage ejector shall be used.
   E.   Extensions/Connections:
      1.   If an extension of one of the sewer mains is required for
connection, the city council shall first determine if an extension of a sewer
main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and
the number of existing or potential users that will use the sewer along the
extension and if such extension will enhance the overall economic benefit to
the city.
If the extension is approved, the city may, in its sole discretion, install and
pay, in whole or in part, the cost of such extension to the nearest property
boundary line of the first property to be serviced from such extension. If the
city elects, in its sole discretion, not to pay such cost, in whole or in part,
then the property owner(s) shall pay the cost, which the city has elected not
to pay, to extend such sewer main from the nearest location of the then
existing sewer main to the property to be serviced.
In any event, and in all cases in which there is to be any connection to the
city's sanitary sewer main, the property owner (developer) shall pay the cost
to extend the sanitary sewer main the entire width or length (depending upon
the direction of such extension) of the property owner's property to be
serviced and/or for such additional distance or direction along the property
owner's property to be serviced, as determined by the city council from time to
time, and shall be installed at the maximum depth and at minimum grade as
determined by the city engineer or the street and sewer superintendent, so that
such extension, after completion thereof, immediately borders adjacent property
in such a manner that future extensions can directly be made to service
adjacent property or properties.
Such "costs", as referred to herein, shall include, but not be limited to, all
engineering fees, the city's attorney fees, all recording fees, all cost for
survey and easement plats, all costs relating to easement instruments, all
title insurance fees and all costs, materials, equipment, and labor relating to
and for the construction of such sewer main extension.
Such sewer main extension shall be constructed according to such plans and
specifications as may be determined by the city council from time to time. If
the city elects not to perform the work to install such extension or have
others do so on behalf of the city, then the property owner(s) must obtain the
written consent and approval of the city as to the contractor(s) who will
install such sewer extension. Any such "costs" owed to the city shall be paid
to the city by such property owner(s) within fourteen (14) days of mailing of a
bill therefor to such property owner(s) or their representative, or prior to
any connection to such extension, whichever event first occurs. Prior to any
such extension, the property owner(s) shall sign and provide the city with
permanent easements and temporary construction easements for such sewer main
extension in such form as the city council may determine from time to time. The
foregoing requirements shall also be deemed as additional requirements under
title 11 of this code.
      2.   If someone other than the city installs an extension of one of the
sewer mains, the city must approve all plans and specifications for any
extensions. Ownership, rights of way and title must be conveyed to the city for
all extensions installed by anyone other than the city. The city will maintain
the mains thereafter.
No extension will be permitted if, in the opinion of the city council, the
system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the proposed extension.
   F.   Surface Water Runoff:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any
stormwater drain which discharges water onto any sidewalk in the city, and it
shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of any such drain
which discharges into any public street or alley at a height greater than
eighteen inches (18") above the ground or pavement.
      2.   No drain tile or foundation tile which could or does collect surface
or subsurface water shall be constructed directly to the sanitary sewer system
of the city.
   G.   Cross Connections: It shall be unlawful to permit any sanitary sewage
to flow into any drain, gutter or pipe installed for the flow of surface water
drainage only or to permit sanitary sewage to flow into the stormwater drainage
system.
   H.   Excavations:
      1.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
      2.   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
      3.   The provisions of all city ordinances relating to excavations 1  in
streets or other public places shall be complied with in making sewer
connections.
   I.   Liability Of Property Owner:
      1.   All costs and expenses incident to the initial installation of the
property owner's building sewer service line and connection (tap on) of the
property owner's building sewer service line to the City's public sewer system
(trunk line) shall be borne and paid by the property owner. Such initial
installation and connection work shall be performed by an Illinois licensed
plumber; and all such installation and connection work must be performed to the
satisfaction of the City Street and Sewer Superintendent or his designee. The
City shall provide the "saddle tap" for the connection (tap on) of the property
owner's building sewer service line to the City's public sewer system (trunk
line); and any "Y" tap must be separated from the City's public sewer system
(trunk line).
      2.   The property owner shall be solely responsible and liable for the
expenses, maintenance, repair, and/or replacement of the property owner's
building sewer service line up to its connection (tap on) to the City's public
sewer system (trunk line) wheresoever located. All such maintenance, repair,
and/or replacement work shall be performed by an Illinois licensed plumber.
In extenuating cost circumstances, the City Council may, in its sole discretion
and upon recommendation from the City's Street and Sewer Committee from time to
time, review and determine responsibility of the property owner for any
maintenance, repair, and/or replacement work to the property owner's building
sewer service line up to its connection (tap on) to the City's public sewer
system (trunk line) to the extent said building sewer service line is located
outside the property owner's property boundary lines but is located within City
property.
      3.   The City shall repair and/or replace such portion of the City's
public sewer system (trunk line) and/or the public sewer connection (tap) to
the property owners' sewer service line (but not the property owner's sewer
service line itself) that is located within the City's property or within the
City's right of way or easement.
Provided the property owner provides the City with free access to the property
owner's property, the City may also repair such portion of the City's public
sewer system (but not the property owner's sewer service line itself) up to the
property owner's sewer service line connection (tap) to the City's public sewer
system (trunk line) that is located within the property owner's property
boundary lines (but outside of the City's right of way or easement area located
on the property owner's property).
      4.   The City's Street and Sewer Superintendent or his designee shall
determine in his or her sole discretion the reasonableness and necessity and
the nature and extent of any and all of the aforesaid repair or replacement
work to protect and maintain and avoid any further damage to the City's public
sewer system.
   J.   Disconnection From Sewers: Any person desiring or planning to
disconnect from a sewer outlet in the city sewer and sanitary system shall
first notify the superintendent of streets and sewers of the intention to so
disconnect and, in no event, shall such person commence action to disconnect
from the sewer outlet until either the superintendent of streets and sewers or
his duly authorized representative is available to inspect and approve the
disconnection.
   K.   South Houston Street Storm Sewer Project:
      1.   The term "storm sewer" as used in this subsection K shall mean the
underground stormwater sewer, approximately three thousand five hundred thirty
(3,530) linear feet of thirty six inch (36") diameter storm sewer pipe, to be
constructed by the city in 2004, commencing from the existing ward III storm
sewer line at the intersection of Vandeveer Street and South Houston Street
thence south approximately one thousand seven hundred ten feet (1,710'), thence
east approximately seven hundred ten feet (710') along the south line of
Houston Street Subdivision (such 710 feet of storm sewer to be constructed and
installed, including all materials, labor, and equipment, by Windsor
Development Group, Inc., and Michael Niehaus at their sole costs and expense),
thence south approximately three hundred ten feet (310'), thence east
approximately six hundred feet (600'), thence north two hundred feet (200') to
a point at or near the existing Taylorville sanitary district existing combined
sanitary and storm sewer line in Cheney Street.
      2.   The term "area benefited by the storm sewer" shall mean all real
property located within the area as is located within the following described
boundary lines: Commencing at the intersection of Henrietta Street and
Vandeveer Street, thence east along Vandeveer Street to the intersection of
Shumway Street, then south along Shumway Street to West Calvert Street, then
southwesterly along West Calvert Street to the intersection of Cheney Street,
then north along Cheney Street, to the intersection of Gilpin Street, then west
along Gilpin Street to the intersection of Houston Street, then northwesterly
to the point of beginning. A map of the "area benefited by the storm sewer" is
on file with the city clerk's office and is available for public inspection
during the city clerk's normal business hours.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to utilize, uncover, make any connection with,
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb the storm sewer without first obtaining
a written permit issued by the city clerk, after approval by the city council.
      4.   Commencing February 1, 2004, and thereafter, no final subdivision
plat and/or development project involving any land located within the "area
benefited by the storm sewer", which subdivision or development project is
subject to any of the provisions of title 11, "Land Subdivisions", and/or title
12, "Flood Control", of this code, as now enacted or hereafter amended, shall
be approved by the city until and unless the applicant for such approval shall
first obtain a city permit and pay the city a permit fee in accordance with the
rate set forth in subsection K6 of this section.
      5.   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring such permit shall make
written application to the city, which application shall be supplemented by
detailed plans and specifications for utilization of the storm sewer or for the
construction of a proposed storm sewer connection. Such application shall also
contain a signed statement by a registered engineer that the size of the storm
sewer connection will in his or her opinion be adequate to drain the area
served by the storm sewer connection.
      6.   Such permit fee shall be computed at the rate of one thousand four
hundred twenty five dollars ($1,425.00) per acre or the prorated amount of said
one thousand four hundred twenty five dollars ($1,425.00) for any portion of an
acre. In determining the appropriate permit fee, the entire tract of land or
lands that will be subdivided or the entire tract of land or lands upon which
the development project will occur shall all be considered in computing the
acreage for application of rate of one thousand four hundred twenty five
dollars ($1,425.00) per acre.
      7.   Such permit fee shall be paid at the time the application for such
permit is submitted. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) permit fee for Windsor Development
Group, Inc., and Michael Niehaus identified in that certain intergovernmental
cooperation agreement by and between the city of Taylorville sanitary district,
said corporation, and Niehaus with an effective date of February 1, 2004, shall
control and be applicable to said corporation and Niehaus subject to the terms
of said agreement. Furthermore, such permit fee shall not be applicable to the
city nor to the Taylorville Community Unit school district who has agreed to
grant a permanent easement to the city to allow the construction and
maintenance of the storm sewer on a portion of school property or to the
Taylorville sanitary district who has agreed to pay up to the sum of fifty five
thousand dollars ($55,000.00) toward the installation and construction costs
and engineering fees for the storm sewer.
      8.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation of the storm
sewer connection shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the storm sewer connection. The
connection when authorized shall be made under the supervision of the city's
street and sewer superintendent, and shall be made only by a licensed master
plumber who has filed the required bond, if any, in accordance with this code.
      9.   It shall be unlawful to throw, run, drain, or otherwise dispose of,
into the storm sewer, or cause, suffer, permit to be thrown, run, drained,
allowed to seep, or otherwise disposed of, into the storm sewer, any organic or
inorganic matter that may cause pollution of the waters in the storm sewer.
      10.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
subsection K shall be fined and/or sentenced, upon conviction, in accordance
with section
1-4-1 of this code.
   L.   Use Of City Storm Sewer:
      1.   The term "sewer" as used in this subsection shall mean the
underground storm sewer throughout the city of Taylorville.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to uncover, make any connection with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb the "sewer" without first obtaining a
written permit from the street and sewer department of the city of Taylorville.
      3.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit shall make written
application to the city, which application shall be supplemented by plans and
specifications for the construction of the proposed storm sewer connection.
Said application shall also contain a signed statement by a registered engineer
that the size of the storm sewer connection will in his opinion be adequate to
drain the area served by the storm sewer connection.
      4.   The fee for construction of a connection into the sewer shall be
computed as follows:
Pipe Diameter Used In Tap (Inches) Cost
Pipe Diameter Used In Tap (Inches) Cost
4                                  $ 600.00
6                                  850.00
8                                  1,500.00
10                                 2,350.00
12                                 3,400.00
15                                 5,300.00
18                                 7,650.00
21                                 10,400.00
24                                 13,600.00
30                                 17,350.00
 
The above fee shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is
submitted. In the event a written agreement has been entered into prior to the
effective date hereof between the city and any person concerning the amount of
the fee for construction of a connection into the "sewer", the amount of the
fee set forth in the agreement shall control. The minimum size tap allowed
shall be four inches (4").
      5.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation of the
stormwater sewer connection shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the connecting stormwater
sewer. The connection when authorized shall be made under the direct
supervision of the superintendent of streets and sewers of the city of
Taylorville, and shall be made only by a licensed master plumber who has filed
the required bond, if any, in accordance with applicable city ordinances and
providing a certificate of insurance to the city clerk's office listing the
city of Taylorville as certificate holder and as additional insured with the
following language "city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation, and
its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officials, officers,
employees and agents".
      6.   It shall be unlawful to throw, run, drain, or otherwise dispose of,
into the "sewer", or cause, suffer, permit to be thrown, run, drained, allowed
to seep, or otherwise disposed of, into such sewer, any organic or inorganic
matter that shall cause pollution of the waters in such sewer.
      7.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
subsection shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 2078, 11-15-1982; amd.Ord. 2538, 3-21-1994; Ord.
2938, 1-18-2000; Ord. 3121, 4-21-2003; Ord. 3163, 2-2-2004; Ord. 3241, 8-15-
2005; Ord. 3534, 10-3-2011; Ord. 3577, 8-20-2012; Ord. 3750, 5-2-2016; Ord.
4013, 1-4-2021; Ord. 4050, 7-6-2021; Ord. 4087, 12-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 320/35.
1 1. See chapter 1, article A of this title.
8-5-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   B.   Materials Under Special Review:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the superintendent of streets and sewers, that such wastes can
endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers and materials of construction of the
sewers. The substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and
approval of the superintendent.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement.
         f.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at any time
except as permitted by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection B1 of this section and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA
rules and regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128-Pretreatment
Standards, federal register volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the superintendent, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewer system or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
         a.   Reject the wastes.
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   C.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarter or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   D.   Preliminary Treatment: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing
facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   E.   Control Manhole For Industrial Wastes: Each industry shall be required
to install a control manhole and, when required by the superintendent, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at
his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
   F.   Measurements, Tests And Analyses:
      1.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory
analysis to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but
no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analysis to the city at such times and
in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
      2.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
   G.   Special Agreements: No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, by the industrial concern; provided such payments are in accordance
with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost
recovery system. (Ord. 2078, 11-15-1982)
   H.   Control Of Fats, Oils, And Greases:
      1.   Scope And Purpose: To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer
blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils,
and greases into the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. Any
nonresidential facility connected to the city's sanitary sewer collection and
treatment system involved in the preparation or serving of foods shall be
subject to the conditions of this section.
      2.   Definitions:
         FATS, OILS, AND GREASES: Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in the United States code of federal regulations 40 CFR 136, as may
be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease"
or "greases".
         FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption
by the public such as restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school,
hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care institution. These
establishments use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking
by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie
cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or
poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any
other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product
in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
         GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A structure or device designed for the purpose of
removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices are often belowground units in outside areas
and are built as two (2) or three (3) chamber baffled tanks.
         GREASE TRAP: A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases
and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically
compact under the sink units that are near food preparation areas.
         MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY: The design features of a grease interceptor
and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases
from grease laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer.
         USER: Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the city of Taylorville, who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city's
boundaries, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile
sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
      3.   Food Service Establishment Permit Requirement: All permitted food
service establishments discharging wastewater to the city of Taylorville
sanitary sewer collection system are subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Grease Interceptor Requirements: All permitted food service
establishments are required to install, operate, and maintain an approved type
and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with
the objectives of this subsection H. All grease interceptors must meet the
requirements of the state of Illinois plumbing code.
         b.   Implementation: All new food service establishment facilities are
subject to grease interceptor requirements. All such facilities must obtain
prior approval from the state plumber/city engineer and county inspector for
grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All
grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building for cleaning and
inspection. Existing facilities with planned modification in plumbing
improvements, with a building permit evaluation of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) or more will be required to include plans to comply with the
grease interceptor requirements. These facilities must obtain approval from the
state plumber/city engineer and county inspector for grease interceptor sizing
prior to submitting plans for a building permit.
All existing food service establishments, determined by the state plumber/city
engineer and county inspector, to have a reasonable potential to adversely
impact the city's sewer system will be notified of their obligation to install
a grease interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification
letter.
         c.   Variance From Grease Interceptor Requirements: Grease
interceptors required under this subsection H shall be installed unless the
state plumber/city engineer and county inspector authorizes the installation of
an indoor grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology and
determines that the installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible.
The food service establishment bears the burden of demonstrating that the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. The state plumber/city
engineer or county inspector may authorize the installation of an indoor grease
trap where the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to
space constraints or other considerations. If an establishment believes the
installation of a grease interceptor is infeasible, because of documented space
constraints, the request for an alternate grease removal device shall contain
the following information:
            (1)   Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available
exterior space outside building.
            (2)   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing
for all services at that site.
Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, devices
that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it
from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. All
alternative pretreatment technology must be appropriately sized and approved by
the State plumber/City Engineer and County inspector.
      4.   Grease Interceptor Requirements:
         a.   Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the
current edition of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
         b.   Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with
design approved by the State plumber/City Engineer and County inspector and
shall have a minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease
retention.
         c.   Grease interceptors shall be installed outside at a location
where it shall be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of
intercepted grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of
the building where food is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must
meet the approval of the State plumber/City Engineer and County inspector.
         d.   All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content at least every three (3) months or when needed in
order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume. These devices
should be inspected at least monthly. Users who are required to maintain a
grease interceptor shall:
            (1)   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time in accordance
with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
            (2)   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as
required. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials
such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels,
rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the
effective volume of the device.
         e.   The user shall maintain a written record of inspection and
maintenance for two (2) years. All such records will be made available for on
site inspection by representative of the City of Taylorville during all
operating hours.
         f.   The users shall give the City of Taylorville written record of
cleaning of grease interceptor every three (3) months or when City of
Taylorville Sewer Superintendent or County inspector say when written records
are required. If not in compliance, City of Taylorville may fine user seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and/or shut off water. The fine set forth
herein is an addition to any penalty as set forth in Section
 8-5-9 of this Chapter.
         g.   Sanitary wastes are not allowed to be connected to sewer lines
intended for grease interceptor service.
         h.   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty four inches
(24"), shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee.
The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and
maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also
have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and
wastewater sampling activities.
      5.   Grease Trap Requirements:
         a.   Upon approval by the State plumber/City Engineer and County
inspector, a grease trap complying with the provisions of this Section must be
installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains, and other fixtures or
equipment in food service establishments where grease may be introduced into
the drainage or sewage system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or
hinder sewage treatment or private sewage disposal.
         b.   Grease traps sizing and installation shall conform to the State
of Illinois Plumbing Code.
         c.   No grease trap shall be installed which has a stated rate flow of
more than fifty five (55) gallons per minute, nor less than twenty (20) gallons
per minute, except when specially approved by the State plumber/City Engineer
and County inspector.
         d.   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating
conditions by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected
grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping, or public or private
sewer.
         e.   No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to
or discharge into any grease trap.
         f.   Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F)/(60°C) shall not be discharged into a grease trap. (Ord. 3514, 5-16-
2011)
8-5-6: WASTEWATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Rates And Charges Established: There are hereby established rates or
charges for the use of the sewer system of the City based upon the amount of
water used, as shown by the water metered as follows:
      1.   Service Charge:
         a.   Each sewer user who is also a City water user at the same
premises shall pay a service charge in the amount of two dollars ($2.00) per
monthly period.
         b.   Each residential sewer user who is not also a City water user at
the same premises shall pay a service charge in the amount of five dollars
($5.00) per monthly period.
         c.   Each commercial sewer user who is not also a City water user at
the same premises shall pay a service charge in the amount of fifteen dollars
($15.00) per monthly period.
      2.   Volume Charge: In addition to a service charge, each sewer user
shall pay a volume charge based on the volume of water used as shown by the
water meter at the following rates:
         a.   Commencing January 1, 2025: $0.00400 per gallon of water; and
         b.   Commencing January 1, 2026: $0.00425 per gallon of water; and
         c.   Commencing January 1, 2027: $0.00450 per gallon of water; and
         d.   Commencing January 1, 2028: $0.00475 per gallon of water.
      3.   In the event of sewer users who do not purchase water from the City,
the volume charge will be based on metered water use, metered sewer use, or an
estimate of sewer use as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works and/
or Superintendent of Streets and Sewers.
      4.   Debt Service Charge: (Rep. by Ord. 2822, 2-3-1998)
      5.   Annual Review; Revisions: Following each annual audit of fiscal
years ending April 30, the City will review (on the basis of the past year's
audit and volumes and strengths of wastes treated) the sewer rates, including
service charges, volume charges and debt service charge. Revisions will be
made, if appropriate, to take effect as soon as practicable.
   B.   Bills For Sewer Service; Delinquencies: Rates or charges for sewer
service shall be payable monthly. Each sewer customer for use of the sewer
service at the subject premises shall be jointly and severally liable to pay
for the sewer service on such premises, and the sewer service is furnished to
such premises by the City only upon the condition that each sewer customer for
the use of the sewer service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
City. All sewer service bills will be issued with the water service bills
issued by the City, and all payment provisions, delinquent charges and
collection procedures used by the City in the collection of water service bills
shall be used in the collection of the sewer user charges. For purposes of this
Section, "sewer customer" shall mean and include each person and/or entity in
whose name the sewer service is in and/or who has signed any City document to
provide for sewer service for the subject premises according to the City's
records at the time of the rendering of such bill.
The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the City". The City Treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the
"Revised Cities and Villages Act", effective January 1942 1 .
   C.   Disposition Of Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the
operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of
the Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the City
Treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the City, and all of said sum, without any deductions
whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more than ten (10) days
after receipt of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time
to time, be directed by the Mayor and Council.
   D.   Books And Accounts; Audit:
      1.   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
         a.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
         b.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
         c.   Number of users connected to the system.
         d.   Number of nonmetered users.
         e.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
      2.   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of
the City which are applicable to the City system of user charges for the
purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to
ensure compliance with the term of the special and general conditions to any
State grant.
   E.   Notice Of Rates: A copy of this Section, properly certified by the City
Treasurer, shall be filed in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Christian
County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges
of the sewerage system of the City on their properties. In addition, the City
Treasurer shall notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate attributable to treatment services.
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of subsections B through E
of this Section shall be fined in the amount not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 2089, 4-4-1983; amd. Ord. 2822, 2-3-1998; Ord. 3728, 9-9-2015; Ord. 3831,
2-5-2018; Ord. 3887, 3-4-2019; Ord. 4019, 2-16-2021; Ord. 4285, 12-16-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.
8-5-7: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 2078, 11-
15-1982)
8-5-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The Superintendent of Streets and Sewers and other duly authorized
employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or his representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city, the Illinois environmental protection agency and the
U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the
owner against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation by city
employees or officials, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 8-5-5E of
this chapter.
   C.   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent works, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2078, 11-15-1982)
8-5-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter, except section
 8-5-7 of this chapter, shall be served by the city with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit (not
to exceed a 30 consecutive calendar days time period) for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease or correct or remedy all violations.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be fined for each
offense as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   C.   Revocation Of Permit; Water Termination: In addition, and not in lieu
of any fines or costs imposed, the city may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal or a private sanitary sewage system as a result of any violation of
any provision of this chapter and may also terminate any and all water service
to the subject property until and unless the violation(s) is/are corrected to
the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 3683, 9-2-2014)
8-5-10: SURFACE WATER RUNOFF:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary
sewer or other place of disposal.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, partnership, association, society,
corporation or group.
   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which is controlled by public authority which
carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are
not intentionally admitted.
   SHALL/MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND SEWERS: The superintendent of streets and
sewers for the city of Taylorville, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   B.   Connection Of Sources Of Roof Water, Surface Water Runoff Or
Groundwater To Building Sewers Restricted:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to and no person shall hereafter make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, tile
drains, subsurface drains or other sources of roof water, surface water runoff,
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      2.   All existing connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, tile drains, subsurface drains, or other sources of
roof water, surface water runoff, or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer are hereby declared unlawful. Any person who now has such
connections declared herein to be unlawful shall have until January 1, 1995, in
which to disconnect, at their sole expense, any and all roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, tile drains, subsurface drains, or
other sources of roof water, surface water runoff, or groundwater from any
building sewer or drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer. No such person shall be deemed in violation of this
section by virtue of such illegal connection until after January 1, 1995. In
addition thereto, such person shall, immediately at the time of such
disconnection, properly cap and cover the point of disconnect with the building
sewer or building drain in accordance with and in the manner as may be required
by the superintendent of streets and sewers.
   C.   Right Of Entry For Inspection And Observation: The superintendent of
streets and sewers and other authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall have access to and be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection and observation to determine
whether compliance has been accomplished in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Any person refusing to permit the said officer or employees the
above described right of access to his/her/its premises or properties shall be
subject to cessation of water and sewer services until the required opportunity
to inspect and observe is accorded said officer or employees of the city.
   D.   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
      2.   With respect to any violation of this section, and in addition to
and not in lieu of the fine provisions hereinabove set forth, the city
corporate authorities may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction and
obtain injunctive relief, mandatory and/or restraining, to enforce and effect
compliance with the provisions of this section. In such event, such person
against which injunctive relief is obtained shall be responsible for and pay
for the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in obtaining such
injunctive relief. (Ord. 2538, 3-21-1994)
8-5-11: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   No territory or premises located outside the city's corporate limits
which is contiguous to the city's corporate limits shall be connected with the
city's sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer and/or combined sewer distribution
system until and unless a valid petition for annexation of said territory or
premises is presented to the city clerk and such territory or premises is
actually annexed to the city, which annexation can be denied for any reason or
for no reason whatsoever in the sole discretion of the city council from time
to time.
Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, if the city council
elects not to annex contiguous territory or premises at the time city sanitary
sewer and/or storm sewer and/or combined sewer distribution system services are
requested by the record owner(s) of such contiguous territory or premises, then
the city council may, in its sole discretion, approve sanitary sewer and/or
storm sewer or combined sewer distribution system services for such contiguous
territory or premises provided each then owner of record of such contiguous
territory or premises signs an annexation petition and enters into and signs an
annexation agreement with the city in forms approved by the city council from
time to time, whereby each said owner and their respective heirs, devisees,
legal and personal representatives, successors and assigns, agree to and shall
immediately annex said contiguous territory or premises to the city when and if
at any time thereafter during the remaining term of said annexation agreement
or renewal thereof the city council determines in its sole discretion that such
contiguous territory or premises shall be annexed into the city.
   B.   No territory or premises located outside the city's corporate limits
which is not contiguous to the city's corporate limits shall be connected with
the city's sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer and/or combined sewer distribution
system until and unless each owner of record of such territory or premises
signs an annexation petition and enters into and signs an annexation agreement
with the city, whereby said owners agree to and shall immediately annex said
territory or premises to the city when and if said territory or premises has
become contiguous to the city's corporate limits and at any time thereafter
during the remaining term of said annexation agreement or renewal thereof the
city council determines in its sole discretion that such contiguous territory
or premises shall be annexed into the city.
   C.   At the time of annexation as set forth in subsections A and B of this
section, the annexing party or parties as the case may be shall pay any and all
expenses related to said annexation and all other fees as set forth in this
code including, but not limited to, the recording fee for said annexation,
which fee shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) or the fee actually assessed
by the recorder's office for Christian County, Illinois, at the time or
recording, whichever amount shall be greater.
   D.   Unless said annexation petition and annexation agreement has been
signed and filed with the city clerk as provided in subsection A or B of this
section, then in the event a territory or premises located outside the city's
corporate limits is connected with the city's sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer
and/or combined sewer distribution system and is contiguous to the city's
corporate limits, the city clerk shall send notice to the owner of said
territory or premises that if a petition to annex the territory or premises
into the city's corporate limits is not properly signed by all record owners of
said territory or premises and filed with the city clerk within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice, the territory or premises shall be disconnected
from the city's sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer and/or combined sewer
distribution system; and if a proper petition to annex is signed and filed, but
annexation of the territory or premises into the city's corporate limits is not
completed within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice by the city clerk as
set forth herein, said territory or premises shall be disconnected from the
city's sanitary sewer and/or storm sewer and/or combined sewer distribution
system; and the street and sewer superintendent, or his designee, shall make
such disconnection. (Ord. 3720, 7-20-2015)
8-5-12: POLICY FOR MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF CITY'S SEWER MAIN AND PROPERTY
OWNER'S SEWER:
   A.   The city council will refuse to pay any plumbing charges incurred prior
to contacting the city sewer department. Any time a plumber or sewer cleaning
entity is contacted, they should not proceed with any work until the city has
been contacted to determine if the problem is in the sewer main or the property
owner's sewer.
   B.   A five hundred dollar ($500.00) excavation fee must be paid to the City
of Taylorville before any tunneling under or excavation begins in any street,
alley, or public place. If the five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee is not paid to
the City of Taylorville before excavation begins as otherwise set forth herein,
an automatic seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) fine will be imposed on the
person failing to pay before proceeding to excavation.
   C.   Sewer taps must be inspected by authorized personnel of the street and
sewer department and tap card signed by a licensed plumber before being
covered. If covered before inspection, plumber will have to uncover for
inspection and pay a seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) fine.
   D.   Inspections by authorized personnel of the street and sewer department
not done during working hours (7:00 A.M. to 12:00 noon and 1:00 P.M. to 4:00
P.M.) will require an additional fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
overtime.
   E.   The city sewer department may locate sewer taps by TV camera when given
forty eight (48) hours' notice (not including weekends or holidays), or may
give measurement from books or plans which may or may not be accurate.
   F.   The following are fill instructions when streets have been dug up:
Asphalt street:
Six inches (6") sand over pipe material
Followed by flowable fill
Followed with four inch (4") concrete leaving two inch (2") asphalt replacement
(edges must be square and straight)
Plumber will be billed by the city when asphalt has been replaced
Other streets: Oil/chip
Flowable fill leaving two inches (2") for chip mix replacement
Alley: Unpaved
Six inches (6") of sand
CA7 to within six inches (6") of top
CA6 to finish
   G.   All excavators and plumbers must have insurance on file in the city
clerk's office naming the city as additional insured before working on city
easements. (Ord. 3452, 12-21-2009; amd. Ord. 3541, 12-5-2011; Ord. 4087, 12-20-
2021)
CHAPTER 6
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Franchise Ordinances Adopted
8-6-1: FRANCHISE ORDINANCES ADOPTED:
The following ordinances relating to the granting of cable television
franchises have been adopted by the city council:
 
Ord. # Passage Date Subject
                    An ordinance ratifying and authorizing an extension of a
2497   6-7-1993     cable television franchise and authorizing and approving an
                    agreement between the city of Taylorville, Illinois, and
                    Enstar Communications Corporation.
                    An ordinance creating the position of special assistant
2503   7-19-1993    city attorney, confirming an appointment in connection
                    therewith and authorizing the execution of an engagement
                    letter for legal services.
                    An ordinance adopting procedures for conducting a public
2506   8-16-1993    hearing to determine whether an additional cable television
                    franchise should be granted by the city of Taylorville.
                    Cable television ordinance of the city of Taylorville,
2544   5-16-1994    Illinois, published in pamphlet form and on file in the
                    office of the city clerk.
                    An ordinance authorizing a franchise agreement for cable
3275   2-21-2006    services with Consolidated Communications Network Services,
                    Inc.
3704   4-6-2015     An ordinance amending ordinance 2544.
 
CHAPTER 7
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
8-7-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
8-7-4: Applicable Principles
8-7-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
8-7-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
8-7-7: Late Fees/Payments
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
   COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
   GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in- kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   PEG: Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to section
8-7-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or
its designee for PEG access support in the city.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city or
to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection
8-7-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
8-7-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this city pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights
act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 3705, 4-6-2015)
CHAPTER 8
AIRPORT MANAGER
SECTION:
8-8-1: Airport Manager
8-8-2: Crop Applicator Leases
8-8-1: AIRPORT MANAGER:
   A.   Appointment: The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, an Airport Manager to care for and manage the Taylorville
Municipal Airport ("airport").
   B.   Duties: Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor and City
Council, the Airport Manager shall supervise and be in charge of all City
airport employees; and all City employees assigned to the airport shall be
under the supervision and direction of the Airport Manager; and in addition,
the Airport Manager shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him
from time to time by the Mayor and City Council.
   C.   Salary: The hours of employment, salary, benefits, and associated costs
of the Airport Manager shall be as determined by the City Council from time to
time.
(Ord. 3983, 8-17-2020)
8-8-2: CROP APPLICATOR LEASES:
   A.   The Airport Manager may from time to time approve and sign, on behalf
of the City, crop applicator leases on a per diem basis at the current rate of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for the purposes of the storage, parking,
use and set up of equipment and vehicles by lessees on Taylorville Municipal
Airport property for aerial operations and applications of agricultural crop
products and chemicals.
   B.   The form of said crop applicator leases shall be in the form as is
approved by the City Council from time to time. The per diem rental rate may be
increased by the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 4250, 7-1-2024)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Permits
9-1-2: Insurance Or Bond (Rep. by Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
9-1-3: Fire District
9-1-4: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
9-1-5: Obstructing Stairways Or Exits
9-1-6: Enforcement
9-1-7: Penalty
9-1-1: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Building Permit Required for Buildings and Structures (other than
fences): It shall be unlawful to construct, repair, alter, or remodel any
building or structure in the City without a building permit where the total
cost of such construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling work exceeds one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   B.   Building Permit Required for Fences, Prohibited Materials, and
Location:
      1.   Without a building permit, it shall be unlawful or to construct,
repair, alter, or remodel any fence in the City where the total cost of such
construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling work exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
      2.   A "fence" shall mean and include an enclosure, barrier, or wall
constructed of materials (approved by the Health and Building Officer) intended
to enclose, divide, separate, screen, or border, in whole or in part, an area
of a lot, parcel, or tract of land to mark a boundary or an area, or to control
access, or to confine or prevent entrance or escape. A "fence" shall also mean
and include a temporary sediment control device (commonly referred to as a soil
erosion fence or a silt fence) consisting of a temporary synthetic filter
fabric stretched across and attached to supporting posts and entrenched that is
used on construction sites to protect water quality in nearby streams, rivers,
or lakes from sediment (loose soil) in stormwater runoff.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to construct, repair, alter, or remodel any
fence that is comprised, in whole or in part, with any of the following
prohibited materials: cinder block, plank lumber over 10" in width, scrap
lumber, scrap materials, pallet lumber, plastic pipe, "chicken wire mesh",
square wire farm fence, fabric, burlap plastic, canvas tarp and wood, or
plastic snow fence, metals (other than wrought iron or its synthetic
substitutes), razor wire, electric fence, tires, pallets, or other materials
not specifically designed to be used as a fence.
      4.   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any fence within a
public right of way, boulevard, or sidewalk or within other public property. It
shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any fence within twelve (12) inches
from the closest public sidewalk edge.
      5.   A "fence height" shall be determined by measuring from the finished
grade of the land or surface where the fence is located to the highest top of
the fence.
   C.   For purposes of this Chapter, "repair" shall mean and include the
fixing or restoration of any damaged exterior portion of any building or
structure or fence; and "alter" or "alteration" or "remodel" or "remodeling"
shall include and mean the renovation or improvement or changing the form or
surface of any damaged exterior portion of any building or structure or fence.
   D.   Application for Building Permit:
      1.   Applications for such building permits shall be made to the Health
and Building Officer and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, in
duplicate, showing the work to be done and the specific marked location of all
real estate boundary line pins/markers and the planned specific location of the
building, structure or fence on the real estate as it relates to the boundary
lines of said real estate. Such plans and specifications shall be verified by
the signature either of the owner of the real estate or by the architect or
contractor in charge of operations.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued except upon payment of the
applicable fee, if any, as provided herein. Furthermore, no building permit
shall be issued to any "person" (as that term is defined and construed in Title
1, Chapter 3 of this Code) who is in default to the City of Taylorville (other
than for payment of Real Estate Taxes levied by the City) until and unless such
person fully pays the amount due the City of Taylorville and/or fully performs
all other work or obligations due or owed to the City of Taylorville.
   E.   Building Permit Fees:
      1.   Fees for building permits for construction work for building or
structures (excluding "repair", "alteration" or "remodeling" work costing
$1,500.00 or less) shall be determined as prescribed in Title 10 of this Code.
      2.   Fees for building permits for construction work for fences
(excluding "repair", "alteration" or "remodeling" work costing a total of
$500.00 or less) shall be $50.00.
   F.   Compliance with Plans and Specifications: It shall be unlawful to alter
or vary from the approved plans and specifications deposited with the Health
and Building Officer unless amended plans and specifications showing such
proposed alteration or variation are first filed with, and are approved by, the
Health and Building Officer. If such alteration or variation involves an
increase in the total area or cost of the work, a statement to that effect
shall be made and the necessary additional fee shall be made.
   G.   Term and Conditions of Building Permit:
      1.   A building permit for the construction of any building or structure
or fence on property shall only be valid for twelve (12) consecutive calendar
months from date of issuance of the building permit. All construction work must
be completed within twelve (12) consecutive calendar months from date of
issuance of such initial building permit.
      2.   If the construction of such building or structure or fence on such
property covered by such initial building permit is not then fully completed
within such twelve (12) month period, then a second building permit not to
exceed a twelve (12) consecutive calendar month period and another full
building permit fee shall be required and paid prior to the continuation of any
further work on such building or structure or fence on such property. Such new
building permit, if issued, shall only be valid for a maximum of twelve (12)
additional consecutive calendar months from date of expiration of the initial
building permit. All construction work covered by said second building permit
for such property shall be fully completed within said maximum twelve (12)
consecutive calendar month period.
      3.   A building permit for the "repair", "alteration", or "remodeling"
(each as defined in this Section) of any building or structure or fence on
property shall only be valid for six (6) consecutive calendar months from date
of issuance of the building permit; and all repair, alteration or remodeling
work must be completed within six (6) consecutive calendar months from date of
issuance of the building permit.
      4.   An issued initial or second building permit, as the case may be,
shall become void if the holder of such building permit fails to commence
construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling of such building or structure
or fence within ninety (90) consecutive calendar days from the date of issuance
of said initial or second building permit.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section
9-1-1, the initial or second building permit fee for the construction, repair,
alteration or remodeling of any building or structure shall be double the
otherwise appropriate building fee for issuance of a building permit if any
such work has been commenced or continued on any building or structure prior to
the issuance of a valid building permit.
      6.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section
9-1-1, the initial or second building permit fee for the construction, repair,
alteration or remodeling of any fence shall be five times the otherwise
appropriate building fee for issuance of a building permit if any such work has
been commenced or continued on any fence prior to the issuance of a valid
building permit.
   H.   Issuance Of A Building Permit: The Health and Building Officer shall be
the person responsible for issuing the building permit.
   I.   Building Permit Required: Any accessory building larger than one
hundred twenty (120) square feet requires a building permit.
   J.   Accessory Buildings:
      1.   An accessory building shall be located on a single platted parcel,
lot, or tract of real estate rather than any combination of parcels, lots, or
tracts of real estate.
      2.   The accessory building shall be constructed of materials
architecturally compatible with the existing or proposed principal residence on
the real estate lot, tract, parcel, surrounding buildings, and buildings on
adjacent properties.
      3.   The accessory building shall be of a design architecturally
compatible with the design of the existing or proposed principal residence and
surrounding buildings on the lot, parcel, or tract of real estate with respect
to roof pitch, eave dimensions, height, window design, door design and other
details.
      4.   The square footage of the detached accessory building shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the remaining space available in the rear yard
except by obtaining a variance.
      5.   Notwithstanding the above subparagraphs J2 and J3 of this subsection
J to the contrary, the Zoning Board of Appeals may from time to time approve an
applicant's request for a building permit to locate (on the applicant's single
platted parcel, lot, or tract of real estate) a detached accessory one-story
enclosed storage building or an open one-story carport (for parking of one or
two motor vehicle(s) only) under the following circumstances:
         a.   Said storage building or said carport is a mobile non-permanent
building or structure that will be placed on skids or on a concrete pad; and
         b.   Said storage building or said carport does not exceed a side wall
height (with or without a solid wall) of eleven feet (11') and does not exceed
a total floor space of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet with a maximum
height of eighteen feet (18') on a permanent foundation; and
         c.   In the case of said storage building, it is constructed with the
following materials: 1) wood and/or 26-28 gauge metal interior frame; 2)
fiberglass or 26-28 gauge metal external siding; 3) fiberglass or 26-28 gauge
metal external roof; 4) swinging or roll-up or sliding entry fiberglass or 26-
28 gauge metal doors; and 5) all such fiberglass or 26-28 gauge metal shall be
painted with a color coordinating with the primary building on said real
estate, other than silver or galvanized; and 6) the Zoning Board of Appeals
determines that the location of said storage building will not unreasonably
distract from the character or materials of the existing primary building on
said real estate or from the existing primary or accessory buildings located on
adjacent properties or on properties within three hundred feet (300') from all
directions of both front property boundary line corners of the applicant's
subject real estate; and
         d.   In the case of said carport, it is constructed with the following
materials: 1) wood and/or fiberglass interior frame; 2) wood or fiberglass
external siding; 3) wood or fiberglass external roof; and 4) other than one
motor vehicle, no other property shall be stored or located on said carport;
and 5) all such wood or fiberglass shall be painted with a color other than
silver or galvanized; and 6) the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the
location of said carport will not unreasonably distract from the character or
materials of the existing primary building on said real estate or from the
existing primary or accessory buildings located on adjacent properties or on
properties within three hundred feet (300') from all directions of both front
property boundary line corners of the applicant's subject real estate.
         e.   Notwithstanding anything herein stated to the contrary, all metal
or "Quonset style" carports or accessory buildings shall not be allowed or
permitted.
      6.   Notwithstanding anything herein stated in this Section to the
contrary, the provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to boat docks
or boat lifts or accessory covers or canopies or buildings on or related to
boat docks or boat lifts located on private property adjacent to Lake
Taylorville or located on Lake Taylorville. However, any such boat docks or
boat lifts or accessory covers, canopies, or buildings shall not be constructed
or maintained on Lake Taylorville or on private property adjacent to Lake
Taylorville without first receiving the approval and permission by the City
Council, and subject to such plans and specifications as the City Council may
require from time to time. Any request for such approval and permission can be
denied from time to time by the City Council for any or no reason whatsoever in
its sole discretion. All such requests shall first be presented to and
considered by the Lake Committee for any recommendations to the City Council.
   K.   Location Of Accessory Buildings: No accessory building shall be erected
or altered at, nor moved to, a location within ten feet (10') of the nearest
wall of the principal building nor within the required area for front or side
yard setbacks for the lot, parcel, or tract of real estate. (Ord. 3797, 3-6-
2017; amd. Ord. 3861, 8-20-2018; Ord. 3833, 2-20-2018; Ord. 3994, 9-21-2020;
Ord. 4021, 3-1-2021; Ord. 4288, 12-16-2024)
9-1-2: INSURANCE OR BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
9-1-3: FIRE DISTRICT:
   A.   Boundaries: The Fire District of the City shall be the area bounded on
the north by Vine Street, on the west by Webster Street, on the south by
Franklin Street and on the east by Walnut Street. (1979 Code §18-2-1)
   B.   Exterior Coverings: It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any
permanent building or structure or portion thereof or addition thereto in the
Fire District unless the exterior walls and roof of such building or structure
are constructed of fire retardant material acceptable to the Fire Chief and the
Health and Building Officer 1 . (1979 Code §18-2-2)
   C.   Repairs: It shall be unlawful to repair any existing frame building
within the Fire District after the same shall be damaged by any cause to fifty
percent (50%) of its value as further prescribed in Section
9-4-4 of this Title. (1979 Code §18-2-3)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 9, Article B of this Code.
9-1-4: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct in any residential, commercial or
industrial zoned area of the City any fence composed in whole or in part of
barbed wire or with any similar material designed to cause injury to persons or
any wire charged with electric current; except, that in commercial or
industrial zoned areas, no more than three (3) strands of barbed wire above a
security fence shall be permitted, provided such barbed wire is at least six
feet (6') above ground level. (Ord. 2241, 5-16-1987)
9-1-5: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church,
theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall or any building used by two
(2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with the
free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (1979 Code §24-4-27)
9-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Officer; Inspections: It shall be the duty of the Health
and Building Officer 1  and any lawfully appointed deputies to enforce the
provisions of this Title. The Health and Building Officer is hereby empowered
to make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of
seeing if they comply with the provisions of this Title. (1979 Code §18-1-6)
   B.   Stop Work Order: The Health and Building Officer, or such other person
as may be authorized by the Mayor or City Council, may order work stopped
whenever any construction, alteration or repair work is being done in violation
of any provision of this Title. Such stop work order, when oral, shall be
followed by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours. It shall be
unlawful to continue work in violation of a stop order until such order has
been revoked by the person issuing it or by the Mayor or City Council. (1979
Code §18-1-8)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 1, Chapter 9, Article B of this Code.
9-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Codes Adopted
9-2-2: Minimum Square Footage For Residential Dwelling
9-2-3: Conflicts With Zoning Regulations
9-2-4: Violation And Penalty
9-2-1: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   The following current codes are hereby adopted by reference thereto and
the same shall be the rules and regulations governing the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, installation, demolition, equipment use, occupancy,
location, and maintenance of buildings and structures of any kind, nature, or
extent whatsoever and also governing the issuance of building permits and
certificates of occupancy:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) including appendix G (Flood
resistant construction) - 2018 edition.
      2.   International Mechanical Code (IMC) - 2018 edition.
      3.   NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) - 2018 edition.
      4.   International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) - 2018 edition.
      5.   International Fire Code - 2018 Edition.
      6.   International Residential Code (IRC) - 2018 edition.
      7.   National Electrical Code (NEC) - 2017 edition.
      8.   Illinois Plumbing Code - current edition.
      9.   2018 Illinois Accessibility Code.
      10.   International Existing Building Code (IEBC) - 2018 edition.
      11.   Illinois Energy Conservation Code (IECC) - 2021 edition.
   B.   Three (3) copies of each of the aforesaid Codes has been on file with
the City Clerk's office for a period of at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
effective adoption date of this Section; and three (3) copies of each of the
aforesaid Codes shall remain on file in the City Clerk's Office and shall be
made available for public use, inspection, and examination. (Ord. 2878, 11-2-
1998; amd. Ord. 3490, 11-1-2010; Ord. 3999, 10-5-2020; Ord. 4279, 12-2-2024)
9-2-2: MINIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
No residential dwelling structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered,
installed, or erected within the City unless the ground floor area of the main
structure, exclusive of one-story open porches and garages, shall be not less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space under air; provided,
however, any residential dwelling structure with less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet of living space under air that exists as of September 5, 2023 may
be reconstructed or repaired in the event such residential dwelling structure
is damaged or destroyed as a result of wind, fire, or other natural disaster,
or by an act of God. Basements do not constitute a story. (Ord. 4195, 9-5-2023)
9-2-3: CONFLICTS WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
Except for Section
9-2-2 of this Chapter 2 which shall prevail, any other part of this Chapter 2
found to be in conflict with the current zoning ordinance of the City shall be
subordinate to such zoning ordinance and shall be governed by such zoning
ordinance. (1979 Code § 18-4-2; amd. Ord. 4195, 9-5-2023)
9-2-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of any said code or codes set forth
in section
9-2-1 of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, construct, reconstruct, install, alter, add to,
move, demolish, use, occupy, locate, or maintain any building or structure of
any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever, or portion thereof, in violation of
said code or codes or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted
and approved thereunder or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder shall,
upon conviction of each violation, be fined in an amount not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed as to each
violation for each and every day or portion thereof during which any provision
of said code or codes is committed or continues. For purposes hereof, the owner
of a building or structure, or portion thereof, or of the premises where
anything in violation of any of said codes shall be placed or shall exist and
an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, firm, or
corporation employed or retained in connection therewith and who assisted in
the commission of such violation or violations shall also be deemed likewise
guilty of such offense or offenses. (Ord. 2873, 9-21-1998)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition
9-3-2: Rules And Regulations Adopted
9-3-3: Enforcement
9-3-4: Penalty
9-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this Chapter, shall be construed to
mean and include conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of
electricity supplied for light, heat or power, but does not include radio
apparatus or equipment for the wireless reception of sounds and signals nor
ordinary household appliances such as toasters, vacuum cleaners and washing
machines, and does not include apparatus, conductors and other equipment
installed for and by public utilities, including common carriers, which are
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their
operations as public utilities. (1979 Code Ch. 21, § 1)
9-3-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED 1 :
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, the
following are hereby adopted as safe and practical standards for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment in the City:
   A.   The rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters as
contained in the code known as the National Electrical Code and as approved by
the American Standards Association and as last published; and
   B.   The rules and regulations regarding the installation, alteration and
use of electrical equipment last adopted by the electrical supply company now
supplying electrical energy to the City and as last published and filed with
the Illinois Commerce Commission.
Three (3) copies of said code and last-mentioned rules and regulations are on
file in the office of the Clerk; also the Electrical Inspector and Health and
Building Officer shall have a copy of said code and regulations. (1979 Code Ch.
21, § 2; amd. 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  9-2-1 of this Title.
9-3-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Health and Building Officer shall act as and have all the powers of and
duties herein given to the Electrical Inspector 1 . (1993 Code)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 1-9B-2B3 of this Code; see Title 1, Chapter 9, Article C of this Code for
  Electrical Inspector.
9-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definition
9-4-2: Nuisance Declared
9-4-3: Abatement Procedures
9-4-4: Dangerous Buildings Within Fire District
9-4-5: Penalty
9-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this Chapter is hereby defined to
mean and include any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure:
   A.   Which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition and
which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the
occupants of it or neighboring structures.
   B.   Which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or
any other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire
hazard.
   C.   Which, because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows,
is dangerous to children and other persons or occupants. (1979 Code Ch. 18,
Art. III, §1)
9-4-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any such dangerous building in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
and it shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the City, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. III,
§§1, 2)
9-4-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice to Abate: Whenever the Health and Building Officer or the Fire
Chief shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the City is a
dangerous building, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the
City Clerk. The Clerk shall, thereupon, cause written notice to be served upon
the owner thereof and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or
by personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been
declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must
be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing
it, and the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice shall be in the
form prescribed by law.
   B.   Abatement by City: If the person receiving the notice has not complied
therewith or taken an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee
finding that a dangerous building exists, within ten (10) days from the time
when this notice is served upon such person by personal service or registered
mail, the Health and Building Officer may, upon orders of the City Council,
proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (1979 Code
Ch. 18, Art. III, §3)
9-4-4: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS WITHIN FIRE DISTRICT:
Any frame building or structure within the Fire District of the City, as
prescribed by ordinance, 1  which has been or may be damaged by fire, decay or
other causes to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value shall be torn
down and removed or rebuilt with fire retardant walls.
Upon written notice filed with the City Clerk by the Health and Building
Officer or the Fire Chief, to the effect that any building has been so damaged,
the Clerk shall notify the Mayor and City Council and the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council, shall appoint a three (3) man board to determine
whether or not such building or structure has been damaged fifty percent (50%)
of its value. Notice of the appointment of this three (3) man board shall be
served upon the owner of the premises involved, by personal service or
registered mail at his last known address, and the notice shall give the time
and place the board will meet to consider the matter, and that the owner may be
present at such meeting if he so desires. If the board of three (3) members
determines that the building in question has been damaged to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) of its value, it shall be the duty of the owner to tear
down and remove the said building within twenty (20) days after the finding of
such board or to remodel it to comply with the requirements for new buildings
in the Fire District, and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the
occupancy of such building after such finding until it is so remodeled. (1979
Code Ch. 18, Art. III, §4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  9-1-3 of this Title.
9-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or permitting any dangerous
condition to remain in the Fire District without remodeling as herein provided
for, after it has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
value, shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. III, §5; 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Public Buildings
9-5-2: Buildings for Public Gatherings
9-5-3: Penalty
9-5-1: PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
   A.   Responsibility: The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the
custody of any public building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall or
church, and in the case of schools, the president of the Board of Education or
the person in charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the
equipment and maintenance of such apparatus as is required in this Section for
the maintenance and safety of all exits, stairs, doors, windows or passageways.
(1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §1)
   B.   Fire Apparatus:
      1.   Location and Number: The location and number of the fire appliances
shall be as follows (unless other location shall be more accessible and
convenient for protection against fires):
         a.   Theaters:
            (1)   Stage: One standard fire extinguisher on each side of the
stage and one fire axe.
            (2)   Foyer: One standard fire extinguisher at each end of the
foyer.
            (3)   Manager's Office: One standard fire extinguisher.
         b.   Public Buildings, Auditoriums, Lodge Halls and Hotels: One
standard fire extinguisher at or near the main entrance of the ground floor and
one standard fire extinguisher installed for every four thousand (4,000) square
feet of floor area and also one standard fire extinguisher (dry chemical) just
outside the boiler room door.
         c.   Churches: One five (5) gallon pump at or near main entrance on
ground floor, one five (5) gallon hand pump and fire axe in boiler room.
         d.   Schools: One five (5) gallon hand pump and fire axe at or near
main entrance on ground floor; same at head of each stairway; same in boiler
room. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §3)
      2.   Removal of Apparatus: It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper
place any fire apparatus or appliances except for inspection or in case of
emergency. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §5)
   C.   Fire Drills: It shall be the duty of the principal or other person in
charge of the pupils in every school in the City to establish and maintain a
good and efficient fire drill. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §4)
   D.   Doors: All public buildings which may be or are used for church,
school, opera performance, theater, lecture room, hotel, public meeting or
similar purposes or which may be or are used for the collection of people for
worship, amusement or instruction and all buildings used for stores to which
the public is invited shall be so built that all doors leading from the main
hall or place of assembly shall open outward, and all such doors shall be
equipped with panic hardware. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §6)
   E.   Exit Lights: In all theaters and public meeting halls, a red light
illuminating the word "exit" shall be kept burning over each regular and
emergency exit while the theater or hall is occupied by an audience or by
patrons. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. III, §7)
   F.   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or his assistants
to inspect all apparatus to be installed and their locations and to make or
cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and
accessibility of regular and emergency exits in all such public places.
9-5-2: BUILDINGS FOR PUBLIC GATHERINGS:
   A.   General Requirements: It shall be unlawful to hold, manage and conduct
any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the City in any premises other than
a building constructed in full compliance with the ordinances and laws
pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes. (1979 Code
Ch. 23, Art. II, §1)
   B.   Exits: Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises
used for such purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and
there shall be at least two (2) separate exits located at least thirty feet
(30') apart. They shall be not less than three feet (3') wide and every
corridor, passageway, stairway or ramp shall be not less than four feet (4')
wide. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. II, §3)
   C.   Doors: All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes
shall open outward, and no such exit shall be so constructed or locked that
egress from inside the premises is blocked. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. II, §5)
   D.   Seats:
      1.   Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so
constructed as to be safe for the use designed and shall be sufficiently strong
to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction of the
auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one hundred pounds (100)
per square foot.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of
persons to exceed the number of actual seats maintained for their
accommodation. (1979 Code Ch. 23, Art. II, §4)
   E.   Inspections and Restrictions:
      1.   No such gathering or entertainment shall be held in any premises
other than a building as described in subsection A of this Section unless such
premises have been examined by the Fire Chief or Health and Building Officer
not more than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and found to be
free from any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose. No
structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such purpose unless the same is
constructed of nonflammable materials; provided, that tents or structures
covered by canvas or similar materials may be so used if such canvas or other
materials has been properly treated so as to be rendered fire resistive in
accordance with Pamphlet #102 National Fire Protection Association. (1979 Code
Ch. 23, Art. II, §2)
      2.   It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling for or
managing any gathering in any premises other than a theater, lodge room or
auditorium building constructed as provided in subsection A of this Section to
notify the City Clerk of the date of such intended use at least ten (10) days
before such meeting is to take place. Upon notice, the Fire Chief or the Health
and Building Officer shall inspect the premises to determine whether or not
they comply with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for any such
gathering shall be subject to the condition that this Section be fully complied
with, whether or not such condition is embodied in the permit. (1979 Code Ch.
23, Art. II, §6)
9-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Title. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 6
RENTAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
9-6-1: Application and Interpretation of Provisions
9-6-2: Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
9-6-3: Minimum Standards for Light, Ventilation, Heat and Rodent Control
9-6-4: Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
9-6-5: Safety and Sanitation Requirements
9-6-6: Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
9-6-7: Hotels, Motels and Lodging Houses
9-6-8: Rules and Regulations
9-6-9: Inspections
9-6-10: Notice of Violation
9-6-11: Penalty
9-6-1: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application of Provisions: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply
to all structures in this City containing one or more rental dwelling units and
to all dwelling units which are either rented for human habitation or permitted
by the owner thereof to be occupied for human habitation by a person other than
the owner thereof. Every building or structure or part thereof rented for use,
in whole or in part, as a home or residence of a single family or person and
every building or part thereof rented for use as a home or residence of two (2)
or more persons or families living in separate apartments shall conform to the
requirements of this Chapter regardless of the class to which such building may
otherwise belong and regardless of when such building may have been
constructed, altered or repaired.
   B.   Minimum Standards; Conflicting Provisions: This Chapter establishes
minimum standards for the human habitation or occupancy of rental premises in
this City, and does not replace or modify the standards otherwise established
for the construction, replacement or repair of buildings contained in the
building ordinances of the City, 1  except such as are in conflict with the
provisions of his Chapter. (1979 Code Ch. 8, Art. VIII, §1)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 2 of this Title.
9-6-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall occupy, as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Sewer Service:
      1.   If a sanitary sewer is located in or under the lot or land upon
which a dwelling or dwelling unit is situated or such sanitary sewer is located
in a street or alley abutting such lot or land, all fixtures in such dwelling
or dwelling unit required by the provisions of subsections B and C of this
Section shall be properly installed and connected to such sanitary sewer. 1
      2.   If such sanitary sewer is not available as aforesaid or is not
available within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the boundary line of a lot,
all such fixtures shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system or
septic tank installed or constructed in compliance with the applicable
regulations of the State Department of Public Health or the City. 2
   B.   Water Service:
      1.   If a water main is located in, over or under the lot or land upon
which a dwelling or dwelling unit is situated, or such water main is located in
a street or alley abutting such lot or land, all fixtures in such dwelling or
dwelling unit required by the provisions of this Section shall be properly
installed and connected to such water main. 3
      2.   If such water main is not available as aforesaid, all such fixtures
shall be installed and connected to a water system approved by the Health and
Building Officer.
   C.   Kitchens; Toilet Facilities; Bathtub or Shower:
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
      2.   Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under subsection
C4 of this Section, shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory
basin in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and
sewer system.
      3.   Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under subsection
C4 of this Section, shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
      4.   The occupants of not more than two (2) dwelling units may share a
single flush water closet, a single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or
shower if:
         a.   Neither of the two (2) dwelling units contains more than two (2)
rooms; provided that, for the purpose of this subsection, a kitchenette or an
efficiency kitchen with not more than sixty feet (60') of floor area shall be
counted as a room; and
         b.   The habitable area of each of such dwelling units shall equal not
more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area; and
         c.   Such water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system.
      5.   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of this Chapter shall be properly connected with cold
water lines.
   D.   Garbage and Refuse Disposal: Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
adequate rubbish storage facilities and garbage storage or disposal facilities.
   E.   Egress: Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of this State and this City. There shall be provided at least two (2) means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level from each story
containing one or more dwelling units above the first story of every dwelling
containing two (2) or more dwelling units. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 5 of this Code.
2 2. See Section
  8-5-3 of this Code.
3 3. See Title 8, Chapter 4 of this Code.
9-6-3: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION, HEAT AND RODENT CONTROL:
No person shall occupy, as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Light and Ventilation:
      1.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be seven percent (7%) of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room, and such light-obstruction structures are located less
than three feet (3') from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum
total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window
in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at
least fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area of such room.
      2.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be
equal to at least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum window area size or
minimum skylight-type window size, except where there is supplied some other
device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Health and Building
Officer.
      3.   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in this
Chapter; except, that no windows or skylight shall be required in adequately
ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a mechanical
ventilation system capable of exhausting twenty five (25) cubic feet of air per
minute which is kept in operating condition and approved by the Health and
Building Officer.
      4.   When there is an electric power line available in a street, alley or
utility easement abutting the lot or land upon which a dwelling is situated or
such line is available over or under such lot or land, every habitable room of
such dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate floor or wall-type
electric convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling- type electric light fixture, and every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, public hall and stairway shall contain at
least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such
outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric power
in conformance with the Electrical Code. 1
      5.   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
four (4) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and
containing not more than three (3) dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed instead of full-time lighting.
   B.   Heat: Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least seventy degrees (70°) Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet (3') above
floor level when the temperature outside if zero degrees (0°) Fahrenheit.
   C.   Rodent Control: Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as
will effectively prevent their entrance. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §6)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  9-3-2A of this Title.
9-6-4: MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space for the first occupancy thereof and at least one
hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof; the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
   B.   In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least seventy (70)
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of each
floor space for each occupant thereof.
   C.   No dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have such
room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment can be
had only by going through another dwelling unit nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
dwelling unit.
   D.   At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet (7'), and the floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not
be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of
the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
   E.   No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
      1.   The floor and walls are protected against leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are protected against dampness;
      2.   The total of window area in each room is equal to the minimum window
area sizes as required in this Chapter;
      3.   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
      4.   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to the
minimum as required under this Chapter except where there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Health and
Building Officer. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §8)
9-6-5: SAFETY AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall occupy, as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be capable of affording privacy
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   B.   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight and rodentproof and shall be kept in sound working condition and
good repair.
   C.   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
   D.   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstructions.
   E.   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   F.   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this Chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
   G.   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy. (1979 Code Ch.
18, Art. VIII, §7)
9-6-6: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
   A.   Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   B.   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall:
      1.   Keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies and controls.
      2.   Dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing
it in the rubbish containers required by this Code. 1
      3.   Dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might
provide food for rodents in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the
garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by this
Code. 2  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities
or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four
(4) dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where more
than four (4) dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases, it
shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or
containers.
      4.   Be responsible for hanging all screens except where the owner has
agreed to supply such service.
   C.   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
   D.   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. (1979 Code
Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §9)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-3-2 of this Code.
2 2. See Section
  4-3-2 of this Code.
9-6-7: HOTELS, MOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions: No person shall operate a rooming, boarding
or lodging house, hotel or motel or shall occupy or let to another for
occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming, boarding or lodging house, hotel or
motel, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this
Chapter.
   B.   Lavatories, Bathtubs and Showers: At least one flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water
and sewer system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each ten
(10) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming, boarding or lodging
house, hotel or motel, including members of the operator's family wherever they
share the use of the said facilities; provided, that in rooming, boarding or
lodging house, hotel or motel, where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals
may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number of
water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as
to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons
sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a
basement except by written approval of the Health and Building Officer.
   C.   Sleeping Space: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person
shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least
fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
   D.   Sanitary Requirements:
      1.   The operator of every rooming, boarding or lodging house, hotel or
motel, shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each
week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall
be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary manner.
      2.   The operator of every rooming, boarding or lodging house, hotel or
motel, shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors
and ceilings and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of
the rooming, boarding or lodging house, hotel or motel, and he shall be further
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the
entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
   E.   Egress: Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level as required by the laws
or regulations of the State and ordinances or regulations of the City. (1979
Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §10)
9-6-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council may make and adopt such written rules and regulations as may
be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter;
provided, that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of this Chapter. The City Council shall file a certified copy of all
rules and regulations which it may adopt with the City Clerk, and such rules
and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this
Chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty
for violation of the provisions of this Code. 1  (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII,
§4)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
   1-4-1 of this Code.
9-6-9: INSPECTIONS:
Any officer or employee of the City charged with the duty of inspecting
buildings, fire hazards, health conditions or plumbing and electrical
installations, 1  may inspect and examine and shall be authorized to enter any
building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour to determine whether
such building, structure or premises conforms to the provisions of this
Chapter. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapters 9B, 9C and 9D and Section
  4-1-2 of this Code.
9-6-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Whenever the Health and Building Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
Chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
   A.   Be in writing;
   B.   Include a statement of any alleged violation;
   C.   Allow a reasonable time, but not less than thirty (30) days, for the
correction of any violation or the performance of any act it requires, except
in a case of emergency, in which case, the person to whom an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately;
   D.   Be served upon the owner or the occupant, as the case may require;
provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner or upon such occupant if a copy thereof:
      1.   Is served upon him personality;
      2.   Is sent by registered mail to his last known address;
      3.   Is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by the notice.
Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VIII, §3)
9-6-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Permit Requirements
9-7-2: Lights and Warnings
9-7-3: Utility Wires
9-7-4: Fire Alarm Wires and Poles
9-7-5: Penalty
9-7-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall move any building on, through or over
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the City without having
obtained a permit therefor from the City Clerk.
   B.   Application for Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made, in
writing, to the Mayor and shall state thereon the proposed route and the number
of days it is intended that the building shall occupy any portion of any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VI, §1)
   C.   Permit Fees and Issuance: Upon approval of the intended route by the
Mayor, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or fraction thereof that it
is intended that the building shall occupy any such portion of any such public
place shall be paid to the City Clerk and the permit issued. Additional payment
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each day or fraction thereof over and above
the time stated on the permit during which any building shall occupy any such
public place shall be paid. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VI, §2)
   D.   Bond: Every person obtaining a permit under this Chapter shall file
with the City Clerk a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) bond with lawful
corporate surety or endorsement of liability policy to the City to be approved
by the Mayor conditioned on the person's compliance with all the provisions of
this Chapter and agreeing to pay and holding the City harmless from any claim
which may be made against it by reason of the occupation of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place by the building or structure moved. (1979 Code
Ch. 18, Art. VI, §3)
9-7-2: LIGHTS AND WARNINGS:
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being
moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the Police Department so as
to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street so
blocked. The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning
signs and terns or lights on the building so as to guard against any person or
vehicle from colliding with it. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VI, §4)
9-7-3: UTILITY WIRES:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public
utility in moving a building, the terms of any special or franchise ordinance
governing shall apply, and the bond therein specified shall be given. If no
such terms apply, then the Mayor shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires
and the bond to be given to cover such expense. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VI, §5)
9-7-4: FIRE ALARM WIRES AND POLES:
When any moving building shall approach any fire alarm, pole or wire which
shall be endangered by the removal of such building or structure, it shall be
the duty of the mover to notify the Fire Chief at least six (6) hours before
reaching such wire or pole so that they may be removed or cared for by the City
authorities. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VI, §6)
9-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 8
SIGNS 1
SECTION:
9-8-1: Definitions
9-8-2: Sign Contractors
9-8-3: Sign Permit
9-8-4: Compliance With Zoning Regulations
9-8-5: General Requirements
9-8-6: Obsolete Signs
9-8-7: Unsafe And Unlawful Signs
9-8-8: Ground Signs
9-8-9: Roof Signs
9-8-10: Wall Signs
9-8-11: Projecting Signs
9-8-12: Marquee Signs
9-8-13: Electric Signs
9-8-14: Inspections; Fee
9-8-15: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  3-3-5-1 of this Code.
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hand place, suspend or affix and shall
also include the painting of wall signs.
   GROUND SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign when such sign is supported by
uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the
sign proper.
   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will
not continue to turn or glow at that temperature.
   MARQUEE: A canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a
building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building,
building line or property line.
   MARQUEE SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign attached to or hung from a
marquee.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN: Any sign consisting of any letter, figure,
character, mark, point, place, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial picture,
stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading meter or illuminating device
constructed, attached, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner
whatsoever so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to
any place, subject, person, public performance, article, machine or merchandise
whatsoever and displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors for recognized
advertising purposes.
   PROJECTING SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign which is affixed to any
building, wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall, structure,
building line or property line more than fifteen inches (15").
   ROOF SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign erected, constructed and maintained
above the roof of any building.
   WALL SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign which is affixed to the front, side
or rear walls of any building, when such sign shall project not more than
fifteen inches (15") from the building wall. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
9-8-2: SIGN CONTRACTORS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in the business of erecting,
constructing, altering, maintaining, servicing, painting or posting outdoor
advertising signs or structures without first having obtained a license from
the City Clerk to do so.
   B.   Application For License; Fee: Application for the license required by
this Section shall be upon forms provided by the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a license fee, payable to the City, in the amount of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
   C.   Insurance: Each such contractor or installer shall maintain in full
force and effect at all times general liability insurance coverage in an amount
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence for personal injuries, including death,
and property damages, including, but not limited to, property damages to City
property or property of others that may result, in whole or in part, from the
erecting, constructing, altering, maintaining, servicing, painting, or posting
outdoor advertising signs or structures. Such general liability insurance
coverage shall be an "occurrence" type policy and not a "claims made" type
policy and shall name as additional named insureds the "City of Taylorville,
Illinois, a municipal corporation, and its elected and/or appointed Mayor, City
Council, officials, officers, employees, and agents". Such person(s) shall file
and refile, from time to time, with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance
evidencing the aforesaid insurance requirements at each time such insurance is
obtained or renewed or prior to the time any prior certificate of insurance on
file with the City Clerk will expire. (Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
9-8-3: SIGN PERMIT:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required; Application And Fee: Except as
otherwise provided herein, no outdoor advertising sign or structure shall be
erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or relocated except as provided in this
Chapter and until a permit for the same has been issued by the Health and
Building Officer upon application therefor submitted in such form as the Health
and Building Officer may prescribe so as to include such information as may be
required by him for a complete understanding of the proposed work. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to be paid
to the City. (Ord. 2228, 11-17-1986)
   B.   Insurance: Each person or entity maintaining a sign, marquee, rigid
canopy, or other tangible property of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever
which overhangs City property or City right-of- way or is in danger of falling
on City property or City right-of- way shall maintain in full force and effect
at all times general liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) per occurrence for personal injuries, including death, and
property damages, including, but not limited to, property damages to city
property or to property of others that may result, in whole or in part, from
the construction or maintenance of such sign, marquee, canopy, or tangible
property. Such general liability insurance coverage shall be an "occurrence"
type policy and not a "claims made" type policy and shall name as additional
named insureds the city of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation, and
its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officials, officers,
employees and agents. Such persons and entities shall file and refile, from
time to time, with the city clerk a certificate of insurance evidencing the
aforesaid insurance requirements at each time such insurance is obtained or
renewed or prior to the time any prior certificate of insurance on file with
the city clerk will expire. (Ord. 3625, 7-1-2013)
   C.   Examination Of Plans; Issuance Of Permit: It shall be the duty of the
health and building officer, upon the filing of an application for an erection
permit as required by subsection A of this section, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and the premises upon which the proposed sign or
other advertising structure is to be erected. If it shall appear that the
proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
all other laws and ordinances of the city, the health and building officer
shall then issue the erection permit.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit: If the work authorized under an erection permit
required by subsection A of this section has not been completed within six (6)
months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. (Ord.
2131, 2-20-1984)
   E.   Exemptions From Permit: No permit will be required under this chapter
for the following: (Ord. 3131, 7-21-2003)
      1.   Any temporary ground sign or for any ground sign less than five feet
(5') in height or less than nine (9) square feet or for a sign painted on the
premises or for plaques securely attached to the premises.
      2.   Projecting signs weighing less than six (6) pounds. (Ord. 2131, 2-
20-1984)
      3.   A window sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet of display surface.
(Ord. 2290, 5-16-1988)
      4.   A sign not exceeding three (3) square feet of display surface on a
residence building stating merely the name and profession of the occupant.
      5.   A ground sign advertising either the sale or rental of the premises
upon which it is maintained when such sign does not exceed twenty five (25)
square feet of display surface.
      6.   Political wall signs affixed to building or structure and projecting
not more than five inches (5").
      7.   Street, warning and other official or nonadvertising signs erected
by any government or by others where required by or pursuant to a legal
authority.
The exemptions permitted by this subsection shall apply only to the requirement
of a permit and shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from
responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a good and safe condition.
(Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
9-8-4: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as allowed under the provisions of this chapter relating to
projecting and marquee signs, every outdoor advertising sign for which a permit
is required shall rigidly conform to the requirements of front, rear and side
yards and setback restrictions of the zoning area district of the lot upon
which such sign is to be or is located and of any lot contiguous thereto as
fully as if such sign were a part of a building wall; except, that lighting
reflector may project beyond the face of such sign 1 .
   B.   Every outdoor advertising sign shall rigidly conform to the
requirements of the height restrictions 2  of the zoning height district of the
lot upon which such a sign is to be or is located and of any lot contiguous
thereto as fully as if such sign were a part of the building wall or roof;
except, that lighting reflectors may project beyond the top of such sign 1 .
(Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
2 2. See subsection
  9-8-8A of this chapter.
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
9-8-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Wind Pressure: Ground signs shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind pressure of not less than twenty five (25) pounds per square
foot of exposed area, but all other signs must be designed and constructed to
withstand wind pressure of not less than fifty (50) pounds per square foot of
exposed area.
   B.   Anchors And Supports: Allowable stresses and materials shall conform to
the latest approved specifications of the American standard building code
requirements for structural steel, approved by the American Standards
Association, and of the national design specifications for stress grade lumber
and its fastenings, recommended by the National Lumber Manufacturers
Association. The working stress of chains, wire ropes and steel guy rods and
their fastenings shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of their ultimate strength.
   C.   Maintenance: The owner of any sign, as defined and regulated by this
chapter shall be required to have such sign properly painted, including all
parts and supports of the sign, unless such parts and supports are galvanized
or otherwise treated to prevent rust.
   D.   Obstructing Fire Escapes, Doorways, Etc.: No outdoor advertising sign
shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape
or any window or door or opening used as a means of egress or for firefighting
purposes or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another
part thereof. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire
escape nor be placed as to interfere with an opening required for legal
ventilation. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
9-8-6: OBSOLETE SIGNS:
Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product
sold shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the building or structure upon which sign may be found within
ten (10) days after written notification from the health and building officer,
and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such
order, the health and building officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of
such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
building or structure to which such sign is attached. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-1984)
9-8-7: UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
If the health and building officer shall find that any sign or other
advertising structure is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he shall give written notice to the permittee
thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards set forth in this Chapter within ten (10) days after
such notice, such signs or advertising structure may be removed or altered to
comply with this Chapter by the Health and Building Officer at the expense of
the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The Health and
Building Officer may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without
notice. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-84)
9-8-8: GROUND SIGNS:
   A.   Maximum Height:
      1.   No ground sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt or
relocated to a height exceeding thirty feet (30') above the ground, but such
maximum height for any part of any ground sign shall be further restricted to
two feet (2') of height above the ground for each one foot (1') or portion
thereof that such part of such ground sign is to be located from the property
line of any lot in the residence districts relative to zoning. (Ord. 2131, 2-
20-84; 1993 Code)
      2.   No ground sign for which a permit is required shall be erected to a
height of more than twelve feet (12') above the ground unless the face is
constructed of sheet metal or other noncombustible facing materials.
   B.   Bottom of Sign Facing: The bottom of the facing of every ground sign
shall be at least thirty inches (30") above the ground, which space may be
filled with platform or decorative trim of light wood or metal construction.
   C.   Supports and Anchors:
      1.   Generally: Ground signs shall be adequately supported to resist dead
load and the wind load specified in subsection
9-8-5A of this Chapter acting in any direction on the sign.
      2.   Height Does Not Exceed Twenty Five Feet: Ground signs which do not
exceed twenty five feet (25') in height may have supports which consist only of
vertical posts driven into or set in the soil or which consist of vertical
posts rigidly attached to bases embedded in the soil. There shall be two (2) or
more vertical posts spaced not to exceed a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the
height of the sign above the ground; except, that a sign which does not exceed
fifty (50) square feet in area may be supported by a single post.
      3.   Height Exceeds Twenty Five Feet: All ground signs over twenty five
feet (25') in height shall be braced by frames or inclined braces placed in
vertical planes, preferably normal to the face of the sign, at intervals not
exceeding its height; except, that metal beams of at least six inches by
fourteen inches (6" x 14") or wooden poles of at least eight inches (8") in
diameter shall be used as braces and set in concrete at a minimum depth below
the ground level of five feet (5'). At least two (2) frames or braces shall be
provided.
      4.   Posts Supporting Unbraced Signs: The posts, or bases for rigidly
attached posts, supporting unbraced ground signs shall be so proportioned that
the bearing loads imposed upon the soil in either a horizontal or vertical
direction shall not exceed safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored
to resist the specified wind load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports
shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective
resistance to pull out amounting to a force of twenty five percent (25%)
greater than the required resistance to overturning.
      5.   Wood Anchors or Supports: Whenever anchors or supports consist of
wood embedded in the soil, the wood shall be treated under pressure with
creosote or other approved preservative before erection. This requirement shall
not apply to temporary signs which will not remain in place for more than six
(6) months.
   D.   Soil Used For Backfill; Depth of Anchors and Supports: The soil used
for backfill for the dug-in type of anchor or post support shall be carefully
placed and thoroughly compacted. The anchors and supports shall penetrate to a
depth below ground greater than that of the frost line.
   E.   Portable Signs: Portable signs supported by frames or posts rigidly
attached to bases shall be so proportioned that the weight and size of the
bases are adequate to resist the wind pressure specified in subsection 9-8-5A
of this Chapter. Such signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
   F.   Maintenance of Area Around Sign: The owner of a lot upon which there is
a ground sign or the person occupying such lot or both are hereby required to
keep such lot and such ground sign clean, sanitary, inoffensive and free and
clear of all obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-
84)
9-8-9: ROOF SIGNS:
   A.   Construction Materials: Every roof sign shall be constructed entirely
of fire-resistive materials, including the uprights, supports and braces;
except, that the ornamental moldings, battend, cappings and nailing strips,
platforms and the decorative trimmings may be constructed of combustible
material.
   B.   Projections: No roof sign shall project beyond the exterior wall, but
if illuminated, lighting reflectors may project beyond the face of the wall.
   C.   Space Between Roof and Sign: Roof signs shall be so constructed as to
leave a clear space, except for the structure supporting such sign, of not less
than four feet (4') between the roof and the lowest part of such sign.
   D.   Anchors:
      1.   Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the building
over which they are constructed and erected. The dead and wind loads from the
signs shall be distributed to the structural elements of the building in such
manner that no element shall be overstressed.
      2.   Uplift due to overturning of roof signs shall be adequately resisted
by proper anchorage to the building walls or structure or by sufficient
concrete counterweights to resist uplift. Proper anchorage to the building
walls or structure shall include such alterations to the building as may be
needed to integrate and adequately interconnect sufficient dead load to equal
not less than ten percent (10%) in excess of the computed uplift applied to the
building by the sign. Where uplift is resisted by counterweights, their weight
shall exceed the amount of the uplift by ten percent (10%). (Ord. 2131, 2-20-
84)
9-8-10: WALL SIGNS:
Wall signs attached to exterior walls of solid masonry or concrete shall be
safely and securely attached to the same by means of metal anchors, bolts or
expansion screws of not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter which
shall be embedded at least five inches (5"). No wooden blocks or anchorage with
wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper
anchorage, except in the case of wall signs attached to buildings with walls of
wood. No wall sign shall be entirely supported by an unbraced parapet wall.
(Ord. 2131, 2-20-84)
9-8-11: PROJECTING SIGNS:
   A.   Maximum Projection; Height Above Sidewalk: Signs shall in no case
project from a building or structure to any point within two feet (2') of a
line drawn perpendicularly upward from the curb line, except signs, the lowest
point of which is a minimum of seventeen feet (17') above the pavement, in
which case, said signs may project out from the curb line not to exceed two
feet (2'). No projecting sign shall in any case project over a sidewalk so as
to endanger persons using the sidewalk.
   B.   Attachment to Building: Projecting signs shall be securely attached to
a building or structure by metal bolts, anchors, supports, chains, wire ropes
or steel rods. No staples or nails shall be used to secure any projecting sign
to any building or structure.
   C.   Supports:
      1.   The dead load of projecting signs, not parallel to the building or
the structure, and the load due to wind pressure shall be supported by
structural shapes, chains, wire ropes or steel guy rods. Such supports shall be
erected and maintained preferably at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) or
more with the face of the sign in an approximately horizontal place to resist
wind pressure. The lateral supports shall be placed not more than eight feet
(8') apart and shall be secured to a bolt or expansion screw capable of
developing the strength of the supporting chain, wire rope or steel guy rod.
The expansive device and details of the anchorage shall be subject to the
approval of the Health and Building Officer. Turn buckles or other approved
means of adjustment shall be placed in all chains, wire ropes or steel guy rods
supporting or bracing projecting signs.
      2.   Chains, wire ropes or steel guy rods used to support the dead or
wind loads of projecting signs may be fastened to solid masonry walls with
expansion bolts or other devices approved by the Health and Building Officer,
but no such support shall be attached to an unbraced parapet wall. Where the
supports must be fastened to walls made of wood, the supporting device must be
fastened securely in a manner approved by the Health and Building Officer.
      3.   All metal supports and braces for projecting signs shall be
galvanized or of corrosive-resistant material or painted at least once
annually. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-84)
9-8-12: MARQUEE SIGNS:
Fire-resistant marquee signs may be attached to or hung from a marquee. When
attached to or hung from a marquee, such signs shall be at least eight feet
(8') at its lowest level above the sidewalk or ground level. 1  No such sign
shall extend outside the vertical lines of such marquee. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-84)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-7-2B of this Code.
9-8-13: ELECTRIC SIGNS:
All signs and displays using electrical power shall have a cut-off switch on
the outside of the premises and on the outside of the sign. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-
84)
9-8-14: INSPECTIONS; FEE:
The Health and Building Officer shall inspect signs at such times as he deems
necessary and each electrical sign, projecting sign or marquee sign regulated
by this Chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or
insecure and whether it is in need of removal or repair. The Health and
Building Officer shall have the right and option, when he deems necessary, to
employ the services of a qualified electrician for the purpose of inspecting
said electrical sign, projecting sign or marquee sign. To meet the expense of
such inspection, the permittee thereof shall pay to the City the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) plus any additional cost incurred through the employment of a
qualified electrician in said inspection. (Ord. 2131, 2-20-84)
9-8-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this Chapter
shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILER COACH PARKS 1
SECTION:
9-9-1: Definitions
9-9-2: Use Of Mobile Homes And Trailers
9-9-3: Removal Of Wheels
9-9-4: Trailer Coach Park License
9-9-5: Mobile Home Sites
9-9-6: Park Sanitation And Safety
9-9-7: Park Supervision
9-9-8: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-4-3A2 and A3 of this Code.
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
   TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME OR HOUSE TRAILER: Any structure so constructed
so as it may be moved from place to place as a dwelling for one or more
persons; and there is or was affixed on the rear of such structure a red metal
label identifying such structure as a mobile home.
   TRAILER COACH PARK: Means and includes an area of land on which two (2) or
more occupied trailer coaches and/or mobile homes and/or house trailers are
harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together with any building,
structure or enclosure used as part of the equipment of any such park. (Ord.
2762, 9-3-1996)
9-9-2: USE OF MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer coach, mobile home,
house trailer, double wide trailer coach, double wide mobile home, double wide
house trailer, or similar housing as a dwelling unit upon any plot of ground in
the City or, after September 16, 1996, in the recreational areas, campground
sites or lake lots at Lake Taylorville, except as follows:
   A.   In a licensed trailer coach park.
   B.   For temporary construction purposes.
   C.   For emergency use following fire, tornado or other disaster. (Ord.
2762, 9-3-1996)
9-9-3: REMOVAL OF WHEELS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other transporting
device from any trailer coach, mobile home, double wide mobile home or similar
housing or otherwise to affix said trailer coach, mobile home or double wide
mobile home or similar housing permanently to the ground. (1979 Code Ch. 18,
Art. VII, § 10)
9-9-4: TRAILER COACH PARK LICENSE:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or
operate any trailer coach park in the City without first having obtained a
license therefor.
   B.   Application For License: Application for such licenses shall be made,
in writing, to the City Clerk in compliance with the ordinances relating to
license application 1  and shall contain the name of the applicant, the
location for the proposed park and the number of trailers to be accommodated.
(1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 2)
   C.   Plan: Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch
showing the size and location of all buildings and structures. (1979 Code Ch.
18, Art. VII, § 3)
   D.   License Fee: The annual fee for such licenses shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 4)
   E.   Character Of Applicant: No such license shall be issued to any but a
person of good character nor to any corporation if any officer thereof is not a
person of good character. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 5)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code.
9-9-5: MOBILE HOME SITES:
Each trailer coach shall be allotted a site of not less than one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. The trailer spaces will not be located any
closer to the bounding property lines of the park than the appropriate yard
requirements for the district would allow or closer than ten feet (10') to a
public street, alley or building. Each individual trailer site shall abut or
face on a driveway or clear unoccupied space which shall have unobstructed
access to a public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least
ten feet (10') between the ends of every trailer coach. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art.
VII, § 7)
9-9-6: PARK SANITATION AND SAFETY:
   A.   Garbage Disposal: It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent or
caretaker to provide for the collection and removal of garbage or other waste
material and to otherwise maintain the park in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 8)
   B.   Lights: The parks shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all
times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. (1979 Code
Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 9)
9-9-7: PARK SUPERVISION:
Each trailer coach park, while operated, shall be in the charge of a
responsible attendant or caretaker at all times who shall be responsible, with
the licensee, for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter relating to
the conduct of such parks. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII, § 7)
It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager, superintendent or person in
charge of a trailer coach park any person who is not a person of good character
or any person who has been convicted of a felony. (1979 Code Ch. 18, Art. VII,
§ 11)
9-9-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 10
HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Numbering Plan
9-10-2: Chart Of House Numbers
9-10-3: House Numbers Required; Size
9-10-1: NUMBERING PLAN:
All lots, buildings and structures in the city shall be numbered in accordance
with the following plan:
   A.   Main Cross Street shall be the base line for north and south numbers
and Main Street shall be the base line for east and west numbers.
   B.   Odd numbers shall be on the north and west sides of the streets; even
numbers shall be on the south and east sides of the streets.
   C.   There shall be one hundred (100) numbers to each block, one number to
every twenty five feet (25') of frontage. (1979 Code Ch. 9, Art. III, § 1)
   D.   The developer of a subdivision shall be responsible for securing house
numbers from the Christian County 911 office for the subdivision. The
subdivision developer shall also be responsible for placing on the final
subdivision plat the house numbers obtained from the Christian County 911
office. The subdivision developer shall also submit with the final subdivision
plat a letter from the Christian County 911 coordinator indicating approval of
the house numbers listed in the final subdivision plat presented to the
planning and zoning commission and Taylorville city council. The planning and
zoning commission, in conjunction with the city engineer, shall approve final
plats of a subdivision only after lot numbers are assigned on the final plat by
the subdivision developer and approved by the Christian County 911 office/
coordinator. (Ord. 3253, 10-17-2005)
9-10-2: CHART OF HOUSE NUMBERS:
The city clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot
in the city which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. (1979 Code
Ch. 9, Art. III, § 2)
9-10-3: HOUSE NUMBERS REQUIRED; SIZE:
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house in the city to
have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least two
and one-half inches (21/2") high showing the number of the house. Any person
failing to so number any house, building or other structure occupied by him or
if, after receiving notice to do so from the clerk, shall continue in his
failure to so number such house, building or structure shall be fined twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each day during or on which a failure to so number
continues. (1979 Code Ch. 9, Art. III, § 3)
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
SECTION:
9-11-1: Definitions
9-11-2: Restrictions On Number Of Residents In A Dwelling Unit
9-11-3: Penalty
9-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be construed as set
forth below:
   DWELLING: Any building which contains one or more "Dwelling Units" used,
intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied, or which are occupied for residential living purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
   SAME FAMILY: The same family shall consist of an individual person, or two
(2) persons living together on a resident conjugal basis, or one married
couple, and the minor children of such individual person or such two (2)
persons or such married couple living together in a dwelling unit with not more
than a total of two (2) other persons, either acting as servants or who are
related directly to such individual person or two (2) persons or such married
couple by blood, marriage, or law; or the same family shall consist of a group
of not more than five (5) unrelated persons, living together in a dwelling
unit. (Ord. 2966, 6-5-2000)
9-11-2: RESTRICTIONS ON NUMBER OF RESIDENTS IN A DWELLING UNIT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of any dwelling unit to permit or
allow such dwelling unit to be occupied or used, at any time, for residential
living purposes by any person who is not of the "same family" (as defined
above). (Ord. 2966, 6-5-2000)
9-11-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, for each offense, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2966, 6-5-2000)
CHAPTER 12
RESIDENTIAL CAMPER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Restrictions
9-12-3: Penalty
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   CAMPER: Any tent, or shelter, or self-contained traveling home, or trailer
capable of being hauled by a motor vehicle, or any recreational vehicle, or any
vehicle, or any structure or unit or vehicle or thing so constructed such that
it may be moved from place to place, any of which that is capable of being used
as a permanent or temporary living accommodation, sleeping quarters, or
dwelling for one or more persons.
   RESIDENTIAL: The use of a camper by any person for a living accommodation,
or as sleeping quarters, or as a dwelling for a period of more than ten (10)
days within any consecutive thirty (30) day period on any lot or parcel of
public or private land within the city of Taylorville, Illinois. (Ord. 3214,
12-20-2004)
9-12-2: RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or maintain or use or occupy any
residential camper upon any land within the city of Taylorville, Illinois,
except as follows:
   A.   For emergency residential use following fire, tornado, or any other act
of God disaster for a period of time as may be approved by the city council
from time to time; or
   B.   On any campsite or lake lot that such person or persons are leasing
from the city at Lake Taylorville provided such use of a residential camper
thereon is being used in accordance with any such lease. (Ord. 3214, 12-20-
2004)
9-12-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall, for each offense, be fined the sum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed
a separate offense. (Ord. 3214, 12-20-2004)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ZONING TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title; Contents
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Interpretation
10-1-4: Rules And Definitions
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE; CONTENTS:
This comprehensive zoning title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF TAYLORVILLE, ILLINOIS. The zoning maps herein referred to are
identified by the titles "Taylorville, Illinois zoning districts, map A, A-
1 and A-2; and Lake Taylorville zoning districts, map C" and dated January
1977. All explanatory matter thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this
title 1 . (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-2-2 of this title.
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
These zoning regulations and districts have been made with these objectives:
   A.   The assuring that adequate light, air and safety from fire and other
dangers may be secured;
   B.   That property values be conserved;
   C.   That traffic congestion be lessened or avoided; and
   D.   That public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare might otherwise
be promoted. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of this
title, the provisions contained herein shall be held to be minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of public health, morals, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
   B.   Covenants And Deeds: In the case of any conflict between this title, or
part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future private
restrictive covenants or deeds, the provisions of this title, and not the
provisions of such private restrictive covenants or deeds, shall apply for
purposes of enforcement of this title by the city. (Ord. 3024, 6-18-2001)
10-1-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
All words used in the present tense include the future tense; all words in the
singular include the plural, and all words in the plural include the singular;
the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "used" shall be
deemed to include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used".
   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use or building.
   AGRICULTURAL USES, BONA FIDE: The growing of crops in the open, raising of
stock and poultry, forestry, mushroom growing, flower gardening, operation of
apiaries and aviaries, nurseries, orchards, fur farms, roadside stands, signs
and billboards relating to the sale or use of products produced thereon and
necessary structures and farm dwellings for such uses.
   ALLEY: Any public or private way dedicated to public travel and less than
twenty feet (20') in width.
   AUTO WRECKING YARD: Any place where three (3) or more motor vehicles not in
running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation or any land, building or structure used for the
wrecking or storing of such automobiles or the parts thereof.
   BUILDING: Any structure constructed or placed or used for residence,
business, commercial, or industrial use or for other public or private purposes
or accessory uses thereto and including, but not limited to, portable storage
containers, portable awnings, accessory buildings, canopies, coverings, or
roofs of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever, tents, lunch wagons, dining
cars, trailers, billboards, signs and similar structures whether stationary or
movable or portable or affixed to real estate.
   DWELLING: A permanent building used primarily for human habitation, but not
including facilities for the housing of transient residents, nor to include
mobile homes.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A permanent building or portion thereof providing
separate living accommodations for three (3) or more families.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A permanent building, separate and freestanding, in
itself providing living accommodations for one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A permanent building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two (2) families.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance from the established average
sidewalk grade, street grade or finished grade at the building line, whichever
is the highest, to the highest point of the building.
   HOME OCCUPATION: The conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a
service or the conduct of a business, or the handcrafted manufacture of
products within a dwelling in a residential district, which is incidental and
secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes.
   LOT: A piece, parcel or plot of land occupied or to be occupied by one
principal building and its accessory buildings and including the open spaces
required under this title.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use of building or land lawful at the effective date
hereof that does not conform with the "permitted use" provisions of this title.
   SCHOOLS: Accredited elementary schools, junior high and high schools
(nonboarding).
   STREET: Any public or private way dedicated to public travel twenty feet
(20') or more in width. The word "street" shall include the words "road",
"highway" and "thoroughfare".
   TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure originally
constructed with wheels, whether or not the wheels are still contained thereon,
and designed and constructed to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping
purposes but does not include camping vehicles used for recreational purposes.
   USE: The purpose or activity for which a building or structure is occupied
or maintained.
   YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings, except as otherwise provided in this
title.
Front Yard: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the
principal building and the right of way line or street line which the building
faces.
Rear Yard: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
Side Yard: The yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to
the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of the
principal building. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 2079, 11-7-1982; Ord. 3081,
7-15-2002; Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS; GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts Established
10-2-2: Zoning Map
10-2-3: Boundaries Of Districts
10-2-4: Application Of Regulations
10-2-5: Restrictions On Continuance Of Nonconforming Use
10-2-6: Clear View At Intersections
10-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this Title, all land within the City is hereby designated on
the zoning maps as being in one of the following districts:
Agricultural Districts
   AG-1 district - agricultural
   AG-2 district - agricultural
Residence Districts
   R-1 district - one- and two-family residential
   R-2 district - multiple-family residential
Commercial Districts
   C-1 district - general retail
   C-2 district - service retail
Industrial Districts
   I-1 district - light industrial
   I-2 district - heavy industrial
   I-3 district - energy
(Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 3177, 6-7-2004)
10-2-2: ZONING MAP 1 :
The City Council shall cause to be published, as needed, a map clearly showing
the existing zoning divisions and classifications. The City Engineer shall
maintain a current zoning map, with amendments, for the City Council and the
Plan Commission's use. The Plan Commission shall review the zoning map,
annually, during the month of March to determine whether or not a new
publication shall be required. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  10-1-1 of this Title.
10-2-3: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise indicated on the Zoning District maps, the boundary lines of
the districts follow lot lines, centerlines of streets, alleys or railroad
rights of way or such centerlines extended, centerlines of creeks or the
corporate limit line as existing at the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-
1977)
10-2-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Generally: No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved, altered or remodeled unless for a use
expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations for the Zoning
District in which it is located. (Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
   B.   Zoning Of Agricultural Uses: Notwithstanding subsection A of this
Section none of the following regulations in this Title, with the exception of
front yard requirements, shall be applicable to bona fide agricultural uses as
defined in Chapter 3 of this Title. This shall not be construed, however, as to
eliminate the necessity of bona fide agricultural uses from applying for and
obtaining the necessary building permit prior to construction, alteration or
moving of buildings. No fee, however, shall be required for a building permit
for such agricultural uses.
   C.   Zoning Of Annexed Areas: All territory which may hereafter be annexed
to the City shall, from time of annexation, be considered as being the same
Zoning District designated to said territory under the zoning provisions
established by the Christian County, Illinois Zoning Board until and unless
otherwise designated by zoning ordinance amendment as specified in the
procedure in Section
10-9-6 of this Title. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
10-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the effective date hereof or
subsequent amendments hereto may be continued with the following limitations:
   A.   Expansion Or Alteration Of Nonconforming Use: Any structure containing
a nonconforming use may not be expanded nor substantially remodeled. The Board
of Appeals 1  may approve any remodeling and incidental repairs which do not
tend to prolong the life of the nonconforming use.
   B.   Damaged Buildings: Any structure containing a nonconforming use which
has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its current fair
value, as estimated immediately prior to damage, shall not be repaired or
reconstructed except in conformity with this Title.
   C.   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use shall be
reestablished after having been discontinued for twelve (12) months. Vacating
of premises or building or nonoperative status shall be evidence of a
discontinued use.
   D.   Change Of Use: No nonconforming use may be substituted for any other
nonconforming use or any conforming use. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code.
10-2-6: CLEAR VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS:
On any corner lot in all districts except the C-1 fire limits area, as
described in this Code 1 , there shall be no obstructions to traffic visibility
within thirty five feet (35') of the intersection of the two (2) street
property lines of the corner lots. (Ord. 1836, 1-16-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  9-1-3A of this Code.
CHAPTER 3
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purposes
10-3-2: Uses Permitted
10-3-3: Special Uses
10-3-4: Site and Structure Requirements
10-3-5: Off-Street Parking
10-3-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   AG-1 Districts: The purpose of the AG-1 District is:
      1.   To encourage the preservation of a proper setting for and pleasant
approaches to the City;
      2.   To provide an area for agricultural pursuits protected from
infringement of unguided urban development;
      3.   To create and preserve a setting for rural small estate residential
development;
      4.   To conserve areas physically unsuitable for intensive development;
and
      5.   To provide in the area immediately surrounding the City an
environment capable of accommodating future expansion of the City in an orderly
and efficient manner.
   B.   AG-2 District: The purpose of the AG-2 District is to protect the area
around the proposed Lake Taylorville 1  from encroachment and intermixing of
land uses which can be detrimental to the public health, welfare and
conservation of property values. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-77)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 7 of this Code.
10-3-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   AG-1 District: The following uses are permitted in the AG-1 District:
Agricultural uses, commercial grain storage.
Community buildings, utility and service system buildings and lands, libraries
and museums, picnic grounds, religious, educational or charitable institutions.
One- and two-family residential dwellings, home occupations.
Unlighted signs notifying of sale, rental or lease of land or sale of farm
goods on the premises on which the sign is maintained having not over fifty
(50) square feet of sign area; signs announcing meeting time and place of civic
organizations.
   B.   AG-2 District: Within any AG-2 Agricultural District, except for bona
fide agricultural uses as defined in Section
10-1-4 of this title, no building or premises shall be used or arranged or
designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses which shall be
subject to all regulations and requirements for permit of this Title:
Lakes (artificial).
Public parks and forest preserves.
Public picnic grounds, marinas and beaches.
Public utility substations, booster stations, radio and television relay
towers, repeater stations, etc., but not including power generation or gas
manufacturing plants. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-77)
10-3-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the Mayor
and City Council after a public hearing and recommendation by the Plan
Commission. Such special use shall be subject to the following requirements and
any other requirements the Plan Commission feels necessary to further the
purpose of the Agricultural Districts as stated in Section
10-3-1 of this Chapter:
   A.   AG-1 District:
Cemeteries.
Commercial resort uses such as lodges, restaurants, rental cottages, riding
stables, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and other such
recreational facilities.
Outdoor advertising structures, providing not closer than three hundred feet
(300') to the nearest highway right of way or five hundred feet (500') to the
nearest residential or public or semi-public property, and that permits are
issued for not longer than five (5) years.
Uses of land including quarrying and mining of natural resources, sanitary
landfill and other types of landfill, refuse disposal and dumps.
   B.   AG-2 District: No special uses provided. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-77)
10-3-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area and Lot Width:
      1.   AG-1 District: No dwelling shall be located on a lot less than one
acre in area nor one hundred fifty feet (150') in width.
      2.   AG-2 District: Lot area and lot width not specified.
   B.   Yards: All structures shall have the following minimum yard spaces:
      1.   Front Yard: Fifty feet (50').
      2.   Side Yards: Each not less than fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Rear Yard: Each not less than thirty feet (30').
Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard requirements on each street
side of the lot.
   C.   Building Height:
      1.   AG-1 District: No residential dwelling shall exceed two (2) stories
or thirty feet (30') in height.
      2.   AG-2 district: No height limitation is specified.
10-3-5: OFF-STREET PARKING:
There shall be provided in the AG Districts off-street parking in accordance
with Chapter 8 of this Title. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-77)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-1-1: Definition Of Lot For Single-Family Or Two-Family Residential
Dwellings
10-4-2: Uses Permitted
10-4-3: Special Uses
10-4-4: Site And Structure Requirements
10-4-5: Off-Street Parking
10-4-6: Mobile Homes
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the residence districts is to provide an area for residential
uses and those public and semipublic uses or businesses normally considered an
integral part of and is reasonably compatible with the residential neighborhood
they serve or business uses which may have a unique, special or unusual impact
upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, and planned developments.
(Ord. 3716, 7-20-2015)
10-4-1-1: DEFINITION OF LOT FOR SINGLE-FAMILY OR TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DWELLINGS:
Notwithstanding anything in this Title to the contrary, one single-family
residence dwelling or one two-family residence dwelling may be constructed,
located, and occupied in an R-1 District or in an R-2 District on any two (2)
or more lots if such lots are adjoining and contiguous with one another and all
such lots have a common owner or owners. In such event, the total dimensions of
all such adjoining and contiguous lots used for such residential construction,
location, and occupancy shall be construed as comprising only one "lot" for the
purpose of determining compliance with any requirement(s), restriction(s), or
provision(s) as set forth in this Title when such requirement(s), restriction
(s), or provision(s) references the term "lot" in said Title. (Ord. 3014, 4-2-
2001)
10-4-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   R-1 District: The following uses are permitted in the R-1 District:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Light agricultural uses including nurseries and raising of farm products (not
to include livestock or sale of products on premises).
Municipal public water treatment plants and related facilities, buildings and
lands uses. No special use is required.
Single-family and two-family residence dwellings, leasing of rooms to not more
than two (2) families and home occupations as defined in Section
10-1-4 of this Title.
Unlighted real estate, nonconforming business use signs and public building or
church signs or bulletin boards pertaining to the property on which they are
placed and not having over twelve (12) square feet of sign area; provided
however, a twelve foot (12') wide by six foot (6') high sign with one light
thereon may be located and maintained on the sites of Municipal public water
treatment plants and related facilities, buildings and land uses. (Ord. 3817,
9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 3874, 11-5-2018)
   B.   R-2 District:
Any use permitted in the R-1 District.
Clubs, lodges, hospitals, sanatoriums and rest homes.
Multiple-family dwelling of not more than four (4) units, tourist homes and
lodging uses with accommodations for not more than fifteen (15) persons or for
over four (4) units or more than one multiple-family dwelling on a single
tract. (See subsection
10-4-3A6 of this Chapter.)
Unlighted signs as described in the R-1 District. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd.
Ord. 1923, 8-6-1979; Ord. 2150, 10-8-1984)
10-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
One or more of the following uses may be permitted as one or multiple special
uses in the R-1 and R-2 Districts only when authorized and approved by the City
Council after a public hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission. Such
special use or special uses shall be subject to the following requirements and
to any and all other requirements or conditions the Plan Commission or City
Council believes necessary and directs to further the purpose of the residence
districts as stated in Section
10-4-1 of this Chapter: (Ord. 3716, 7-20-2015)
   A.   Special Uses Enumerated:
      1.   Planned residential development under single ownership in which
incidental business and recreational facilities for the convenience of the
occupants may be furnished; provided, however, that the property shall have a
gross area of thirty (30) acres and that permitted business uses shall be
limited to those uses allowed in C-1 District, and they shall occupy not more
than ten percent (10%) of the gross land area of the development. Such planned
developments may vary the dwelling type requirements, yard, height or area per
dwelling requirements; providing, however, that the total number of dwelling
units to be accommodated is not greater than would otherwise be allowed under
normal development.
      2.   Individual mobile homes 1  for emergency use only following a fire,
tornado or other disaster; providing that:
         a.   Such mobile home shall be connected to sanitary sewer and public
water;
         b.   Such mobile home shall be for temporary use only lasting no
longer than two (2) years;
         c.   Such mobile home shall meet the single-family dwelling
requirements for lot area and yards for the particular residence district in
which it is located; and
         d.   That such mobile home will not in its proposed location impair
public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the community.
      3.   Trailer parks 2  with permanent accommodations for mobile homes;
providing that:
         a.   Such trailer park will have permanent accommodations for a
minimum of five (5) trailers;
         b.   Trailer accommodations will include, for each trailer, individual
underground sewer and water connections, concrete trailer platform, forty foot
(40') wide pavement with vehicle access to all trailers;
      3A.   The retail sales of mobile homes on site in a trailer park by the
owner of a trailer park that has been granted a special use for a trailer park
under subparagraph A.3 of Section
10-4-3 of this Chapter.
         c.   The plan of development will provide a minimum of one thousand
two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet per trailer space; and
         d.   The trailer spaces will not be located any closer to the bounding
property lines of the park than the appropriate yard requirements for the
district would allow. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for each
individual trailer to be located in the park prior to occupancy as provided in
section
10-9-3 of this title. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
      4.   Professional business offices, medical or dental offices or clinics,
law, insurance, or real estate offices, financial institutions, finance or
utility companies. (Ord. 2888, 12-21-1998)
      5.   Daycare center, nursery school or preschool centers which are
licensed by the state of Illinois, department of children and family services.
(Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
      6.   Apartments, condominiums, residential conversion condominiums,
residential add-on condominiums (all in R-2 zoned areas only).
         a.   Requirements: All condominiums, including those listed above,
shall be governed by the condominium property act 3 , including the definitions
therein as found in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 605/1. If multiple
condominium buildings are to be presented, then this project will first fall
under the subdivision ordinance 4 .
         b.   Plat Review: To provide for a successful review of a condominium
or an apartment complex, the petitioner should submit a plat, and approval will
constitute a successful review of the plat by the plan commission and approval
then by the governing body, the city council. Such plat should contain:
            (1)   A location map. The location map should outline the area to
be subdivided.
            (2)   Existing streets and city utilities on the joining property.
            (3)   The north point on the map.
            (4)   Name and address of the owner, name of the proposed complex
(apartment or condominium), boundary line bearings and distances and acreages,
names of persons who prepared the plat, the owner's attorney, representative
agent, graphic scale and date, contours at two foot (2') intervals.
            (5)   Location of existing lot lines, public streets, public
utilities, water mains, sewers, drainpipes, culverts, watercourses, bridges,
railroads, buildings within the boundaries of the proposed complex.
            (6)   Locations and widths, other dimensions and names of proposed
means of ingress and egress, alleys, utilities and other easements, common
places and other open spaces or reserved areas.
            (7)   Grades of proposed streets and alleys.
            (8)   Cross sections of proposed streets extending from the street
line to street line or right of way line to right of way line showing the
roadway locations, type of curb and gutter, paving and sidewalks to be
installed.
            (9)   The layout of proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers.
            (10)   Drainage of the land including proposed storm sewers,
ditches, culverts, bridges.
         c.   Conversion Condominium Plat: A successful condominium will
contain a comprehensive building report which includes age, material and
condition, where applicable, of the following:
            (1)   Type and age of construction.
            (2)   Walls (interior and exterior).
            (3)   Plumbing.
            (4)   Electrical.
            (5)   Roof.
            (6)   Walks.
            (7)   Garaging.
            (8)   Insulation.
            (9)   Life safety systems.
            (10)   Trash disposal.
            (11)   Tiling.
            (12)   Fixtures and appliances.
            (13)   Drainage.
            (14)   Landscaping.
            (15)   Swimming pools, saunas, fountains, recreational facilities.
            (16)   Driveways.
            (17)   Wall and fences.
            (18)   Stone or brick work.
            (19)   Heating.
            (20)   Air conditioning.
            (21)   Fireplaces.
            (22)   Floors.
            (23)   Laundry facilities.
            (24)   Exterior lighting.
            (25)   Deferred maintenance.
            (26)   Number and composition of existing tenants.
            (27)   Length of existing leases and average rents.
            (28)   Average length of tenancy for existing tenants.
            (29)   Estimated schedule for conversion.
            (30)   Estimated price range of converted units.
            (31)   List of improvements contemplated.
            (32)   Copy of proposed CC&Rs.
            (33)   Estimate of available similar housing in the area.
         d.   Lot Width:
 
Condominium           Minimum
Units                 Lot Width
1,700 square feet     50 feet
Room Or Lodging House
1,500 square feet     50 feet
 
(Ord. 2150, 10-8-1984)
      7.   Churches, schools, libraries, museums and art galleries, parks,
playgrounds, community centers, cemeteries, public services, utility buildings.
(Ord. 1940, 11-19-1979)
      8.   A hard surfaced parking lot or lots for commercial purposes if such
parking lot or lots are to be located immediately adjacent to and abutting a C-
1 or C-2 district.
For purpose hereof, such parking lot or lots shall not be deemed "immediately
adjacent to and abutting" if a street or alley lies between such parking lot or
lots and such C-1 or C-2 district.
Furthermore, such special use shall be limited solely to the existing owners of
the property where such parking lot or lots is or are located at the time of
granting such special use. Such special use shall terminate, without further
action, immediately upon the leasing of such property to nonowners or
immediately upon transfer of ownership of such property by any one or all of
such existing owners. (Ord. 2711, 7-17-1995)
      9.   The adaptive reuse of nonresidential buildings previously
constructed and used for nonresidential purposes and located in an R-1 or R-
2 district on a single lot or on multiple lots immediately adjacent to each
other to be used for one or more of the following special uses: restaurants,
clubs, reception halls, banquet halls, or for any other small retail and/or
service businesses provided each such authorized and special use is located in
and operated within a nonresidential building or buildings previously
constructed and used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, the
property boundary of any such lot or lots is/are located immediately adjacent
to either a C-1 or C-2 district or is located immediately adjacent to another
such business establishment in an R-1 or R-2 district that has been granted a
special use under this subsection A9; and provided, further, that no city
liquor license shall be issued or renewed for any applicant or entitled to be
held by any city liquor license holder concerning any such restaurant, club,
reception hall, or banquet hall business until and unless the applicant for
such liquor license, the liquor license holder, and such business each
qualifies at all times for the issuance, maintenance, or renewal of a city
liquor license and such business is conducted in accordance with all
requirements and conditions of the city council, the plan commission, this
code, and with Illinois law.
All business or advertising signs or signage for each authorized and approved
special use shall conform to the following requirements: a) the illumination of
all signs or signage shall be diffused or indirect and shall be arranged so as
not to reflect direct rays of light or illumination into any adjacent
residential property located in an R-1 or R-2 district or into the public way;
and b) any sign or signage located in the direct line of any traffic control
signal shall not have flashing, intermittent red, green or amber illumination.
(Ord. 3716, 7-20-2015)
   B.   Change Of Special Use: No special use shall be changed except by
authorization of the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by
the plan commission.
   C.   Termination Of Special Use: Special uses as described herein shall
terminate if not used for a period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977;
amd. Ord. 3910, 9-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 9, Chapter 9 of this Code.
2 2. See also Title 9, Chapter 9 of this Code.
3 1. 765 ILCS 605/1.
4 2. See title 11 of this code.
10-4-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area And Lot Widths:
      1.   R-1 district:
 Minimum Lot Area Per Family (Square Minimum Lot Width Per Structure (Feet)
 Feet)
                                             Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
                                             Per Family       Per Structure
                                             (Square Feet)    (Feet)
Single-family dwelling:
    With public water and public sewer   6,000            50
     With public water supply or sewer  10,000           75
    With neither public water supply nor 20,000           100
sewer
Two-family dwelling:
     With public water and public sewer 4,500            75
    With public water or public sewer    7,500            100
    With neither public water nor sewer  15,000           125
 
   (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
      2.   R-2 district:
 
                         Minimum Lot Area Per Family Or Minimum Lot Width Per
                         Rental Unit (Square Feet)      Structure (Feet)
Single-family dwelling   6,000                          50
Two-family dwelling      4,500                          75
Multiple-family dwelling 2,500                          75
Rooming or lodging house 1,500                          75
 
   (Ord. 3629, 8-5-2013)
   B.   Yards: All structures to be constructed, altered or moved in the R-
1 and R-2 Districts shall provide yards of the following minimum depths:
      1.   Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Side Yards: Five feet (5') minimum, one side yard; twelve feet (12')
minimum, two (2) side yards.
      3.   Rear Yard: Twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the lot
depth, whichever is greater.
      4.   Yards Of Corner Lots: Corner lots shall provide a front yard on each
street side, not, however, to reduce the buildable width of the lot below
thirty two feet (32'). (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
   C.   Building Height:
      1.   No building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in
height, unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum by five
feet (5') for every five feet (5'), or fraction thereof, of additional height
over thirty feet (30').
      2.   The height of any accessory building shall not exceed the height of
the principal building located on the same lot.
      3.   The building height of any structure in excess of fifty feet (50')
will require prior approval of the Plan Commission and City Council.
      4.   The building height restrictions set forth in this subsection C
shall not apply to Municipal public water treatment plants and related
facilities, buildings and lands uses. (Ord. 3817, 9-5-2017)
10-4-5: OFF-STREET PARKING:
There shall be provided in the R-1 and R-2 Districts adequate off-street
parking in accordance with the schedule in Chapter 8 of this Title; provided,
however, such off-street parking shall not apply to Municipal water treatment
plants and related facilities, buildings and land uses. (Ord. 3817, 9-5-2017)
10-4-6: MOBILE HOMES:
Mobile homes shall not be permitted to be located in R-1 Districts or in R-
2 Districts except as temporary offices for construction purposes and as
allowed in subsections
10-4-3A2 and A3 and A3A of this Chapter. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 3910,
9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 5
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purposes
10-5-2: Uses Permitted
10-5-3: Site And Structure Requirements
10-5-4: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5-5: Screening Requirements
10-5-6: Special Uses
10-5-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   C-1 District: The purpose of the C-1 general retail district is to
provide for a wide range of retail facilities and services of such a nature as
to be fully compatible in the proximity they must enjoy in the central business
or in neighborhood shopping areas.
   B.   C-2 District: The purpose of the C-2 service retail district is to
provide for those retail businesses and services which require a location other
than the central business district or the neighborhood business district,
requiring either large tracts of land or a highway location. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-
1977)
10-5-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   C-1 district:
Any use permitted in a residential district including mobile homes, trailers
and trailer parks; providing, however, the zoning enforcing officer determines
such uses meet the requirements of subsections
10-4-3A2 and A3 and section 10-4-6 of this title.
Automotive and related uses: new and used car sales, service and repair,
gasoline filling stations, motorcycle and bicycle shops, cab and bus stands and
depots.
Business and advertising signs pertaining to the business on the property on
which the sign is located; providing, that: 1) illumination of all signs shall
be diffused or indirect and shall be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays
of light into adjacent residential districts or into the public way; and 2)
that any sign located in the direct line of vision of any traffic control
signal shall not have flashing, intermittent, red, green or amber illumination.
Business and professional offices: medical and dental offices and clinics, law
offices, insurance and real estate offices, banks, finance and utility
companies.
Food, drug and beverage: grocery stores, supermarkets, meat markets, drugstores
and package liquor stores, bakery in conjunction with retail sales,
restaurants, tearooms, taverns, lounges, restaurants, clubs, reception halls,
banquet halls, package liquor stores, and brewpubs.
Major retail outlets: furniture, department, clothing, shoe and variety stores,
hardware, appliance, paint, wallpaper and retail outlet for trees, shrubbery,
lawn and garden seeds, fertilizer for the lawn and related lawn and garden
items.
Multiple retail or service oriented business outlets or strip malls that are
housed in a single building which contains multiple separate but independent
business spaces located within such single building for business uses permitted
in a C-1 district.
Service and recreation: motels and hotels, laundromats, dry cleaning and
laundry pick up stations, barber and beauty shops, shoe repair and tailor
shops, mortuaries, newspaper publishing, printing shops with not more than ten
(10) full time regular employees, storage and transfer establishments, places
of amusement and assembly, commercial recreation.
Sheet metal, plumbing and heating sales and service and electrical shops;
provided, that operations of these businesses shall be limited in time from
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and further provided,
that the storage and warehousing of goods and materials shall be limited to the
interior of the building and not stored on the outside. No mass production of
sheet metal goods shall be allowed.
Specialty shops: gift shops, magazine, book and stationery outlets, florist
shops, camera and photography shops, sporting goods. (Ord. 3716, 7-20-2015)
   B.   C-2 district:
Any use permitted in the C-1 general retail district.
Any use permitted in the residential districts.
Accessory uses or buildings.
Building trades or equipment: building, concrete, masonry, and building
material establishments (providing no assembly, construction, millwork, or
concrete block manufacture is done on premises).
Business and advertising signs pertaining to the business on the property on
which the sign is located; providing, that: 1) illumination of all signs shall
be diffused or indirect and shall be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays
of light into adjacent residence districts or into the public way, and 2) that
any sign located in the direct line of vision of any traffic control signal
shall not have flashing intermittent red, green or amber illumination.
Heavy service and processing facilities: laundry and dry cleaning plants;
linens, towels, diaper and similar supply services; animal pounds, kennels, and
veterinary establishments; frozen food lockers; seed and food processing
plants; dairies.
Vehicle drive-in and heavy vehicle service: drive-in theaters, drive-in
restaurants and refreshment stands; express, cartage, and trucking facilities;
large item machinery or bulk sales and storage not including outdoor unfenced
storage. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 1914, 7-2-1979)
10-5-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area And Lot Width:
      1.   Each residential use to be accommodated in the C-1 and C-
2 commercial districts shall meet the minimum lot area and minimum lot width
requirements of the R-2 residence district 1 .
      2.   Each business use to be accommodated in the C-1 and C-2 commercial
districts shall provide a minimum lot area of two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet; no minimum lot width is required for business uses.
   B.   Yards: All buildings to be constructed, altered or moved in the
commercial districts shall meet the following minimum requirements: (Ord. 1793,
2-7-1977)
      1.   C-1 District:
         a.   Front Yard: Fifteen feet (15'); except, that there shall be no
minimum yard required within the nine (9) square block area bordered by Walnut
Street on the east, Vine Street on the north, Webster Street on the west and
Franklin Street on the south.
         b.   Side Yards: Ten feet (10'); except, that there shall be no
minimum yard required within the nine (9) square block area bordered by Walnut
Street on the east, Vine Street on the north, Webster Street on the west and
Franklin Street on the south. It is further provided, however, that all lots
adjoining a residential district shall provide a side yard on that adjoining
side equal to that required in the adjoining residence district.
         c.   Rear Yard: Twenty feet (20'). Where a rear lot line abuts an
alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of such alley may be considered in meeting
the rear yard requirements. (Ord. 2274, 1-18-1988)
      2.   C-2 District:
         a.   Front Yard: Fifteen feet (15').
         b.   Side Yards: Ten feet (10').
         c.   Rear Yard: Twenty feet (20'). Where a rear lot line abuts an
alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of such alley may be considered in meeting
the rear yard requirements.
   C.   Building Height:
      1.   C-1 District: In the C-1 general retail district, no building shall
exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45').
      2.   C-2 District: In the C-2 service retail district, no building shall
exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-4-4A2 of this title.
10-5-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
There shall be provided in the C-1 and C-2 commercial districts off street
parking and loading in accordance with the schedules in chapter 8 of this
title. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
10-5-5: SCREENING REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be provided in the C-1 and C-2 commercial districts which adjoin
residential districts appropriate screening of off street parking areas and
improvements on side and rear yards only to help mitigate the visual impact of
said areas and improvements on the residential district.
   A.   Types Of Screening: All screening shall be maintained and may consist
of:
      1.   Shrub or hedge plantings with dense foliage. The plantings must be
of a type that will reach a minimum height of four feet (4') at maturity.
Plantings must be maintained and replaced when dead.
      2.   Berms of mounded earth, covered with grass or appropriate ground
cover, that are constructed at a minimum height of four feet (4').
      3.   Fencing that is painted, stained or treated. Such fencing must be
constructed to a minimum height of four feet (4') and must be opaque.
   B.   Plans: Screening plans must be submitted, in writing, and accompanied
by a sketch of the proposal. Plans are to be submitted to the city's zoning
officer at the time of application for a building permit for the parking area
or improvements. The zoning officer shall approve or reject the plan. He may
consult the plan commission 1  for advice. Screenings shall comply with the
requirements of section
10-2-6 of this title as it prevents obstruction to traffic visibility.
Pursuant to chapter 9 of this title, an applicant whose plan is rejected or who
wishes to be exempted from these requirements may appeal to the Taylorville
zoning board of appeals 2 .
   C.   Exemptions: This requirement shall not apply within the nine (9) square
block area bordered by Walnut Street on the east, Vine Street on the north,
Webster Street on the west and Franklin Street on the south.
   D.   Existing Uses: Any lawful use of land or structure existing at the
effective date hereof may be continued subject to the limitations and
definitions set forth in sections
10-1-4 and
10-2-5 of this title. (Ord. 2273, 1-18-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
2 2. See title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
10-5-6: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be permitted as special uses in the C-1 and C-
2 commercial districts only when authorized and approved by the city council
after a public hearing and recommendation by the plan commission. Such special
uses shall be subject to the following requirements and to any and all other
requirements or conditions the city council believes necessary and directs to
further the purpose of the C-1 commercial district or the C-2 commercial
district, as the case may be, as stated in section
10-5-1 of this chapter: (Ord. 3741, 3-7-2016)
   A.   C-1 District:
   Human crematoriums.
      1.   If the crematory chamber is not located within the main building
structure, it must be enclosed in a building that is similar in architecture
and design of the main building.
      2.   The exhaust stacks must be constructed to resemble normal chimneys
with a veneer of brick or some other type of masonry.
      3.   Designs, elevations, and locations of the proposed building and
crematory equipment must be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission.
   Indoor firearm ranges a.k.a. indoor firing ranges.
      1.   For purposes hereof, an "indoor firing range" shall only mean a
business located in a completely enclosed building that is specifically
designed, constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with all
requirements as specifically set forth in this Section and with any additional
requirements as may be directed by the City Council for the sole purpose of
providing a training and target practice facility allowing customers or patrons
of such business to discharge and fire nonautomatic and/or semiautomatic
handguns, pistols, rifles, or firearms and/or to engage in bow and arrow
shooting at designated mechanical or stationary nonliving targets for the safe
use of firearm instruction, training and target practice, provided however,
such firearms shall not use or discharge or fire bullets in excess of .50
caliber and shall not use exploding targets or cannons.
      2.   The firing of automatic and/or noise suppressor handguns, pistols,
rifles or firearms that do not use, discharge, or fire bullets in excess of .50
caliber in such indoor firing range may be permitted by the majority
affirmative vote of the City Council from time to time if the owners and
operators of such indoor firing range then hold a valid class of Federal
firearms license (FFL) that permits the firing of said automatic or
semiautomatic weapons that do not use, discharge, or fire bullets in excess of
.50 caliber at such indoor firing range, with the understanding the City
Council by majority prevailing vote may, in its sole discretion, revoke such
permission to firing said automatic or semiautomatic weapons at such indoor
firing range from time to time.
      3.   All firearms and bows and arrows carried into or out of such indoor
firing range property, with the intent to sell, trade or discharge such items
in such indoor firing range, shall be unloaded and variously securely encased
prior to entering or leaving the indoor firing range property, irrespective of
whether one holds a concealed carry license. The owners of such indoor firing
range shall post appropriate visible signage at all entrances to such indoor
firing range building of such concealed carry restriction. Except for the
foregoing concealed carry restriction, the owners of such indoor firing range
may decide from time to time to otherwise allow or to prohibit the concealed
carry of firearms on or within the indoor firing range property as may be then
permitted by law; and, if so prohibited, such owners shall post the appropriate
signage prohibiting the carrying of concealed firearms on and within such
indoor firing range property in accordance with subsections (a-10) and (d) of
430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/65 or any amendments thereto.
      4.   All shooters shall be required to wear eye protection and ear
protection (earmuffs or earplugs) at all times when within the defined
boundaries of the firing range.
      5.   The construction plans and specifications for such indoor firing
range and training facility building shall be designed and prepared by a
competent professional and/or an Illinois licensed engineer and/or an Illinois
licensed architect who is proficient and experienced in the design,
construction, maintenance, and operation of indoor firing range and training
facilities. Prior to the authorization of such special use, such competent
professional and/or engineer and/or architect shall certify in writing to the
Plan Commission and City Council that such design, plans and specifications:
         a.   Will provide proper airflow ventilation and filtration and
recycling systems that pulls smoke and lead particles and other airborne
contaminants away from the shooting lines or lanes and capture and filter them
in the building's system before discharging them from the building to reduce
potential lead poisoning and to eliminate any exposure to employees or users of
such firing range and training facility building and to persons or bystanders
outside of such indoor firearms range building to smoke, lead dust or particles
or lead poisoning from bullets or cartridge primers or the use of the indoor
firing range; and to ensure that the discharge of the air from the inside of
the indoor firearms range facility shall not decrease the quality of the
outside air within a radius of twenty five feet (25') from the perimeter of the
exterior of the indoor firearms range building; and
         b.   Will require firing range industry standard air locked corridors,
special acoustic sheeting to ceilings and interior walls and other
soundproofing requirements such that bystanders or persons within ten feet
(10') of such indoor firing range building cannot hear the discharge of
firearms within such firearms range building; and
         c.   Will require firing range industry standard reinforced steel
baffling barrier devices and ballistics grade rubber panels along the roof,
ceiling, and interior side walls and on other areas and backstops to accomplish
one hundred percent (100%) containment and safety and to restrict or interrupt
errant or off the target shots and to suppress sound waves; and
         d.   Will require firing range industry standard steel plated target
systems and bullet traps; and
         e.   Will require a procedure and construction design that will ensure
the safe containment of and from any and all projectiles that could be
delivered and discharged from any and all the types of bows, handguns, pistols,
rifles, or firearms that are permitted under such special use; and
         f.   Repealed.
         g.   Will require proper drainage and stormwater retention management
as may be required by the City Engineer; and
         h.   Will otherwise conform to all existing City setback, off street
parking and loading, site and structure requirements, and screening
requirements, and all other applicable zoning requirements for a C-1 District
or a C-2 District, as the case may be.
      6.   All owners, staff, employees, and representatives of the business
who are present on the premises, and all customers or patrons or shooters at
such indoor firing range must be of the age of eighteen (18) years or older or
accompanied by an adult of such age; and must have a current Illinois firearm
owner's identification card; or in the case of nonresidents of Illinois must be
currently licensed or registered to possess a firearm in their resident state.
      7.   During all business firing range operation hours, such indoor firing
range shall be supervised by at least a minimum of one business staff members
and employees on site who are properly qualified and trained as firing range
safety officers in the safe use, handling and discharge of firearms.
      8.   Such indoor firing range shall be well secured and monitored at all
times and shall be equipped with the installation of a web based operational
remote video surveillance system that can be monitored twenty four (24) hours a
day/seven (7) days a week.
      9.   All training and instructional staff shall have extensive law
enforcement and/or military education, training, and experience, or be an
approved National Rifle Association (NRA) firearms training instructor for an
indoor firing range or otherwise approved by applicable State of Illinois laws,
rules or regulations as a person qualified to provide firearm training at an
indoor firing range.
      10.   Such indoor firing range may also include indoor space for the
retail sale of firearms and ammunitions and firearm accessories; provided
however, such retail sales are limited to bows and arrows or limited to the
types of firearms, weapons, and ammunition that are permitted under the
foregoing paragraph under this indoor firing ranges use, unless the owner and
operator of such indoor firing range holds a valid class of Federal firearms
license (FFL) that permits the retail sale of other firearms, weapons, and
ammunition at such indoor firing range. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, all such retail sales shall be in full compliance with all Illinois
and Federal Statutes, laws, rules and regulations applicable to such retail
sales; and the City Council, in its sole discretion, may by majority prevailing
vote from time to time limit the nature, kind, and extent of firearms, weapons,
and ammunition that may be sold at such indoor firing range.
      11.   No alcohol or any illegal drugs or contraband shall be allowed,
given, sold, possessed, or consumed at any time by any person who is on the
premises of such indoor firing range; and no person who is intoxicated or under
the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs or contraband shall be allowed to
enter or remain on the premises of such indoor firing range.
      12.   Any and all business or advertisings signs or signage for each
authorized and approved special use shall conform to the following
requirements: a) the illumination of all signs or signage shall be diffused or
indirect and shall be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays of light or
illumination into any adjacent residential property located in an R-1 or R-
2 Residential District or into the public way; and b) any sign or signage
located in the direct line of any traffic control signal shall not have
flashing, intermittent red, green or amber illumination.
      13.   The shooting and discharge of firearms shall be restricted to the
hours and requirements as detailed in the issuance of the special use;
provided, however, all such hours and requirements of shooting and discharge
operation and activities may be amended by the majority affirmative vote of the
City Council, in its sole discretion, from time to time.
      14.   The owners and operators of such indoor firing range shall provide
and maintain and display a written reasonable and adequate safety plan at such
indoor firing range and require same to be followed by its staff, employees,
customers, and patrons at all times. Such safety plan shall include, but is not
limited to, firearm handling rules, general range rules, specific range rules
and administrative rules and regulations that identifies the firearms and
caliber restrictions as specified herein.
      15.   Such indoor firing range shall be conducted in accordance with all
requirements and conditions of the City Council, the Plan Commission, this
Code, and with Illinois and Federal law.
      16.   Prior to commencement of operations, the owners and operators of
such indoor firing range shall have its design, safety procedures, and its
firing range maintenance and operation plan evaluated and approved by a
competent professional who is proficient and experienced in the design, safety
procedures and indoor firing range and training facilities maintenance and
operation plans and/or by an NRA range technical team advisor (RTA); and a
certified copy of such firing range maintenance and operation plan and log
shall be submitted in writing to the City's Zoning Enforcement Officer.
      17.   Upon completion of the construction of the indoor firing range, the
aforesaid competent professional and/or engineer and/or architect shall certify
in writing to the City Council that such completed construction was done in
full compliance with all the aforesaid competent professional's and/or
engineer's and/or architect's aforesaid design, plans, and specifications; and
no certificate of occupancy under Section
10-9-3 of this Title (or any amendments thereto) and no operating permit shall
be issued by the City's Zoning Enforcement Officer until such written
certification is received by the City Council. If such written certification is
not received by the City Council upon demand of the City's Zoning Enforcement
Officer, then the aforesaid special use may be terminated by majority
affirmative vote of the City Council exercised in its sole discretion without
notice to the owner(s) of such special use.
      18.   The owners and operators of such indoor firing range shall not
operate, maintain or use such indoor firing range until and unless the
requisite fee for said operating permit is paid by such owners or operators and
said operating permit is issued by the City. Such operating permit shall be for
a twelve (12) month period, subject to earlier termination by the City's Zoning
Enforcement Officer should he determine that such indoor firing range is being
maintained or operated or used in violation of any of the aforesaid
requirements for such special use. The annual fee for such operating permit
shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), subject to change from time to time by
the City Council, in its sole discretion, by majority prevailing vote.
      19.   The owners and operators of such indoor firing range shall annually
submit to the City's Zoning Enforcement Officer, and more frequently as may be
requested from time to time by the City's Zoning Enforcement Officer or by any
appropriate official inspector in the State of Illinois a certified copy of all
records and documents that evidence that such indoor firearms range facility is
being operated and maintained in full compliance with all the terms,
provisions, restrictions and conditions of such special use including, but not
limited to, as they relate to the safety of such indoor firearms range, the
maintenance of all firearms range equipment and machinery, and the applicable
noise control and air quality inside and outside of the indoor firearms range
facility. Said submission of full compliance shall be prepared and certified in
writing by a competent professional and Illinois licensed engineer and/or
Illinois licensed architect who is proficient and experienced in the design,
construction, maintenance, and operation of indoor firing range and training
facilities. If said written full compliance certification with said supporting
documentation is not received by the City's Zoning Enforcement Officer, then
the aforesaid special use may be terminated by majority affirmative vote of the
City Council exercised in its sole discretion without notice to the owner(s) of
such special use.
      20.   The City's Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or his delegate(s) or any
member(s) of the City's Police Department shall have the right from time to
time to enter and inspect such indoor firing range to determine whether such
indoor firing range has been designed and constructed and is being maintained,
operated, and used in accordance with and in full compliance with all of the
aforesaid requirements for such indoor firing range.
   Indoor recycling centers.
      1.   For purposes hereof, an "indoor recycling center" shall only mean a
business located in a completely enclosed building that is specifically
designed, constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with all
requirements as specifically set forth in this Section and with any additional
requirements as may be directed by the City Council for the sole purpose of
providing an indoor recycling building opened to the general public for
personal deposit of recyclable materials and waste and operated solely for
receiving, depositing, storing, collecting, processing, and transferring or
disposing of source separated recyclable materials or waste off site to another
third party location source; and such recyclable materials or waste shall not
be permitted to be stored, deposited, or located outside of such indoor
recycling building.
      2.   For purposes hereof, "recyclable materials or waste" shall only mean
those hereafter described dry recyclable materials which would otherwise become
solid waste and which may be collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw material or products and shall only
include cardboard, paper, and glass or plastic or aluminum bottles, cans, or
containers.
      3.   For purposes hereof, "processing" shall solely mean the preparation
of recyclable materials or waste for efficient shipment, or to an end user's
specifications, by such means as bailing, compacting, flattening, crushing,
mechanical sorting, shredding, or cleaning. "Processing" does not mean melting
down.
      4.   An indoor recyclable center shall be constructed, maintained and
operated in accordance with any and all applicable City, Illinois, and Federal
Statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, exposure standards and
guidelines and recommendations, including, but not limited to, the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA), and ATF.
      5.   An indoor recyclable center shall otherwise conform to all existing
City setback, off street parking and loading, site and structure requirements,
and screening requirements, and all other applicable zoning requirements for
the zoning district where it is located.
      6.   If such indoor recycling center ceases its operations as such indoor
recycling center for more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days, then the
owners of such indoor recycling center shall, within thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days thereafter, remove all recyclable materials and waste located
within or outside the indoor recycling center building at the indoor recycling
center site.
      7.   Such indoor recycling center shall be conducted in accordance with
all requirements and conditions of the City Council, the Plan Commission, this
Code, and with Illinois and Federal law.
      8.   The City's Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or his delegate(s) or any
member(s) of the City's Police Department shall have the right from time to
time to enter and inspect such indoor recycling center to determine whether
such indoor recycling center has been designed and constructed and is being
maintained, operated, and used in accordance with and in full compliance with
all of the aforesaid requirements for such indoor recycling center.
   Pet crematoriums.
      1.   The crematory chamber must be enclosed inside a building conforming
in architecture and design to the neighborhood.
      2.   The exhaust stacks must be constructed to resemble normal chimneys
with a veneer of brick or some other type of masonry.
      3.   Designs, elevations, and locations of the proposed building and
crematory equipment must be submitted for approval to the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 3345, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord. 3740, 3-7-2016; Ord. 3741, 3-7-2016; Ord.
3830, 1-16-2018)
   B.   C-2 District:
   Indoor firing ranges.
      1.   The same aforesaid requirements as stated in subsection A of this
Section for an indoor firing range special use in a C-1 District are
incorporated herein by reference thereto and are applicable to an indoor firing
range special use in a C-2 District.
   Indoor recycling centers.
      1.   The same aforesaid requirements as stated in subsection A of this
Section for an indoor recycling center special use in a C-1 District are
incorporated herein by reference thereto and are applicable to an indoor
recycling center special use in a C-2 District. (Ord. 3740, 3-7-2016; amd. Ord.
3741, 3-7-2016)
   C.   Change Of Special Use: No special use shall be changed except by
authorization of the City Council after a public hearing and recommendation by
the Plan Commission.
   D.   Termination Of Special Use:
      1.   A special use as described herein shall terminate if not used for a
period of twelve (12) months.
      2.   A special use as described herein shall be limited solely to the
existing sole owner(s) of said property granted such special use under this
Section.
      3.   A special use as described herein shall terminate, without further
action, immediately upon the leasing of the special use property to anyone
other than the existing owners of the property granted such special use or
immediately upon any future transfer of ownership of the property granted such
special use to anyone other than to one of the existing owners of the property
granted such special use or to their respective heirs or testamentary devisees.
      4.   A special use as described herein shall, without further action,
immediately terminate: a) upon the exercise of any other use of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever on the property granted such special use under; or
b) upon the exercise of any other use not permitted in a C-1 or C-2 Commercial
District, as the case may be; or c) upon the majority affirmative vote of the
City Council, exercised in its sole discretion, upon any violation of any one
or more of the terms, restrictions, provisions, or conditions of a special use
as described herein.
      5.   In addition to, and not in lieu of any other right or remedy of the
City, each owner of the property that is subject to such special use shall be
assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation of any terms, provisions, restrictions or conditions of a special use
as described herein. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   E.   C-1 District Or C-2 District: The subdivision of a single lot of
commercial property with adjoining and connected buildings in a C-1 District or
in a C-2 District may be permitted as a special use provided:
      1.   There is a common building wall maintenance agreement between the
adjoining subdivided landowners that is approved by the City Council; and
      2.   There are separate water meters to each of the connected buildings
to be serviced with City water; and
      3.   There are sufficient off-street parking and loading spaces for each
building in compliance with the off-street parking and loading requirements as
set forth in Section
10-5-4; and
      4.   Such Special Use shall be further subject to such other additional
requirements as the Plan Commission and/or the City Council shall determine
from time to time, and in addition to all other applicable requirements,
conditions, and regulations for special uses as stated in Section
10-5-6 of the Taylorville City Code; provided, however, there shall be no side
yard setback requirements for the side of the buildings that are connected to
one another after such subdivision. (Ord. 3741, 3-7-2016; amd. Ord. 3929, 12-2-
2019)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Uses Permitted
10-6-3: Site And Structure Requirements
10-6-4: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   I-1 District: The purpose of the I-1 light industrial district is to
provide for commercial uses, storage and those manufacturing uses not normally
creating a nuisance discernible beyond its property.
   B.   I-2 District: The purpose of the I-2 heavy industrial district is to
provide for industrial uses not allowed in any other district; providing, that
within this district, uses of a hazardous nature or those producing extensive
smoke or odor shall not be located so that the general hazard or nuisance
affects a large segment of the community. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
   C.   I-3 District: The purpose of the I-3 district is to provide for
industrial uses relating to electrical generation facilities and associated and
related uses, including, but not limited to, coal gasification, storage and
landfills, and for the mining, extraction, processing, washing, storage, and
transporting of coal and the storage of ash and other refuse from the
processing of coal, and including equipment, buildings, or structures related
to such uses; providing, that within this district such uses that may emit
detrimental or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, odors, dust, or other
objectionable conditions beyond the confines of its property shall be in
compliance with any requirements of the state of Illinois environmental
protection agency. (Ord. 3177, 6-7-2004)
10-6-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   I-1 District:
Any use permitted in the C-1 and C-2 commercial districts except residential
uses.
Manufacturing: Manufacture or processing of small items including gloves,
footwear, bathing caps, boxes, cartons and cans, hardware, toys, electric
batteries, motors or generators; textile products manufacture; glass, plastics,
cement and stone products manufacture; furniture manufacture; food manufacture
or processing including hatcheries, canning, freezing, storage and bottling.
Other manufacturing uses of a light nature, free from any objectionable odors,
fumes, dirt, vibration or noise detectable at the lot line. Such uses shall not
be established without an application for a permit which shall be accompanied
by a certification by a registered engineer or architect indicating that fumes,
odors, dirt, vibration or noise produced by the industry will not be detectable
at the lot line. In the event of the denial of such permit, the applicant shall
have the right of appeal to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with
section
 10-9-4 of this title.
Warehousing and storage: Indoor and outdoor storage of goods and materials
including warehousing, pole yards, building material storage and trucking
storage. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
Additional permissible use limited to the I-1 District where the Taylorville
Industrial Park is located: Outdoor digital and/or lighted one-sided and/or
two-sided business and advertising billboards or signs pertaining to
advertisement of business and/or events on and/or off the property where such
billboards or signs are located, provided such billboard or sign is otherwise
compliant with the sign regulations in Chapter 8 of Title 9 of the Taylorville
City Code, and the illumination of all billboards or signs shall be diffused or
indirect and shall be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays of light into
adjacent residential districts or into the public way unless authorized and
permitted by the Illinois Department of Transportation; and any billboard or
sign located in the direct line of vision of any traffic control signal shall
not have flashing or intermittent red, green, or amber illumination.
   B.   I-2 District: All uses not otherwise prohibited by law except as
residential uses; provided, however, that the following uses will be permitted
as special uses in the I-2 district when authorized by the city council after
public hearing and recommendation by the plan commission: auction houses; auto
wrecking yards and other salvage or wrecking operations, providing all such
salvage operations are located not less than two hundred feet (200') from any R
district and are conducted within an area enclosed on all sides with painted
fence, tight and impervious to view, and not less than eight feet (8') high,
and provided further, that such salvage or wrecking operations shall not be
visible from the nearest street or highway; bag cleaning, boiler and tank
works; central mixing plant for cement, mortar, plaster or paving materials;
coke oven; curing, tanning and storage of raw hides and skins; distillation of
bones, coal, wood or tar; fat rendering; forge plant; foundry or metal
fabrication plant; gasoline or oil storage aboveground in excess of five
hundred (500) gallons; slaughterhouse or stockyards; smelting plant; and the
manufacture of acetylene, acid, alcohol or alcoholic beverages; ammonia,
bleaching powder, chemicals, brick, pottery, terra cotta or tile; candles;
disinfectants; dyestuffs; fertilizers; linseed oil, paint, oil, turpentine,
varnish, soap and tar products, or any other use which, in the opinion of the
plan commission, would emit detrimental or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke,
odors, dust or other objectionable conditions beyond the confines of its
property. The plan commission shall recommend city council approval if it
determines that the proposed use will not extend its detrimental or obnoxious
effects beyond the limits of the heavy industrial district in which it is
located. Such special uses shall be subject to any requirements the plan
commission feels necessary to further the purpose of the industrial district as
stated in subsection
10-6-1B of this chapter. (Ord. 3347, 8-20-2007)
   C.   I-3 District: Permitted uses in this district shall be:
Bona fide agricultural uses as defined in section
10-1-4 of this title.
Electrical generation facilities with a nameplate capacity greater than 10MW
and associated and related uses, including, but not limited to, coal
gasification, storage and landfills.
The mining, extraction, processing, washing, storage, and transporting of coal
and the storage of ash and other refuse from the processing of coal.
Including equipment, buildings, or structures related to such uses.
The plan commission shall recommend city council approval for any
reclassification of territory to an I-3 district if it determines that the
proposed use or uses will not extend its detrimental or obnoxious effects to a
large segment of the community; and any such use or uses shall be further
subject to any requirements the plan commission feels necessary to further the
purpose of the I-3 district as stated in subsection
10-6-1C of this chapter. (Ord. 3177, 6-7-2004)
   D.   I-1, I-2, Or I-3 District:
Indoor firing ranges. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter,
an indoor firing range shall only be permitted as a special use in an I-1, I-2,
or I-3 industrial district subject to the same requirements for an indoor
firing range special use that is stated in subsection
10-5-6A of this title for an indoor firing range special use in a C-
1 commercial district, and such aforesaid requirements are incorporated herein
by reference thereto and are applicable to an indoor firing range special use
in an I-1, I-2, or I-3 industrial district.
Indoor recycling centers. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
chapter, an indoor recycling center shall only be permitted as a special use in
an I-1, I-2, or I-3 industrial district subject to the same requirements for an
indoor recycling center special use that is stated in subsection
10-5-6A of this title for an indoor recycling center special use in a C-
1 commercial district, and such aforesaid requirements are incorporated herein
by reference thereto and are applicable to an indoor recycling center special
use in an I-1, I-2, or I-3 industrial district. (Ord. 3740, 3-7-2016; amd. Ord.
3741, 3-7-2016)
   E.   Change Of Special Use: No special use shall be changed except by
authorization of the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by
the plan commission.
   F.   Termination Of Special Use:
      1.   A special use as described herein shall terminate if not used for a
period of twelve (12) months.
      2.   A special use as described herein shall be limited solely to the
existing sole owner(s) of said property granted such special use under this
section.
      3.   A special use as described herein shall terminate, without further
action, immediately upon the leasing of the special use property to anyone
other than the existing owners of the property granted such special use or
immediately upon any future transfer of ownership of the property granted such
special use to anyone other than to one of the existing owners of the property
granted such special use or to their respective heirs or testamentary devisees.
      4.   A special use as described herein shall, without further action,
immediately terminate: a) upon the exercise of any other use of any kind,
nature, or extent whatsoever on the property granted such special use under; or
b) upon the exercise of any other use not permitted in an I-1 or I-2 or I-
3 industrial district, as the case may be; or c) upon the majority affirmative
vote of the city council, exercised in its sole discretion, upon any violation
of any one or more of the terms, restrictions, provisions, or conditions of a
special use, as described herein.
      5.   In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other right or remedy of the
city, each owner of the property that is subject to such special use shall be
assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation of any terms, provisions, restrictions or conditions of such special
use. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be
a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of
the evidence. (Ord. 3741, 3-7-2016; amd. Ord. 4127, 10-3-2022)
10-6-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area And Lot Width: Each use to be established in the I-1, I-2 or
I-3 district shall provide a minimum lot area of five thousand (5,000) square
feet and a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50').
   B.   Yards: All structures to be constructed, altered or moved in the I-1,
I-2 or I-3 districts shall provide yards of the following minimum depths: (Ord.
1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 3177, 6-7-2004)
      1.   Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Side Yards: Ten feet (10') except where a side yard abuts a
residential district, in which case, a side yard of twenty five feet (25')
shall be provided.
      3.   Rear Yard: Twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Building Height: No building in the I-1 or I-2 district shall exceed
fifty feet (50') in height. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
10-6-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
There shall be provided in the I-1, I-2 and I-3 districts adequate off street
parking and loading in accordance with the schedules in chapter 8 of this
title. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 3177, 6-7-2004)
CHAPTER 7
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Lot of Record
10-7-2: Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Allowable Projections
10-7-3: Exceptions to Building Height Limits
10-7-1: LOT OF RECORD:
When a lot which is an official lot of record at the effective date hereof does
not comply with the area, yard or other requirements of this Title, an
application may be submitted to the Board of Appeals for a variance from the
terms of this Title in accordance with the procedure outlined in Section
10-9-5 of this Title. Such a lot may be used as a building site; provided,
however, that the yard and other requirements of the district are complied with
as closely as possible in the opinion of the Board of Appeals. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-
77)
10-7-2: EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS; ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS:
   A.   Residential Structures Into Yard: Architectural features of residential
buildings such as windowsills, cornices and roof overhangs may project into the
required yard; provided, such projection is not more than four feet (4') and
does not reach closer than four feet (4') to any lot line.
   B.   Business Structures Over Sidewalk: Signs, awnings, canopies and
marquees are permitted to overhang the sidewalk in the C-1 General Retail
District only; providing, that overhanging signs are a minimum of eight feet
(8') above the sidewalk at any point and that all other structures are a
minimum of six feet eight inches (6' 8") above the sidewalk at any point. 1
   C.   Accessory Building Into Rear Yard: One story accessory buildings may
project into only rear yards abutting on an alley; providing, such projections
extends not closer than five feet (5') to the rear lot line.
   D.   Fences Into Yards: Fences may be constructed in or project into yards;
providing, that 1) no fence or planting more than three feet (3') high or
thirty percent (30%) solid shall be located within thirty feet (30') of a
street intersection, 2) no fence more than four feet (4') high may be located
closer to the front of the lot than the principal building, and 3) no fence
more than six feet (6') high shall be allowed on any part of the lot. (Ord.
1793, 2-7-77)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  9-8-12 of this Code.
10-7-3: EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITS:
The height limitations of this Title shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water
towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors,
flagpoles, radio towers, masts and aerials. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-77)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose Of Provisions
10-8-2: Off Street Parking Requirements
10-8-3: Number Of Spaces Required For Various Uses
10-8-4: Off Street Loading Requirements
10-8-1: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The following regulations are established to increase safety and lessen
congestion in the public streets, to adequately provide for parking needs
associated with the development of land and increased automobile usage, to set
standards for the requirements of off street parking according to the amount of
traffic generated by each use, and to eliminate the on street storage of
vehicles. (Ord. 3458, 4-5-2010)
10-8-2: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Hard surfaced (a minimum of 4 inches of PC concrete or 6 inches of
gravel or crushed stone base plus 2 inches bituminous asphalt, which can be
chip and oil, asphalt or concrete) off street motor vehicle parking shall be
provided on any lot on which any of the required off street parking spaces are
hereafter required for the uses described in the following Section
10-8-3. Said off street parking area shall be provided with vehicular access to
a street or alley. For purposes of computing gross off street parking area
required, the ratio of two hundred fifty (250) square feet per parking space
shall be used.
   B.   All off street parking requirements as set forth in this Section
10-8-2 and in the following Section
10-8-3 for any non-residential property use shall be completed within three
hundred and sixty-five (365) consecutive calendar days following the date of
issuance of the City's building or construction permit concerning such property
where the off-street parking requirements apply.
   C.   Any person found to have been in violation of this Section
10-8-2 and/or of the following Section
10-8-3 shall be assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 3458, 4-5-2010; amd. Ord. 4071,
10-18-2021)
10-8-3: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED FOR VARIOUS USES:
The following required off street parking spaces for the particular use are
minimum requirements:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                     Parking Spaces Required
Banks, savings and loan, drive up       5 stacking spaces per teller window,
                                        plus employee parking
Banks, savings and loan, walk in        1 space per 300 square feet of floor
                                        area
Beauty and barber shops                 2 spaces per chair plus employee
                                        parking
Boarding and/or rooming house           2 spaces for each rental unit
Churches, clubs, lodges                 1 space for every 4 seats in the
                                        largest seating area
Dwelling, single-family                 2 for each dwelling unit on a single
                                        lot
Dwelling, two-family or multiple-family 2 for each dwelling unit
Furniture and appliance store           1 space per 500 square feet of floor
                                        area
                                        1 space per 150 square feet of floor
                                        area devoted to the home occupation
Home occupations                        (not to exceed 2 spaces) in addition to
                                        the parking requirement for the
                                        dwelling
Hospitals                               1 space per 2 beds, plus employee
                                        parking
Libraries                               1 for each 250 square feet of gross
                                        floor space
                                        1 space per 200 square feet of floor
Medical and dental offices              area, or 2 spaces per practicing
                                        professional, whichever is greater
Mobile homes including those in mobile  2 spaces per mobile home
home parks
                                        1 space per 5 seats, plus 1 space per
Mortuaries, funeral homes               funeral vehicle, but not less than 20
                                        spaces per chapel
Motels                                  1 for each guestroom
Nursery school, day nursery or          1 for each 350 square feet of usable
childcare center                        floor space
Nursing homes, homes for the aged,      1 for each 5 beds
group care homes
Restaurants, drive in or walk up        1 space per 25 square feet of building
                                        floor area
                                        1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 50
Restaurants, sit down                   square feet of floor area, whichever is
                                        greater
                                        1 for each teacher, employee or
Schools, elementary and junior high     administrator and 1 space for each 10
                                        students in addition to the
                                        requirements of the auditorium
                                        1 space for every 2 students of driving
Schools, senior high                    age, plus faculty parking in addition
                                        to the requirements of the auditorium
Service station and auto repair shops   1 space per service stall plus employee
                                        parking
Stadium, sports arena or similar place  1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of benches
of outdoor assembly
                                        1 space per 4 seats, or 1 space per 50
Taverns and bars                        square feet of floor area, whichever is
                                        lessor
Theater and auditorium                  1 for each 4 seats plus 1 for each 2
                                        employees
Theaters and meeting halls              1 space per 4 seats in the largest
                                        seating area
Vehicles sales (including auto, boat    1 space per 600 square feet of enclosed
and trailer sales)                      floor area, plus 1 space per 2,500
                                        square feet of open lot area
All other uses not specifically         1 space per 300 square feet of floor
indicated above                         area
 
There will be no minimum requirements within the nine (9) square block area
bordered by Walnut Street on the east, Vine Street on the north, Webster Street
on the west and Franklin Street on the south.
Off street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water
accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water
onto adjacent property or toward buildings.
All lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area shall be so
installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only.
(Ord. 3458, 4-5-2010; amd. Ord. 4289, 1-6-2025)
10-8-4: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Schedule Of Loading Requirements: Every building or structure used for
other than residential uses and constructed after the effective date hereof
(except for Municipal water treatment plants and related facilities, buildings
and structures) shall provide space on the property to be used exclusively for
loading and unloading of vehicles. Such space shall be in accordance with the
following schedule: (Ord. 3817, 9-5-2017)
Building Gross Floor Area Required Spaces
Building Gross Floor Area          Required Spaces
0 - 8,000 sq. ft.                  1
8,000 - 25,000 sq. ft.             2
25,000 - 40,000 sq. ft.            3
40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft.           4
100,000 - 250,000 sq. ft.          5
250,000 - 400,000 sq. ft.          6
For buildings over 400,000 sq. ft. 6 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each
                                   additional 200,000 sq. ft.
 
   B.   Size Of Loading Space: For the purpose of determining adequacy of
loading area, each space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, forty
five feet (45') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height. (Ord. 3458, 4-5-
2010)
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Zoning Enforcing Officer
10-9-2: Building Permit
10-9-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-9-4: Appeals
10-9-5: Variations
10-9-6: Amendments
10-9-7: Fees
10-9-8: Remedies And Penalties
10-9-1: ZONING ENFORCING OFFICER:
This Title shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and the City Council's concurrence.
In addition to the powers stated in the Taylorville City Code, the Zoning Board
of Appeals has jurisdiction and power to approve building permits for the
location of detached accessory enclosed storage buildings or open carports in
accordance with subsection
9-1-1J5 of the Taylorville City Code. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977; amd. Ord. 3833, 2-
20-2018; Ord. 4288, 12-16-2024)
10-9-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Building Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for
or the construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling of any building,
including accessory buildings where the total cost of such construction,
repair, alteration, or remodeling work exceeds one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) until the Zoning Enforcing Officer has issued a building
permit for such work. For purposes of this Chapter, "repair" shall mean and
include the fixing or restoration of any damaged exterior portion of any
building or structure; and "alter" or "alteration" or "remodel" or "remodeling"
shall include and mean the renovation or improvement or changing the form or
surface of any damaged exterior portion of any building or structure.
      2.   Application For Permit; Plan: In applying to the Zoning Enforcing
Officer for a permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or scale
plan indicating the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be
erected, constructed, moved, repaired, altered, or remodeled on the lot. The
applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings
and supply such other information as may be required by the Zoning Enforcing
Officer for determining whether the provisions of this Title are being
observed.
      3.   Approval Or Refusal Of Permit: If the proposed excavation,
construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling work as set forth in the
application is in conformity with the provisions of this Title and all other
City Code provisions and ordinances, the Zoning Enforcing Officer shall issue a
building permit for such excavation, construction, repair, alteration, or
remodeling work. If a building permit is refused, the Zoning Enforcing Officer
shall state such a refusal, in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately
forward such notice of refusal to the applicant. The Zoning Enforcing Officer
shall grant or deny the permit within ten (10) days from the date the
application is submitted. (Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
   B.   Demolition Permit: A building permit shall become void thirty (30) days
after issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the
project described therein. (Ord. 3045, 9-17-2001)
      1.   Permit Required: A demolition permit shall be required for the
demolition of any permanent structure. The demolition permit shall become void
thirty (30) days after issuance. However, one (1) 30-day extension of the
permit may be granted by the Zoning Officer in the event good cause is shown
for the extension or substantial progress has been made on the permit,
providing the applicant pays a seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee for the request
for the extension, which extension may or may not then be granted in writing by
the Zoning Officer. The form of the permit for demolition is attached to
ordinance 2472, marked exhibit A, on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and
made a part of this subsection by reference. (Ord. 3209, 12-6-2004)
10-9-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected, constructed, repaired,
altered, or remodeled or altered in its use or structure shall be used until
the Zoning Enforcing Officer shall have issued a certificate of occupancy
indicating that such land, building or part thereof and the proposed use
thereof are found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
Within seven (7) business days after notification that a building or premises
or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the
Health and Building Officer to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a
certificate of occupancy if the land, building or premises or part thereof and
the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of this
Title, or if such certificate is refused, to state refusal, in writing, with
the cause, and immediately forward such notice of refusal to the applicant.
(Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
10-9-4: APPEALS:
An appeal to the Board of Appeals 1  may be taken by any person aggrieved by
any order, requirement, decision or determination by any governmental officer,
department, board or bureau based in whole or in part upon the provisions of
this Title.
Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk with payment of proper fee
within twenty (20) days of the action appealed from. Upon appeal, the Zoning
Enforcing Officer shall immediately transmit to the Board of Appeals all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless
the Enforcing Officer certifies to the Board that a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. The Board shall fix a reasonable time
for hearing of the appeal, a notice of which shall be published at least once,
not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing,
in a newspaper of general circulation within the community.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals is necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision of an administrative official or to
decide in favor of the applicant. (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code.
10-9-5: VARIATIONS:
Before any variation is granted, the Board of Appeals 1  must make a finding of
facts that all of the following conditions are shown to be present:
   A.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted
to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in that zone;
   B.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
   C.   A variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
In granting a variation the Board may attach thereto any conditions and
safeguards it deems necessary or desirable in furthering the purposes of this
Title. Violation of any of these conditions or safeguards shall be deemed to be
a violation of this Title.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant the Board the
power or authority to permit a use not generally permitted in the district
involved.
All final administrative decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to
judicial review pursuant to the "Administrative Review Act", approved May 8,
1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto 2 . (Ord. 1793, 2-7-1977)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code.
2 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101.
10-9-6: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The Mayor and City Council may amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal the regulations, restrictions and boundaries as provided for
in this Title.
   B.   Procedure: A public hearing shall be held by the Mayor and City Council
before adoption of any proposed amendment, supplement or change, public notice
of which shall have been placed in a newspaper of general circulation within
the community not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing.
In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations
or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage proposed to be altered or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage immediately joining or across an alley therefrom or by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed
to be altered, such protest being filed with the City Clerk, the amendment
shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members of the City Council.
   C.   Approval: No amendment shall become effective unless it is first
submitted to and approved by the Plan Commission or, if disapproved, shall
receive a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the entire City Council. (Ord.
1793, 2-7-1977)
10-9-7: FEES:
   A.   Building Permit: To partially defray the expense of administering this
Title, a fee shall be collected by the Zoning Enforcing Officer in accordance
with the following schedule:
      1.   Residential Uses: Building permit fees for residential uses shall be
as follows:
         a.   All living space will be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred (100) square feet.
         b.   Construction of a basement will be five dollars ($5.00) per one
hundred (100) square feet.
         c.   Attached porches and garage (a nonliving area), ten dollars
($10.00) per hundred square feet.
         d.   Detached garages, carports, storage buildings, and accessory
buildings (all nonliving areas), ten dollars ($10.00) per hundred square feet.
         e.   Addition to a house (living space), twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per hundred square feet.
         f.   There shall be no fee imposed for any building permit that is
issued solely for the "repair", "alteration", or "remodeling" (each as defined
in Section
9-1-1 of this Code) of any building or structure on property.
      2.   Commercial And/Or Industrial Uses: Building permit fees for
commercial and/or industrial uses shall be fifteen cents ($0.15) per square
foot of building and/or structure area up to five thousand (5,000) square feet;
and ten cents ($0.10) per square foot of building and/or structure area in
excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   B.   Special Uses: In order to partially defray the expenses of a special
uses public hearing, each person petitioning for a special uses permit shall
deposit with the City Clerk the sum of two hundred seventy five dollars
($275.00). No part of such amount shall be refunded for failure of said uses to
be granted.
   C.   Variance Appeals: In order to partially defray the expenses of public
hearings involving variations, the applicant shall pay the sum of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) to the City Clerk at the time of filing of the appeal
for the variance.
   D.   Amendments: In order to partially defray the expenses of a zoning
change public hearing, each person petitioning for a zoning change shall
deposit with the City Clerk the sum of two hundred seventy five dollars
($275.00). No part of such amount shall be refunded for failure of said
amendment to be enacted into law.
   E.   Appeals To Board Of Appeals: In order to partially defray the expenses
of an appeal to the Board of Appeals under Section
10-9-4 of this Chapter, the appellant shall pay a fee in the sum of one hundred
seventy five dollars ($175.00) to the City Clerk, at the time of filing of the
appeal, which appeal must be filed within twenty (20) days of the action
appealed from. Such fee shall be refunded to the appellant if, and only if, the
Board of Appeals, by a concurring vote of four (4) members thereof, reverses
any order, requirement, and decision of an administrative official, or decides
in favor of the appellant, or if a court of competent jurisdiction reverses any
order, requirement, or decision of the Board of Appeals, or decides in favor of
the appellant. The Board of Appeals shall not entertain any such appeal until
and unless such fee is paid in the manner and at the time set forth herein.
   F.   Public Hearing Costs: Prior to any approval of any amendment to
reclassify the Zoning District classification of any territory, the applicant
shall pay the City Clerk the actual amount charged by any court reporter hired
by the City to attend, record, and/or transcribe the proceedings conducted
during any public hearing incident to such zoning district reclassification
request.
   G.   Soil And Water Conservation District Costs: Prior to any approval of
any application or petition seeking any variation, amendment, or other relief
under this Title regarding any territory located in the Christian County Soil
and Water Conservation District, the applicant shall pay the City Clerk the
actual amount charged by the Christian County Soil and Water Conservation
District to the City to review and/or report to the City regarding any such
application or petition and any and all instruments or documents incident
thereto.
   H.   Demolition Of Blighted Property: "Blighted property" is hereby defined
to mean any improvement on residentially zoned property which is, in the
opinion of the City Council of the City of Taylorville, in violation of this
Code, any other City of Taylorville ordinances, or the Property Maintenance
Code adopted by the City of Taylorville.
If a party demolishes a blighted improvement, the City of Taylorville shall
waive the fee for the demolition permit pursuant to subsection
10-9-2B of this Chapter.
If a party who has demolished a blighted property as set forth herein seeks to
build an improvement where the blighted property was formerly located within
twelve (12) months of the completed demolition, the City of Taylorville shall
waive the building permit fee as set forth in subsection A of this section, as
long as the improvement to be constructed complies with any and all
requirements of this Code and City ordinances.
The waivers set forth herein for demolition and building permits shall not
apply to partial demolition of blighted property and the subsequent remodeling
of that blighted property in residentially zoned property. (Ord. 3209, 12-6-
2004; amd. Ord. 3304, 9-5-2006; Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017; Ord. 4021, 3-1-2021)
10-9-8: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
repaired, altered, remodeled, converted, or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Title, the proper authorities of
the City Council, in addition and not in lieu of other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action(s) or proceedings to prevent the occupancy of such
building, structure or land. In such event the violator shall be liable for and
shall pay the City's reasonable attorney fees and costs of such action(s) or
proceeding(s).
In addition thereto, and not in lieu thereof, any person violating any
provision of this Title shall, for each offense, be punished as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 3797, 3-6-2017)
CHAPTER 10
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA CODE
SECTION:
10-10-1: Short Title
10-10-2: Intent
10-10-3: General Prohibition
10-10-4: Rules And Definitions
10-10-5: Regulations For Antennas Permitted In Specific Zoning Districts
10-10-6: Special Use Permit Standards For Antennas And Antenna Facilities
10-10-7: Special Use Permit Process For Antennas And Antenna Facilities
10-10-8: Variations
10-10-9: Collocation Incentive
10-10-10: Federal Policy
10-10-11: Nonconformities
10-10-12: Building Permit Required
10-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as THE TAYLORVILLE
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA CODE (hereinafter referred to as "code"). (Ord. 2956, 3-
20-2000)
10-10-2: INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of the regulations set forth in this chapter is to further
an overall plan for the enhancement of public safety, consistent community
development, preservation of property values and the general welfare of the
city. In order to accommodate the communication needs of the residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of
the city, the regulations are further intended to: facilitate the provision of
wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the
city; nonetheless preserve and protect property values; avoid potential damage
to adjacent properties from tower failure; lessen congestion of land and air
space; provide against undue concentrations of telecommunication antennas and
antenna facilities which may create adverse visual effects and detraction from
a neighborhood's character; establish reasonable standards for private and
commercial use of telecommunications antennas; preserve the attractive
character of the city; and recognize that the general welfare of the public
includes a community plan that provides for a community that shall be beautiful
as well as healthful, spacious as well as clean, and well-balanced in its
growth and development.
   B.   The promotion of public health, safety, and welfare is to be
accomplished by reducing the distractive characteristics of telecommunications
antenna facilities or towers and ensuring that unless otherwise necessary
telecommunication towers or antenna facilities shall not be located in an
established residential neighborhood.
   C.   The regulations in this chapter expressly distinguish between direct
satellite dishes, amateur radio operator antennas, and commercial antennas.
This distinction is necessary in order to ensure compliance with the federal
aviation administration (FAA) and federal communications commission (FCC)
policies and requirements as they affect the telecommunication industry. (Ord.
2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-3: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
Any telecommunication antenna not expressly permitted by this chapter is
prohibited in the city. All telecommunications antennas shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the building, electrical and municipal codes of the
city, rules promulgated by the federal aviation administration (FAA), the
federal communications commission (FCC), the Taylorville airport hazard zoning
regulations if any and the standards and regulations of any other agency of the
state, federal or local unit of government with authority to regulate antennas.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter to the contrary, this chapter
shall not apply to, prohibit, or govern the city's right to place, install,
construct, maintain, fix, or locate any and all telecommunication antenna(s) or
telecommunication antenna facility (facilities) on city property or city right
(s) of way or on property where the city has an easement. (Ord. 3012, 2-20-
2001)
10-10-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Rules Of Construction: The language set forth in the text of this
chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of
construction:
      1.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
      2.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present;
      3.   The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
      4.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders;
      5.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definitions
hereof; and
      6.   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or more, the integral foot next above shall be
taken.
   B.   Definitions: Where a definition of a term is not specifically set forth
herein, such term shall be defined as set forth, if applicable, in title 9 of
this code and this title. The following definitions shall also apply:
   COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICES: Mobile services that are for profit, are
available to the public or a substantial portion of the public, and provide
subscribers with the ability to access or receive calls from the public
switched telephone network – examples are personal communication services
(PCS), cellular radio mobile service and paging.
   HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from the ground to the vertical apex of the
telecommunication antenna facility.
   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES: A digital, radio-based service that
transmits and receives low-powered electronic signals through networks of
linked transmitter/receiver sites with each transmitter/receiver or base
station covering smaller areas.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES: Transmitters, receivers, antenna facilities
and other types of installation used for the provision of personal wireless
services.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile services, cellular telephone
services, specialized mobile radio services (SMR), unlicensed wireless
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as now or
hereafter defined in title 47 United States Code, section 323(C)(7)(c).
   RADIO BROADCAST: Traditional AM and FM radio broadcasts and amateur radio
broadcasts (HAM radio).
   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A telecommunication antenna shaped like a bowl or
dish and used to transmit and/or receive wireless transmission of radio, data,
or video from a satellite orbiting the earth.
   TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA: A device affixed to the ground, a building or
other structure which device is capable of transmitting, receiving, or relaying
radio waves. Telecommunication antenna includes, but is not limited to, devices
capable of transmitting, receiving or relaying radio waves supporting the
following types of communication:
      1.   Television broadcast, multi-channel multi-point distribution
(wireless cable), direct broadcast satellites (DBS).
      2.   Radio broadcast (including AM, FM, and amateur radio antennas).
      3.   Wireless telecommunications, wireless transmitting, receiving, or
relaying services, personal wireless services, commercial mobile services,
cellular telephone services, specialized mobile radio services (SMR),
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchanges access
services.
   TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA FACILITY: The antenna, mast, pole, latticework,
structure, tower, building, equipment and other supporting material used to
mount and operate an antenna.
   UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunication services
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses by FCC,
but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services. (Ord.
2956, 3-20-2000; amd. Ord. 3012, 2-20-2001)
10-10-5: REGULATIONS FOR ANTENNAS PERMITTED IN SPECIFIC ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Telecommunication antennas and telecommunication antenna facilities are
permitted in R-1 and R-2 residence districts, as follows:
      1.   Accessory use satellite dish receiving antennas exceeding one meter
(1 m) in diameter shall be permitted on the following conditions:
         a.   Such antennas and facilities shall be located only on a roof or
in rear yards and no closer than five feet (5') from a side or rear lot line
and outside of easements of record; and
         b.   The vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall
not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height from ground level for ground mounted,
and fifteen feet (15') in height from roofline (at the point where mounted) for
roof mounted.
      2.   Satellite dish antennas, one meter (1 m) or less in diameter,
television broadcast receiving antennas, multi-channel multi- point
distribution receiving and/or transmitting antennas, radio broadcast receiving
antennas, and amateur radio antennas (receiving and transmitting), provided all
such antennas and facilities are accessory use antennas and facilities, shall
be permitted on the following conditions:
         a.   Such antennas and facilities shall be located only on a roof or
in rear or side yards unless such restriction precludes reception of an
acceptable quality signal. In such case such antennas and facilities may be
placed anywhere on the lot except within an easement of record. Proof of
inability to receive an acceptable quality signal shall be provided to the
health and building and zoning enforcing officer upon request; and
         b.   The vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall
not exceed the greater of the residential district height limit or sixty feet
(60') in height from ground level.
      3.   Other telecommunication antennas or telecommunication antenna
facilities are prohibited, unless the same are located on city property or
right of way or city easement pursuant to a written agreement with the city.
   B.   Within the C-1 general retail district, C-2 service retail district, I-
1 light industrial district, and I-2 heavy industrial district,
telecommunication antennas and telecommunication antenna facilities are
permitted as follows:
      1.   Accessory use satellite dish receiving antennas exceeding two meters
(2 m) in diameter, and accessory use mobile radio antennas shall be permitted
on the following conditions:
         a.   Such antennas and facilities shall be permitted only on the roof
or in the rear or side yards;
         b.   Such antennas and facilities shall not be placed on an easement
of record or within five feet (5') of a property line; and
         c.   The vertical apex of the telecommunication antennas facility
shall not exceed the greater of the applicable zoning district height
regulations or fifteen feet (15') in height above the building roofline for
roof mounted.
      2.   Satellite dish antennas less than two meters (2 m) in diameter,
television broadcast receiving antennas, multi-channel multi-point distribution
receiving and/or transmitting antennas, and radio broadcast receiving antennas
and amateur radio antennas (receiving and transmitting) provided all such
antennas and facilities are accessory use antennas and facilities, shall be
permitted on the following conditions:
         a.   Such antennas and facilities shall be located only on a roof or
in rear or side yards unless such restriction precludes reception of an
acceptable quality signal. In such case such antennas and facilities may be
placed anywhere on the lot except within an easement of record. Proof of
inability to receive an acceptable quality signal shall be provided to the
health and building and zoning enforcing officer upon request; and
         b.   The vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility shall
not exceed the greater of the applicable district height limit or seventy feet
(70') in height from ground level.
      3.   Accessory use mobile radio antennas not meeting the conditions of
subsection B2 of this section and all other telecommunication antennas and
telecommunication antenna facilities shall be permitted only as a special use
pursuant to the applicable procedures and standards for the same set forth in
section
10-10-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, no
telecommunication antenna or telecommunication antenna facility, other than if
otherwise permitted to be located in an R-1 or R-2 residence district, shall be
permitted to be located within the following described area (known as the
city's historical district and buffer zone), unless the same is located on city
property or city right of way or city easement pursuant to a written agreement
with the city:
The nine (9) square block area bordered by Walnut Street on the east, Vine
Street on the north, Webster Street on the west and Franklin Street on the
south. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-6: SPECIAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to specify standards that shall
be required to be met before the issuance of a special use permit.
      1.   Site Plan: Submission of a site plan drawn to scale, showing the
location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings or structures,
natural or manmade features, topography, elevations and location of landscaping
and lighting.
      2.   Description: Description of the proposed telecommunication antenna
facility including certification by an engineer regarding the structural
integrity of the facilities, and evidence of compliance with the FCC emission
standards.
      3.   Siting Needs And Sharing Capabilities: An inventory of the existing
telecommunication antenna facilities including, but not limited to, existing
antenna facilities, silos, water tanks and buildings. Notification by way of
certified mail as proof of exhausting possible alternatives and avenues for
sharing space.
      4.   Maintenance Plan: A description of anticipated maintenance needs,
including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic,
noise and safety impacts on such maintenance.
      5.   Approval Or Compliance: Proof of approval or compliance with FAA
standards.
      6.   Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance in the minimum per
occurrence amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) with the city
and its elected and/or appointed mayor, city council, officers, agents, or
employees named as additional insureds. The applicant shall provide the city
with certified copies of such insurance policy and certificates of insurance
and the holder of any such special use permit shall provide the city at each
time thereafter such policy is renewed or replaced. Such insurance coverage
shall be maintained during all times the special use permit remains in effect.
   B.   Bulk Regulations:
      1.   Lot Size Requirements: Minimum lot size for the district in which
the telecommunication antenna facilities are to be located.
      2.   Setback: A setback from adjoining property lines is required in
order to minimize the adverse effects of falling ice or damage due to antenna
collapse. A setback of fifty percent (50%) of the telecommunication antenna
facility height shall be maintained except a setback of five hundred feet
(500') shall be maintained from all residential zoning districts and from
buildings used for a residential dwelling(s), daycare, elementary or secondary
schools.
      3.   Separation From Other Telecommunication Antenna Facilities: In order
to encourage collocation of antennas on a common facility all new
telecommunication antenna facilities exceeding seventy feet (70') in height,
shall not be located within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of another
telecommunication antenna facility which exceeds seventy feet (70') in height.
      4.   Height: Telecommunication antenna facilities shall not exceed one
hundred five feet (105') in height from ground level.
   C.   Screening And Landscape Requirements:
      1.   The facility and every element thereof shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the architecture of surrounding area.
      2.   The proposed buildings, structures and use will be in harmony with
the general character of the neighborhood.
      3.   Security fencing must be constructed around the base of the tower.
This fencing must have a minimum height of six feet (6').
   D.   Lighting: Shall be consistent with FAA guidelines and have minimal
spillover effect on adjoining property.
   E.   Interference: The proposed facility shall not cause unreasonable
interference with existing radio, television, telephone or DBS reception or
services.
   F.   Effect On Adjoining Properties: The proposed facility shall cause no
objectionable noise, fumes, odors, glare, physical activity or effect that
would impair the peaceful enjoyment of neighboring properties.
   G.   Adequate Public Facilities: The proposed facility shall be served by
adequate public services and facilities, including police and fire protection,
water and sanitary sewer, storm drainage, public roads and other public
improvements.
   H.   FCC Compliance: The proposed telecommunication antenna facility shall
comply with all applicable FCC requirements.
   I.   Other Codes: The proposed telecommunication antenna facility shall
comply with: 1) all building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fire codes
for the city; 2) all other requirements of title 9 of this code and this title;
and 3) any and all other applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations, and requirements of any and all state, federal, or local entities
or agencies having jurisdiction over such telecommunication antenna facility.
   J.   Abandonment: Facilities that remain unused for more than one year shall
be considered abandoned and shall be demolished and removed from the site at
the owner's cost within thirty (30) days following such abandonment.
   K.   Collocation Or Shared Use: Applicants shall be required to exhaust all
possible alternatives and avenues for sharing space on existing
telecommunication antenna facilities. Evidence shall be submitted showing the
following:
      1.   The availability of space on existing telecommunication antenna
facilities;
      2.   The willingness of the telecommunication antenna facility owner to
execute a lease with the applicant and whether or not the terms of such lease
are agreeable to applicant;
      3.   The ability of applicant to reasonably meet its geographic service
area requirements by locating on existing telecommunication antenna facilities;
      4.   Any radio, mechanical or electrical incompatibilities, conflicts or
interference caused by using an existing telecommunication antenna facility;
      5.   The comparative costs of new construction and collocation; and
      6.   Any FCC or other governmental restrictions on collocation.
   L.   Signs: No signs shall be permitted on telecommunication antenna
facilities other than warning or equipment signs, however the telecommunication
antenna may be located on an existing sign structure.
   M.   Waivers: The city council may modify or waive any of the foregoing
special use standards where such waiver or modification is in the public
interest or necessary to comply with federal law.
   N.   General Conditions: Standards applicable to all special uses also
include the following:
      1.   Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures shall be
located and designed in a manner which will maximize automotive and pedestrian
safety and convenience, facilitate traffic flow and control and provide easy
and adequate access in case of fire or other catastrophe;
      2.   Off-street parking and loading areas where required or provided,
shall be located and designed in a manner which shall minimize any adverse
economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special use on adjoining or
nearby properties;
      3.   Refuse and service areas, if provided, shall be located and designed
in a manner which shall minimize any adverse economic, noise, glare or odor
effects of the special use on adjoining or nearby properties;
      4.   Utilities provided in connection with the special use shall be
designed and located so as to encourage the efficient and economic utilization,
extension and expansion of the public utility system;
      5.   Screening and buffering materials shall be sufficient to ensure that
the proposed special use will have no greater impact on surrounding land uses
that other uses authorized as a matter of right;
      6.   Proposed exterior lighting shall be located and designed to maximize
traffic safety and compatibility and harmony with adjoining or nearby
properties and so as to minimize glare, noise and adverse economic impact on
surrounding properties or authorized land uses;
      7.   Required yards and open spaces shall be sufficient to ensure that
the proposed special use shall have no greater impact on surrounding land uses
than other uses authorized as a matter of right;
      8.   The site on which the special use is located shall be designed to
make the proposed use generally compatible with adjoining or nearby properties;
and
      9.   The special use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located and of the entire
Taylorville city code, except as such regulations may in each instance be
modified by the mayor and city council pursuant to the recommendations of the
plan commission or as allowed for a planned unit development. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-
2000)
10-10-7: SPECIAL USE PERMIT PROCESS FOR ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA FACILITIES:
   A.   Hearing On Application: Upon receipt in proper form of an application
and supporting material, the plan commission shall hold at least one public
hearing on the application for a special use permit, in the manner provided in
this title.
   B.   Action By The Plan Commission:
      1.   Finding Of Fact: No special use permit shall be recommended by the
plan commission until written findings of fact are made indicating:
         a.   The extent to which the special use standards and provisions
specified in this chapter are met;
         b.   Recommendations, if any, of conditions deemed reasonably
necessary to meet any or all of such general or specific special use permit
standards and provisions.
   C.   Action By City Council: The city council shall grant or deny, in whole
or in part, any application for a special use permit within thirty (30) days
after receiving the written report of findings and recommendation of the plan
commission, including the recommended stipulations of additional conditions and
guarantees, when they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest. All decisions of the city council shall be in writing and based on
written findings of fact.
   D.   Protest: In case a written protest or protests against any proposed
special use permit, signed and acknowledged by the owners of at least thirty
three percent (33%) of the property adjoining or within two hundred fifty feet
(250') in any direction of the property where the proposed special use permit
is to be applicable is filed with the city clerk, the special use permit shall
not be approved except on the favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of
all aldermen of the city council, then holding office.
   E.   Refiling Period: No application for special use which has been denied
wholly or in part by the city council shall be resubmitted for a period of one
year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or
proof or change of conditions found to be valid by the city council.
   F.   Minor Changes: Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of
structures may be authorized by the health and building and zoning enforcing
officer, however, no such change shall involve a change in the character of the
development, or a substantial increase in the intensity of use, reduction of
parking spaces, or landscaping requirements.
   G.   Nonminor Changes: Decisions concerning nonminor changes in the
location, siting and height of structures, any change in the character of the
development or a substantial increase in the intensity of use, reduction of
parking spaces, or landscaping shall be made by the city council, after the
plan commission conducts an additional public hearing and submits a
recommendation on such proposed changes or deviations. In all nonminor changes,
the plan commission and the city council shall apply the standards set forth in
this chapter for special uses. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-8: VARIATIONS:
In the event the standards and requirements of this chapter impair the receipt
or transmission of an acceptable signal quality for an accessory use
telecommunication antenna (except accessory use mobile radio antennas), the
zoning board of appeals may grant a variance or variances with the strict
application of this chapter, provided the requirements of section
10-9-5 of this title are met and such variance(s) shall be no greater than
reasonably necessary to receive or transmit an acceptable quality signal, and
shall be conditioned where necessary to protect the public's health, safety,
and welfare. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-9: COLLOCATION INCENTIVE:
In order to encourage the collocation of telecommunication antennas on existing
telecommunication antenna facilities, the health and building and zoning
enforcing officer has the authority to permit the placement of antennas on
telecommunication antenna facilities which have been approved pursuant to the
special use permit process provided there is no increase in the height of the
approved telecommunication antenna facility. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-10: FEDERAL POLICY:
In considering any special use permit and variation requests the following
federal policy directives shall be followed:
   A.   All requests shall be processed within ninety (90) days after the
application is properly filed with the health and building and zoning enforcing
officer. The ninety (90) day time limit may be extended by agreement.
   B.   The substantive decision made by the appropriate body shall not
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services
and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provisions of the
particular telecommunication technology in the city. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-11: NONCONFORMITIES:
Nonconforming telecommunication antennas and telecommunication antenna
facilities which are lawful at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter, may
continue so long as the same remains otherwise lawful subject to the following:
   A.   Enlargement Or Alteration: No such nonconforming telecommunication
antenna or telecommunication antenna facility may be enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may
be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
   B.   Reconstruction: Should such nonconforming telecommunication antenna or
telecommunication antenna facility or any nonconforming portion of same be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
fair cash market value prior to the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Moving: Should such nonconforming telecommunication antenna or
telecommunication facility be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved.
   D.   Repairs And Maintenance: Ordinary repairs may be made to an extent not
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the fair cash market value of the
nonconforming telecommunication antenna or telecommunication facility. (Ord.
2956, 3-20-2000)
10-10-12: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit issued by the city is required before the installation or
location of any telecommunication antenna or telecommunication antenna
facility. (Ord. 2956, 3-20-2000)
CHAPTER 11
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Intent And Purpose
10-11-2: Standards And Regulations
10-11-3: Prohibited Home Occupations
10-11-4: Administrative Procedures
10-11-5: Enforcement
10-11-6: Permit Termination
10-11-7: Appeals
10-11-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   To protect residential areas from the adverse impacts that are
sometimes associated with home occupations.
   B.   To maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods.
   C.   To provide for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of all
City residents.
   D.   To afford residents of the City, in certain circumstances, enumerated
herein, a broad choice in the use of their home to produce or supplement
personal and family income in our ever changing society.
   E.   To establish criteria and development standards for home occupations
conducted in the dwelling units in residential districts. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-
2002)
10-11-2: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
No person shall operate a home occupation except in compliance with the
following requirements:
   A.   The home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling or any other
accessory building approved by the City that meets all applicable codes adopted
in Section
9-2-1 of this Code and shall be incidental to the use of the structure as a
dwelling or accessory building.
   B.   There shall be no storage of equipment, vehicles or supplies associated
with the home occupation outside the dwelling or approved accessory building.
   C.   There shall be no display or activity, including, but not limited to,
the display of products that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling
that it is being used in whole or in part for any use other than a dwelling.
   D.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
wherein there is the conduct of a home occupation.
   E.   There shall be no sign or other evidence larger than one square foot
that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized for
anything other than that of a dwelling or accessory building.
   F.   No one other than a permanent resident of the dwelling and a maximum of
one other employee shall be employed in the conduct of the home occupation.
   G.   The use shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Deliveries to the home occupation by the United States Postal Service, United
Parcel Service, Federal Express, or any other licensed delivery service shall
not exceed what would normally be expected in a residential district and shall
only take place between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) P.M.
   H.   The use shall not require additional off street parking spaces for
clients or customers of the home occupation.
   I.   No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any one or
more public utilities (water, sewer, electricity and garbage collection) so
that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds
the average for residences in the neighborhood.
   J.   Except as otherwise stated herein, the home occupation shall not
involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the
premises, other than one vehicle not to exceed one ton, owned or operated by
the resident of the dwelling, which shall be parked in an adequate off street
parking area.
   K.   No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be used in
connection with a home occupation.
   L.   No home occupation shall produce or emit any noise, dust or particulate
matter, glare, odors, noxious fumes, vibrations, smoke, heat, humidity or any
other effect that unreasonably interferes with any person's enjoyment of his or
her residence or property.
   M.   No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
electrical interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises or
cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
   N.   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.; except that a home day care
professional who is licensed by the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services, and who is otherwise eligible and has obtained a City home occupation
permit to conduct a home occupation as a home day care professional under this
Chapter, may conduct such home occupation between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 3832, 2-20-2018)
10-11-3: PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding the above, the following activities may not be licensed
as home occupations in accordance with this Chapter: any repair, modification
and/or alteration of motorized vehicles, including the painting or repair of
automobiles, trucks, trailers, and boats; animal hospitals; astrology, card
reading, palm reading or fortune telling in any form; kennels; stables; bird
keeping facilities; dancing schools; restaurants; unlicensed massage
therapists; unlicensed catering/food preparation businesses; funeral chapels or
homes; crematoria; mausoleums; medical or dental clinics; tattoo parlors; any
business where body piercing is performed; public places of amusement; the sale
of firearms or ammunition by an unlicensed firearms dealer; construction
businesses or landscaping businesses that provide the outside storage of goods
and materials to be utilized in the operation of the business or use;
warehousing; washing vehicles; and welding or machine shops; provided, however,
that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the performance of emergency
medical services in a residential dwelling. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
10-11-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any person with intent to operate a home occupation must make
application with the City Clerk. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
   B.   The application fee for a home occupation permit is twenty five dollars
($25.00) and must be paid at the time of the request. The fee for the first
year shall be waived for those applicants applying within sixty (60) days of
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 3209, 12-6-2004)
   C.   A permit for home occupation shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance. Any person can apply for another home occupation permit on an
annual basis by making application with the City Clerk in accordance with the
requirements of this Section, provided the home occupation continues to satisfy
all of the requirements of this Chapter.
   D.   A permit for a home occupation or a special use permit to operate a
home occupation shall be issued only to the applicant and is nontransferable.
   E.   The City's Health and Building Officer may deny issuance of a home
occupation permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this
Chapter. Any appeal of the decision of the City's Health and Building Officer
in regard to a denial of a home occupation permit shall be made to the Board of
Appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of the denial of a home
occupation permit. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing, and shall
either order a permit to be issued, or affirm its denial.
   F.   The home occupation applicant shall permit any reasonable inspection of
the premises upon reasonable notice to the applicant by the City's Health and
Building Officer and any other persons he or she deems necessary. If entry is
refused, such permit shall be deemed immediately terminated.
   G.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be punished
in accordance with Section
10-9-8 of this Title. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
10-11-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If the City's Health and Building Officer determines that a violation
is occurring or has occurred and has not been corrected, he shall send a notice
to abate by certified mail to the permit holder at his or her last known
address. The notice to abate shall describe the alleged violations and instruct
the permit holder to abate all violations and bring the home occupation into
compliance with this Chapter within ten (10) days from the date of the notice.
The notice to abate shall state that if the permit holder fails to abate the
violations that his or her permit may be revoked.
   B.   If the permit holder fails to abate the violations, the Health and
Building Officer shall revoke the violator's permit. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
10-11-6: PERMIT TERMINATION:
Except as otherwise stated herein, a home occupation permit terminates at the
time the applicant no longer occupies the premises. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
10-11-7: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Health and Building Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section
10-9-4 of this Title. (Ord. 3081, 7-15-2002)
CHAPTER 12
ADULT USES
SECTION:
10-12-1: Definitions
10-12-2: Liquor
10-12-3: Location
10-12-4: Special Use Permit Required
10-12-5: Standards
10-12-6: Registration
10-12-7: Exterior Display
10-12-8: Existing Adult Uses
10-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any
other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which
regularly features: a) persons who appear in a state of nudity; or b) live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or c) films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic or computer reproductions which
are characterized by the depictions or descriptions of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult clubs allowing nudity at regular or frequent
times, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
   EMPLOYEE: Means and includes employees, independent contractors or any other
person who is retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at
the licensed premises.
   ESTABLISHED OR ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license.
   NUDITY, OR STATE OF NUDITY: Means and includes the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, female breasts with less than a full opaque
covering below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered
or, that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn
"thong" type bikini bottom.
   OPERATE OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation.
   OPERATOR: Means and includes any person on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of
the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner,
or licensee of the business.
   PERSON: Means and includes any individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Means and includes any location frequented by the public, or
where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places
include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business
and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether
open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or
membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country
clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by social, fraternal or
similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether
permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public
places shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single
sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals
and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a
state of nudity in a modeling class operated by a proprietary school licensed
by the state or by a college, junior college or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation, or by a private college or university which maintains
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or a university supported entirely or partly by
taxation or an accredited private college.
   SEMINUDE: Means and includes a state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well
as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: A business that includes an adult use.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, 2) pubic
region, 3) buttocks, 4) anus, 5) female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Means and includes any of the following
offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; public indecency; indecency with a child; engaged in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling;
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of the state of Illinois or
other states or countries;
   B.   For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or
2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is the later date,
if the conviction is a felony offense; or 3) less than five (5) years have
elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurred within any twenty four (24) month period; and
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purposes of this chapter, "specified
sexual activities" means and includes: a) human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; b) human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, artificial or simulated; c) fondling or other erotic touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; and d)
excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth
in this definition.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and
includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-2: LIQUOR:
No liquor license shall be issued to any premises where an adult use is
conducted or allowed. No liquor shall be given away or allowed to be consumed
on any such premises where adult use is allowed or conducted. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-
2004)
10-12-3: LOCATION:
Adult uses may be allowed, upon obtaining a special use permit, in an AG-
1 district (agricultural district) provided: a) no adult use shall be located
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any school,
daycare center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing and
place of religious worship; b) no adult use shall be located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any property located in an
R-1 district (residential district) or R-2 district (residential district); c)
no adult use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any
residential structure in existence on the date of the public hearing relating
to the application for a special use permit (as set forth in section
10-12-4 of this chapter); and the applicant shall file said application for a
special use permit with the zoning enforcing officer and with the city clerk
and the applicant shall fully comply with the notice requirement of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-7 (state bar edition). The measurement shall be from
the property line of the real estate as shown by public records upon which the
adult use premises is located to the property line of the other property
described above. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-4: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No adult use shall operate even at those locations where they may be allowed
pursuant to section
10-12-3 of this chapter without first having obtained a special use permit from
the city council by a two-thirds (2/3) favorable vote of the city council then
holding office, provided that no special use permit shall be granted until it
is first submitted to and approved by the plan commission, after a public
hearing. The standards set forth in section
10-12-5 of this chapter shall govern in the determination of the plan
commission whether to recommend the granting of or the refusal of such special
use permit. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-5: STANDARDS:
No adult special use permit shall be granted by the city council unless the
city council finds:
   A.   The design and operation of the facility will not adversely affect the
public health, welfare, and safety;
   B.   The adult use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is located;
   C.   The adult use will not unduly increase traffic congestion in the public
streets and highways in the area in which it is located;
   D.   The adult use will not cause additional public expense for fire or
police protection;
   E.   The adult use will not substantially increase the possibility of
criminal acts against persons and properties within five hundred feet (500') of
such proposed special use or against persons who regularly use such properties;
   F.   The location of the proposed adult use will not violate any of the
terms of section
10-12-3 of this chapter; and
   G.   All terms and provisions of this chapter have been fully complied with.
(Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-6: REGISTRATION:
The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of managing,
controlling or collecting rents, or any other person managing or controlling a
building or premises any part of which contains an adult use, shall file the
following information with the city clerk and the zoning enforcing officer:
   A.   The address of the premises;
   B.   The full legal name(s) of the owner(s) of the premises and names of the
beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust;
   C.   The full legal residential address of the owner(s) and the beneficial
owner(s);
   D.   The full legal name of the business or establishment;
   E.   The full legal name(s) and full legal residential address(es) of the
owner(s), beneficial owner(s) or the major stockholders of the business or
establishment;
   F.   The proposed date of initiation of the adult use;
   G.   The specific nature of the adult use; and
   H.   If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease must be
attached. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-7: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not
registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
10-12-8: EXISTING ADULT USES:
Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the
adoption of this chapter, may be continued as hereinafter provided:
   A.   Upon written notice from the city to any owner or interest holder
therein that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming
under this chapter, such owner(s) or interest holder(s) therein shall, within
ninety (90) days from the date of such notice, apply to the city clerk for a
certificate of nonconformance.
   B.   Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance within ninety (90)
days of the notice provided in subsection A of this section will require the
termination of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice provided
for in subsection A of this section.
   C.   In any event, all nonconforming uses for which an application for a
certificate of nonconformance from the city clerk has been filed shall be
discontinued within one year of the notice provided in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 3210, 12-6-2004)
CHAPTER 13
PROHIBITION OF CONSTRUCTION AND/OR
OPERATION OF WIND TURBINES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Definition
10-13-2: Prohibition
10-13-1: DEFINITION:
WIND TURBINE: A wind energy conversion system which converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the
turbine, blade, tower, base, and pad transformer, if any, and any and all other
related equipment. (Ord. 3489, 10-18-2010)
10-13-2: PROHIBITION:
The construction and/or operation of wind turbines is prohibited within the
corporate boundaries of the city of Taylorville, Christian County, Illinois.
This prohibition applies to all real estate within the city of Taylorville
corporate limits regardless of zoning district classification. (Ord. 3489, 10-
18-2010)
CHAPTER 14
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose And Intent
10-14-2: Definitions
10-14-3: Prohibited/Permitted Locations
10-14-4: Regulations And Standards
10-14-5: Removal And Remedies
10-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide standards to
ensure that portable storage containers as defined herein are only used for
short term, temporary storage and transport of personal property on private
property or where permitted in a public street, public roadway, public alley,
or public right of way; and are not used as long term accessory buildings or
storage sheds or structures; and do not impede vehicular access, traffic flow
or circulation; and minimizes traffic congestion; and do not create public
safety hazards; and which provide for adequate visual screening and
landscaping; and minimizes aesthetic blight and other adverse environmental
impacts; and are safely operated and maintained based upon such factors as the
permitted size, height of stacking, the cargo within such containers, the
locations and surface used, and the accessibility for police, fire, rescue,
emergency and maintenance equipment and vehicles; and that any permitted
placement thereof be restricted to private property unless site constraints
dictate placement elsewhere, in which case placement within a public street,
public roadway, public alley, or public right of way may be allowed by a permit
issued at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
10-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER: Shall mean and include:
   A.   Any "building" (as defined in section
10-1-4 this title); or
   B.   Any fully or partially enclosed container, pod, shed, unit, structure,
or building of whatever type, size, construction, or material designed or
constructed for the storage, loading, unloading, shipping, transport, movement,
or placement therein of any personal property and which can be transported or
moved to or from a site by a vehicle or is otherwise mobile and which is not
permanently affixed and considered by the tax assessor's office for Christian
County, Illinois, to be a part of the real estate or land where it is located
for ad valorem tax purposes.
However, notwithstanding the foregoing descriptions, a portable storage
container shall not mean nor include:
   A.   Any plastic or metal receptacle with a capacity less than two (2) cubic
yards that is designed for the purpose to collect quantities of trash or
garbage; or
   B.   Any "roll-off container" as defined in section
3-11-1 of this code; or
   C.   Any stationary semitrailer unit that is not connected to a truck
tractor; or
   D.   Any portable storage container that is placed, maintained or used by
the Taylorville fire department for training activities or for any and all
other purposes of the Taylorville fire department or of the Taylorville fire
protection district; or
   E.   Any movable accessory building (as defined in section
10-1-4 of this title) that is located on property with a zoning classification
of R-1 district (residential) or R-2 district (residential).
   SEASONAL BUSINESS TIME PERIOD: A period of time not to exceed ninety (90)
consecutive calendar days and not more than twice per calendar year where one
or more portable storage containers are placed, maintained, stored, or used on
property with a C-1 district (commercial) or C-2 district (commercial) zoning
classification for the purpose of displaying for retail sale to the general
public flowers, plants, shrubbery, or landscaping merchandise, goods,
materials, or products.
   SEMITRAILER: A detachable trailer designed for hauling freight, with wheels
at the rear end, the forward end being supported by the rear of a truck tractor
when attached.
   STACKED: A method of placing or storing or stacking two (2) or more portable
storage containers in a vertical manner where the floor of the lower portable
storage container remains parallel to the ground. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
10-14-3: PROHIBITED/PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
   A.   Except as may be permitted in this section, portable storage containers
shall not be placed, maintained, stored, or used on any private property or on
any public street, public roadway, public alleyway, or public right of way
located within any zoning district in the city.
   B.   Subject to compliance with the regulations and standards set forth in
section
10-14-4 of this chapter and provided a portable storage container permit is
first obtained from the city's health, building, and zoning enforcement
officer, a portable storage container may be placed, maintained, stored, or
used for a residential dwelling on private residential property located within
any zoning district within the city for a maximum period of sixty (60)
consecutive calendar days within any calendar twelve (12) month period. Such
maximum sixty (60) day period may be extended by the city's health, building,
and zoning enforcement officer for a period of time as he may deem appropriate
and necessary to facilitate the moving and/or relocation of an occupant's
residence or to facilitate cleanup or restoration activities resulting from
natural disasters, floods, fires, windstorms or other unforeseen catastrophic
events, or to complete repairs or remodeling of the interior, in whole or in
part, of the residential dwelling located on such private residential property.
The fee for such portable storage container permit shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00); and each owner and occupant of the property where such portable
storage container is to be located must sign the application for such permit
and each such owner and occupant shall comply with and be bound by this
chapter.
   C.   If the city's health, building, and zoning enforcement officer
determines there are site constraints that dictate placement elsewhere, and
subject to compliance with the regulations and standards set forth in section
10-14-4 of this chapter, and provided a portable storage container permit is
first obtained from the city's health, building, and zoning enforcement
officer, a portable storage container may be placed, maintained, stored, or
used for storage on a public street, public roadway, public alley, or public
right of way for a residential dwelling on private residential property located
within any zoning district for a maximum period of sixty (60) consecutive
calendar days within any calendar twelve (12) month period. Such maximum sixty
(60) day period may be extended by the city's health, building, and zoning
enforcement officer for a period of time as he may deem appropriate and
necessary to facilitate the moving and/or relocation of an occupant's residence
or to facilitate cleanup or restoration activities resulting from natural
disasters, floods, fires, windstorms or other unforeseen catastrophic events,
or to complete repairs or remodeling of the interior, in whole or in part, of
the residential dwelling located on such private residential property. The fee
for such portable storage container permit shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00); and each owner and occupant of the property where such portable
storage container is to be located must sign the application for such permit
and each such owner and occupant shall comply with and be bound by this
chapter.
   D.   Subject to compliance with the regulations and standards set forth in
section
10-14-4 of this chapter, portable storage containers may be placed, maintained,
stored, or used on property with a zoning classification of I-1 district
(industrial) or I-2 district (industrial) or I-3 district (industrial).
   E.   Subject to compliance with the regulations and standards set forth in
section
10-14-4 of this chapter, contractors may place, maintain, store, or use one
portable storage container at any one time on property located within any
zoning district within the city during the period of construction, repairs, or
remodeling of the exterior or interior of premises located at the construction
site. Each such portable storage container shall be removed from such property
within seven (7) consecutive calendar days after the completion of such
construction activity; provided however, if construction ceases for a period of
thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or is otherwise abandoned, such portable
storage container shall be removed no later than seven (7) consecutive calendar
day period after the city's health, building, and zoning enforcement officer
issues a notice and order to remove such portable storage container.
   F.   Subject to compliance with the regulations and standards of section
10-14-4 of this chapter, portable storage containers may be placed, maintained,
stored or used during a seasonal business time period on private property
located in a C-1 district (commercial) or C-2 district (commercial) zoning
classification for the purpose of displaying for retail sale to the general
public flowers, plants, shrubbery, or landscaping merchandise, goods,
materials, or products; provided, however, such portable storage containers
meet all the requirements of the regulations and standards set forth in section
10-14-4 of this chapter.
   G.   Subject to compliance with the regulations and standards of section
10-14-4 of this chapter, portable storage containers, not to exceed a total of
six (6) portable storage containers at any one time, may be placed, maintained,
stored and used upon any lot that has a zoning classification other than an R-
1 district (residential) or in an R-2 district (residential) for the sole
purpose of storing goods and merchandise for sale or for manufacturing purposes
conducted on such lot by the owner or tenant of such lot; provided, however,
the conduct of such business operations are authorized and permissible in such
zoning classification.
   H.   The placement and maintenance of portable storage containers upon any
lot that has a zoning classification other than an R-1 district (residential)
or an R-2 district (residential) for the sole purpose of rental to other
persons or entities who will temporarily place such portable storage containers
to another site is permissible; provided however, the rental of portable
storage containers to persons or entities other than to the owners or tenants
of the entire real estate lot where all such portable storage container(s) is/
are located is strictly prohibited. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
10-14-4: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   A portable storage container shall be placed and maintained on a paved,
concrete, asphalt or gravel surface and shall meet all minimum front, side, and
rear yard or lot setback requirements for the applicable zoning district.
   B.   No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater than forty
feet (40') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and eight feet (8') in height.
   C.   No signage other that owner identification logos shall be attached or
allowed on any portable storage container.
   D.   All portable storage containers shall be maintained in a condition free
from rust, peeling paint and other forms of visible deterioration of any kind,
nature or extent whatsoever. The owner of the portable storage container shall
be responsible for its maintenance.
   E.   Portable storage containers shall not be stacked atop one another.
   F.   Portable storage containers shall not be placed or maintained or stored
or used on property or within any area that is within the floodplain or
floodway or within any designated landscape or flood retention or detention
areas.
   G.   Portable storage containers shall be located to the rear of any
business or commercial or industrial property that has a zoning classification
other than an R-1 district (residential) or in an R-2 district (residential).
   H.   Portable storage containers shall not contain any personal property or
materials or liquids of a toxic or flammable or radioactive nature.
   I.   Except for seasonal business time periods, portable storage containers
shall not be used for the purpose of displaying for sale or for conducting any
business or selling any goods, merchandise, materials, or personal property of
any kind, nature or extent whatsoever.
   J.   Portable storage containers shall not be placed, maintained, stored, or
used within any off street parking spaces as required under this title or
within any loading/unloading area on the property.
   K.   Portable storage containers placed, maintained, stored or used must be
kept safe, structurally sound, stable, and in good repair. Any portable storage
container that becomes unsound, unstable or otherwise dangerous shall be
immediately repaired or removed from the property where located by the owner or
occupant thereof.
   L.   Portable storage containers shall not be placed, maintained, stored, or
used in a manner that impedes the flow of traffic or access to any public
street, roadway, alleyway, right of way, public utility or drainage easements,
adjacent structures or buildings, or fire hydrants, or access by fire, rescue,
police, and emergency vehicles.
   M.   A portable storage container shall not be modified, retrofitted or used
for on site human habitation and shall not have windows, heating and cooling,
plumbing, air circulation systems, interior lighting, or multiple entrances.
   N.   Portable storage containers located on property with a zoning
classification of C-1 district (commercial) or C-2 district (commercial) shall
not be placed, maintained, stored, or used closer than thirty feet (30') from
the nearest boundary line of any property zoned or used for residential land
uses; and shall not be placed, maintained, stored, or used closer than thirty
feet (30') from any existing structure or building on site or within one
hundred feet (100') of the front property boundary line, unless in either of
the last two (2) situations, the city's health, building, and zoning
enforcement officer approves such placement after determining that the
orientation of property lines and building location prevents compliance with
this placement requirement.
   O.   Portable storage containers shall be safely secured and all enclosures
locked when not in immediate use to prevent vandalism, theft, and to provide
personal safety and protection for children and for other unauthorized persons
who may attempt to open or enter such portable storage container. (Ord. 3734,
11-2-2015)
10-14-5: REMOVAL AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Any portable storage container which existed lawfully on a parcel or
tract of land at the time of the adoption of an ordinance enacting this chapter
shall be removed, by the owner or occupant of the property where such portable
storage container is located, within sixty (60) consecutive calendar days after
adoption of such ordinance, unless such portable storage container is
authorized or permitted under this chapter.
   B.   Any portable storage container placed, maintained, stored or used in
violation of this chapter may be removed by the city or its delegates if such
owner or occupant fails to remove such portable storage container(s) within
fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days immediately following the receipt of a
notice of such violation and order to remove such public nuisance issued by the
city's health, building, and zoning enforcement officer. Such notice of
violation and order to remove shall be deemed received by such owner and/or
occupant on: 1) the date of personal service of such notice and order; or 2)
within three (3) business days of depositing a copy of such notice and order in
a United States post office or post office box in Taylorville, Illinois, in an
envelope addressed to "Owner and/or Occupant" with proper postage for regular
mail prepaid at the address of the property where such portable storage
container(s) are located; or 3) if such address is unknown, then the date when
a copy of such notice of violation and order is posted near the main entrance
of the property where any of such portable storage containers are located or on
one of such portable storage containers. Each owner and occupant, jointly and
severally, shall be liable for and pay the city for all costs and expenses
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court and
collection costs, incurred and related to the removal and disposition of such
portable storage container(s) and the collection of such indebtedness; and such
indebtedness shall be recordable as a lien upon the property where such
portable storage container(s) are or were located before such removal.
   C.   In addition to and not in lieu of the remedy provided in subsection B
of this section, any "person" (as defined under section
1-3-2 of this code) found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be assessed a fine or penalty for each offense
in accordance with the general penalty provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall
be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 3734, 11-2-2015)
CHAPTER 15
SOLAR ENERGY
SECTION:
10-15-1: Purpose And Intent
10-15-2: Applicability
10-15-3: Definitions
10-15-4: Special Use Only
10-15-5: Special Use Permit And Building Permit Applications - Fees
10-15-6: Penalty - Remedies
10-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to preserve and protect the public
health, safety, comfort, and general welfare without significantly increasing
the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a solar energy facility; and to allow
for the orderly development of land, protect property values and esthetic
conditions within the City. (Ord. 3841, 4-16-2018)
10-15-2: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter applies to all property and lands within the corporate limits of
the City. (Ord. 3841, 4-16-2018)
10-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   ABANDONMENT: Means to give up, discontinue, and withdraw from any solar
energy facility that ceases to produce energy on a continuous basis for three
hundred sixty five (365) calendar days shall be considered abandoned.
   FENCE: Means a continuous barrier extending from the surface of the ground
to a uniform height of not less than six feet (6') from the ground at any given
point, constructed of dirt, wood, stone, steel, or other metal, or any
substance of a similar nature and strength.
   GATE: Means a door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened,
provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things for which it was
intended, and which, when closed, forms a continuous barrier as a part of the
fence to which it is attached.
   IMPROVED AREA: Means the area containing any one or more of the following:
solar collectors, solar storage mechanisms, solar panels, electrical inverters,
storage buildings, or access roadways.
   RESIDENCE: Means a building used as a dwelling for one or more families or
persons.
   ROADWAY: Means any street, roadway, highway, alleyway or thoroughfare which
is located within the City.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR: Means:
   A.   An assembly, structure, or design, including passive elements, used for
gathering, concentrating, or absorbing direct or indirect solar energy,
specially designed for holding a substantial amount of useful thermal energy
and to transfer that energy to a gas, solid, or liquid or to use that energy
directly; or
   B.   A mechanism that absorbs solar energy and converts it into electricity;
or
   C.   A mechanism or process used for gathering solar energy through wind or
thermal gradients; or
   D.   A component used to transfer thermal energy to a gas, solid, or liquid,
or to convert it into electricity.
   SOLAR ENERGY: Means radiant energy received from the sun at wave lengths
suitable for heat transfer, photosynthetic use, or photovoltaic use.
   SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY OR FACILITIES: Means and includes a solar farm, a
solar collector, solar storage mechanism, or solar energy system, or facility,
or area of land, or a structural rooftop principally used to convert solar
energy to electricity, which includes, but is not limited to, the use of one or
more solar energy systems; provided, however, a "solar energy facility" shall
only include those solar energy facilities that sell electricity to be used off
site from where it is collected and converted.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Means:
   A.   A complete assembly, structure, or design of a solar collector, or a
solar storage mechanism, which uses solar energy for generating electricity or
for heating or cooling gases, solids, liquids, or other materials;
   B.   The design, materials, or elements of a system and its maintenance,
operation, and labor components, and the necessary components, if any, of
supplemental conventional energy systems designed or constructed to interface
with a solar energy system; and
   C.   Any legal, financial, or institutional orders, certificates, or
mechanisms, including easements, leases, and agreements, required to ensure
continued access to solar energy, its source, or its use in a solar energy
system, and including monitoring and educational elements of a demonstration
project.
   SOLAR FARM: Means and includes a solar energy facility.
   SOLAR STORAGE MECHANISM: Means equipment or elements (such as piping and
transfer mechanisms, containers, heat exchangers, or controls thereof, and
gases, solids, liquids, or combinations thereof) that are utilized for storing
solar energy, gathered by a solar collector, for subsequent use. (Ord. 3841, 4-
16-2018)
10-15-4: SPECIAL USE ONLY:
   A.   A solar energy facility may only be located and permitted in an
Agricultural-1 (AG-1) District, Agricultural-2 (AG-2) District, Industrial-1
(I-1) District, Industrial-2 (I-2) District, or Industrial-3 (I-3) District,
but only when authorized and approved as a special use by the City Council
after public hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
   B.   Such special uses as may be permitted in such zoning districts shall be
subject to the following requirements, restrictions and conditions:
      1.   Lot Area And Lot Width: Each such special use shall provide a
minimum lot area of five (5) acres.
      2.   Yards: All structures to be constructed, altered or moved in the AG-
1, AG-2, I-1, I-2 or I-3 Districts shall provide yards of the following minimum
depths:
         a.   Front Yard: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Side Yards: Fifteen feet (15') except where a side yard abuts a
residential district, in which case, a side yard of fifty feet (50') shall be
provided.
         c.   Rear Yard: Thirty feet (30').
         d.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard
requirements on each street side of the lot.
      3.   Building Height: No building or structure shall exceed fifty feet
(50') in height.
      4.   Off-Street Parking And Loading: There shall be provided adequate
off-street parking and loading in accordance with the schedules in Chapter 8 of
this Title.
      5.   Improved Areas: Improved areas shall be at least one hundred feet
(100') from any residence or church, measured from the nearest point of any
such residence or church.
      6.   Fencing: Solar energy facilities shall be completely fenced with a
gate as defined above and the perimeter fence shall be designed to restrict
unauthorized access.
      7.   Signs: An information sign shall be posted and maintained at the
entrance(s) and at all four (4) sides of the fencing and each such information
sign shall list the name and phone number of the operator.
      8.   Power Lines: On site power lines between solar panels and inverters
shall be placed underground.
      9.   Identification And Warning Sign: The manufacturers or installer's
identification and appropriate warning sign shall be posted on or near the
solar panels in a clearly visible manner.
      10.   Batteries: If the solar energy facility consists of batteries or
storage of batteries, adequate design must be provided to ensure all local,
State and Federal requirements regulating outdoor battery storage have been
met.
      11.   Identification And Warning Sign: The manufacturers or installer's
identification and appropriate warning sign shall be posted on or near the
solar panels in a clearly visible manner.
      12.   Interference: The operation of a solar energy facility shall not
prevent, eliminate, or mitigate any interference with cellular, radio or
television signals; and the owner of a solar energy facility shall take such
reasonable steps as are necessary to prevent, eliminate, or mitigate any
interference with cellular, radio or television signals caused by the solar
energy facility.
      13.   Inspection: The Zoning Enforcing Officer and/or his delegate shall
be allowed to enter and may enter any property or solar energy facility from
time to time for which a special use or building permit has been issued to
conduct an inspection to determine whether the terms, requirements,
restrictions, and conditions stated in the special use or building permit or in
this Chapter have been met.
      14.   Compliance: Each solar energy facility shall comply with all
applicable local, State and Federal laws, statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations, and requirements.
      15.   Requirements, Restrictions, And Conditions: Any and all other
requirements, restrictions, or conditions as the City Council believes
necessary or appropriate and directs to further the purposes of such zoning
districts and to address any one or more or all of the factors set forth in
subsection
10-15-5C of this Chapter.
      16.   Change Of Special Use: No special use shall be changed except by
authorization of the City Council after a public hearing and recommendation by
the Plan Commission. (Ord. 3841, 4-16-2018)
      17.   Termination Of Special Use: A special use as described herein shall
terminate if:
         a.   The solar energy facility is not installed and functioning within
seven hundred thirty (730) calendar days from the date the special use permit
is issued; or
         b.   The solar energy facility is out of service or otherwise unused
or is abandoned for a continuous three hundred sixty five (365) calendar day
period.
      18.   Ownership: A special use as described herein shall be limited
solely to the sole record title owner(s) and tenant(s) of said property to be
granted such special use who exist as of the time of the granting of such
special use under this Chapter. As a condition prerequisite for the granting
and maintenance of such special use, any operator of any solar energy facility
or solar farm who is not the record title owner of said property granted such
special use must have at the time of the granting of such special use and
maintain thereafter a written lease with such existing owners for said property
that is the subject of the special use. Such operator shall provide a copy of
such written lease agreement to the City with the application for a special use
under this Chapter.
      19.   Property Ownership: A special use as described herein shall also
terminate, without further action, immediately upon any of said existing record
title owners, and/or tenants, and/or operators leasing or subletting or
assigning in whole or in part the special use property to anyone other than to
said existing record title owners and/or said existing tenants of the property
granted such special use.
A special use as described herein shall also terminate, without further action,
immediately upon any future transfer of ownership, in whole or in part, of said
property granted such special use to anyone other than to one of the existing
record title owners of said property granted such special use or to their
respective heirs or testamentary devisees. (Ord. 3869, 10-15-2018)
      20.   Termination: A special use as described herein shall, without
further action, immediately terminate: a) upon the exercise of any other use of
any kind, nature, or extent whatsoever on the property granted such special use
under; or b) upon the exercise of any other use not permitted in such zoning
district where the solar energy facility is located; or c) upon the majority
affirmative vote of the City Council, exercised in its sole discretion, upon
any violation of any one or more of the terms, restrictions, provisions, or
conditions of a special use, as described herein.
      21.   Restoration Requirements: The owner of a solar energy facility
shall provide the Zoning Enforcing Officer with a written notice of termination
of operations or abandonment of the solar energy facility. Within one hundred
twenty (120) consecutive calendar days immediately following the City's receipt
of such written notice or within one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar
days immediately following the termination of such special use as stated in
this Section, whichever event first occurs, the owner of each such solar energy
facility shall:
         a.   Remove all structures, buildings, solar panels, above ground
improvements, outdoor storage, fencing, equipment, and roadways; and
         b.   Completely remove all foundations, pads, and underground
electrical wires; and
         c.   Remove all hazardous material from the property and dispose of
the hazardous material in accordance with all applicable Federal, Illinois, and
City laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations; and
         d.   Restoration of all soil and vegetation.
      22.   Decommissioning Plan: Prior to issuance of any special use or
building permit for a solar energy facility, a decommission plan document that
details the planned shut down or removal of a solar energy facility from
operation or usage shall be submitted by the applicant to ensure that the solar
energy facilities are properly removed after their useful life or abandonment
or after termination of the special use. The decommission plan shall include
provisions for the aforesaid restoration requirements and a plan ensuring
financial resources will be available to fully decommission and restore the
site as required in this Chapter.
The owner of a solar energy facility shall submit an update to this
decommissioning plan every three (3) years following issuance of the special
use.
The City reserves the right to require additional information or components to
the decommissioning plan as the City deems necessary to ensure that an adequate
proposal is in place to decommission the solar energy facility in its entirety
and that adequate funds are available for such work.
      23.   Bonds: Prior to the issuance of a special use permit, the owner of
a solar energy facility shall provide the City with a performance and payment
bond with adequate security or surety bond in an amount determined adequate by
the City Council to guarantee the performance of the aforesaid restoration
requirements and decommissioning plan. (Ord. 3841, 4-16-2018)
10-15-5: SPECIAL USE PERMIT AND BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS - FEES:
   A.   Special use permit applications shall be submitted to the Zoning
Enforcing Officer. The application must be on a form approved by the Zoning
Enforcing Officer and must be accompanied by one complete set of completed
construction plans prepared, signed and sealed by a structural engineer and by
an architectural engineer both with a current Illinois license to practice in
Illinois and twenty (20) copies of a scaled drawing, other descriptive
information sufficient to enable the Plan Commission and City Council to
determine whether the requirements of this Chapter will be satisfied, and such
other information as may be specified on the application form. The Zoning
Enforcing Officer will review the application materials for completeness and
may request that the applicant provide additional information. When the Zoning
Enforcing Officer determines that the application is complete, the Zoning
Enforcing Officer will forward a copy of the application to the City Council
and Plan Commission. A copy of the application to the utility company that will
be purchasing electricity from the proposed site shall also be provided by the
applicant.
   B.   The City Council and Plan Commission will conduct a public hearing on
the application within sixty (60) days after the application is determined by
the Zoning Enforcing Officer to have been satisfactory completed and submitted
and following the statutory minimum 15-day public notice publication in the
Breeze- Courier or in a local newspaper published within the City.
   C.   The City Council may grant a special use permit if it determines that
the requirements of this Chapter are met and that granting the permit will not
unreasonably interfere with the orderly land use and development plans of the
City. The City Council and the Plan Commission may consider all relevant
factors when it decides to impose additional requirements, restrictions, or
conditions in addition to those set forth in Section
10-15-4 of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Proposed ingress and egress.
      2.   Proximity to transmission lines to link the system to the electric
power grid.
      3.   Number of solar panels and their location.
      4.   Nature of land use on adjacent and nearby properties.
      5.   Location of other energy systems in the surrounding area.
      6.   Surrounding topography.
      7.   Proximity to residential structures, residential zoning districts,
or areas identified for future residential use.
      8.   Design characteristics that may reduce or eliminate visual
obtrusiveness.
      9.   Possible adverse effects on animals and wildlife.
      10.   Possible adverse effects of stray voltage, interference with
broadcast signals, and noise.
      11.   Impact on the orderly development, property values, and esthetic
conditions within the County.
      12.   Map of surface drainage patterns.
      13.   Drainage tile map.
      14.   Compliance with Illinois drainage laws.
      15.   Recommendations of any aggrieved parties that may be affected by
the solar energy facility.
      16.   Consideration of any potential damage to any existing field tile
with installation of panels or fencing.
      17.   Whether there is a weed control plan for inside and outside of the
fenced in property.
      18.   Reasonable evidence of financial ability to construct the solar
energy facility as determined by the City Council is a condition precedent to
the issuance of any special use or building permit under this Chapter.
      19.   Any and all other factors relevant to the proposed solar energy
facility.
   D.   A special use permit approved by the City Council is required for each
solar energy facility. The application for a special use permit must be
accompanied by the application fee required for each solar energy facility. The
application fee is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each solar energy
facility.
   E.   A building permit is required for the installation of each solar energy
facility or solar farm. The application for a building permit must be
accompanied by the fee required for each solar energy facility or solar farm.
The building permit fee for each solar energy facility or solar farm is ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for up to and including the first two (2) mega
watts capacity and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each mega watt capacity
or part thereof that exceeds the first two (2) mega watts capacity.
   F.   Building permit applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcing
Officer. The application shall be on a form approved by the Zoning Enforcing
Officer from time to time and shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a
drawing that shows the proposed location and distance of the solar energy
facility with reference to the property lines of the parcel on which it is
located, the location of any residence, business, or public building on an
adjacent parcel, the right-of-way of any public road that is within five
hundred feet (500'), and such other information as may be specified on the
application form. The application shall also be accompanied by completed
construction plans for each solar energy facility that are prepared, signed and
sealed by a structural engineer and by an architectural engineer both with a
current license to practice in Illinois. Special inspections by approved
inspection agencies may also be required. The Zoning Enforcing Officer will
issue a building permit for a solar energy facility if the application
materials show that the proposed location meets the requirements of this
Chapter, the special use permit issued by the City, and all other applicable
provisions of this Code. If the application is approved, the Zoning Enforcing
Officer will return one copy of the drawing with the building permit and retain
the other copy with the application. If the application is rejected, the Zoning
Enforcing Officer will notify the applicant in writing and provide a written
statement of the reason why the application was rejected. The building permit
must be conspicuously posted on the premises so as to be visible to the public
at all times until construction or installation of the solar energy facility is
complete. (Ord. 3841, 4-16-2018)
   G.   Within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days immediately following the
completion of construction of the solar energy facility or solar farm, but in
any event prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Zoning
Enforcing Officer, the owners, tenants, and developer/operator thereof who are
granted such special use shall provide to the Zoning Enforcing Officer a
complete paper copy set and a complete digital set on a flash drive of "as
built" plans and specifications for the solar energy facility or solar farm.
(Ord. 3869, 10-15-2018)
10-15-6: PENALTY - REMEDIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, or any operator, person or entity
of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever to construct, install, maintain,
modify, or operate a solar energy system that is not in compliance with any one
or more of the terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions, or conditions as
stated in this Chapter or with any one or more of the terms, provisions,
requirements, restrictions, or conditions contained in a special use or
building permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   The City may revoke the special use and/or building permit if the solar
energy facility and/or solar farm is/are operated or maintain in violation of
any one or more of the terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions, or
conditions as stated in this Chapter or with any one or more of the terms,
provisions, requirements, restrictions, or conditions contained in a special
use or building permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other right or remedy of the
City, each owner, tenant, and operator that is granted such special use shall
be assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation of any one or more terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions or
conditions of such special use or for failure to comply with any provision of
this Chapter. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established by a
preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 3869, 10-15-2018)
ARTICLE A. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-15A-1: Purpose
10-15A-2: Definitions
10-15A-3: Solar Energy System - Regulations
10-15A-4: Self-Contained Solar Energy Systems
10-15A-5: Penalty
10-15A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter 15A is to preserve and protect the
public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare without significantly
increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a solar energy system; and
to allow for the orderly development of land, protect property values and
esthetic conditions with the City. (Ord. 4128, 10-3-2022)
10-15A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A building mounted solar energy system
that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural part of the building. Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems
include, but are not limited to,
Photovoltaic Cell or hot water systems that are contained within roofing
materials, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components.
BUILDING MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system, in which all
parts, are professionally mounted on the roof of a principal building or
accessory structure. A Building Mounted Solar Energy System includes Building
Integrated Solar Energy Systems, Flush Mounted Solar Energy Systems and Non-
Flush Mounted Solar Energy Systems.
CITY: The City of Taylorville, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
CITY CODE: The Taylorville City Code.
CITY COUNCIL: The Alderpersons and Mayor of the City.
CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire department of the City of Taylorville, Illinois,
a municipal corporation.
FLUSH MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A Building Mounted Solar Energy System that
is mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector, once
installed, projects no further than six (6) inches in height beyond the roof
surface.
GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A free-standing solar energy system that is
placed, affixed, or mounted to the ground.
NON-FLUSH MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A Building Mounted Solar Energy System
that is mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector, once
installed, projects more than six (6) inches in height beyond the roof surface
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, firm, company, limited
liability company, partnership, co-partnership, limited liability partnership,
association, organization, joint stock company, trust, estate, government
entity or political subdivision thereof, or any other legal entity, or their
legal representatives, agents, successors, or assigns, or any other group
acting as a unit.
SELF-CONTAINED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A professionally manufactured device that
utilizes Solar Collector(s) to produce small amounts of power that are
generated exclusively for the device. A Self-Contained Solar Energy System is
typically located in areas that are not in close proximity to a utility power
source. Examples of these types of Self-Contained Solar Energy Systems include
but are not limited to: light poles in parks for security or safety reasons,
pedestrian street crossing signs that alert oncoming traffic of the crossing,
natural resource observation systems (such as tracking flood level depths),
pumps that aerate an isolated pond, and attic fans mounted on a roof that are
used for ventilation purposes.
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE: Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the solar collector’s energy transformation process. A solar
collector surface does not include frames, supports and mounting hardware.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A professionally manufactured system accessory to the
principal use that utilizes solar collectors to
convert solar energy from the sun into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy
for storage and use and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power; provided, however, energy produced in excess of on-site
consumption may be sold back to the electric utility service provider that
serves the proposed site for use with the existing energy grid. Otherwise, for
purposes of this Chapter 15A, a solar energy system shall not include a “solar
energy facility” as defined in Section
10-15-3 of the City Code and which is primarily used to produce energy
(electricity) to be sold commercially and to be used off site from where it is
collected and converted. Such solar energy facilities are governed and
regulated by Chapter 15 of Title 10 of the City Code; and does not include
solar energy system authorized by the City Council for public utility and/or
public infrastructure purposes. (Ord. 4128, 10-3-2022)
10-15A-3: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - REGULATIONS:
   A.   Solar Energy Systems may be erected, constructed, or installed or used
on properties within the corporate limits of the City only in accordance with
and subject to the restrictions, limitations, conditions, and regulations under
this Chapter 15A.
   B.   Solar Energy Systems shall only be permitted if accessory to a
principal building and/or principal use.
   C.   Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter 15A to the contrary, the
erection, construction, installation, or use of Ground Mounted Solar Energy
Systems in a R-1 (Residential) District or in a R-2 (Residential) District is
subject to the approval or disapproval of the City Council by a majority
affirmative vote.
   D.   Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter 15A to the contrary, no solar
energy system shall be erected, constructed, installed, used, or permitted on
any vacant property located in a in a R-1 (Residential) District or in a R-2
(Residential) District without any residential building located thereon.
   E.   Any person seeking to erect, construct, or install or use a Solar
Energy System on property located within the corporate limits of the City shall
obtain a Building Permit from the City and a Photovoltaic System Permit from
the City’s Fire Department prior to the erection, construction, or installation
or use of any Solar Energy System. As part of the application for said Permits,
the following fee, information, and documents shall be provided to the City:
      1.   A non-refundable fee of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) shall be
paid to the City.
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person erecting,
constructing, or installing the Solar Energy System.
      3.   A description of the proposed Solar Energy System that includes all
of the following items and information:
         a.   All plans, dimensions, and specifications showing the proposed
location of the proposed Solar Energy System, which plans, dimensions, and
specifications shall be prepared by and include the signature of a state
licensed professional engineer.
         b.   Evidence showing compliance with all applicable zoning setback
requirements.
         c.   Evidence showing compliance with applicable setback and/or height
regulations.
         d.   The distance to any roads or overhead utility lines.
         e.   Evidence of compliance with each regulation contained in this
Chapter 15A.
      4.   Utility Notification: No grid-tied or utility intertie photovoltaic
(PV) system shall be erected, constructed or installed or used until evidence
has been given to the City’s Health and Building Officer that the person
seeking to erect, construct, or install or use a Solar Energy System has
submitted notification to the utility company of their intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid solar energy systems are
exempt from this requirement.
      5.   The City Fire Department shall review said application for a
Building Permit to verify that adequate roof access will be allowed for
emergency personnel in the case of an emergency and/or to determine any safety
concerns concerning the placement of Solar Energy Systems; and no Solar Energy
System shall be erected, constructed, or installed or used until and unless the
City Fire Department approves of such Solar Energy System and the proposed
placement thereof and has issued its Photovoltaic System Permit.
      6.   Solar Energy Systems shall be installed according to manufacturer
specifications and in accordance with this Chapter 15A and with all applicable
City building codes, electrical codes, fire codes, and with all other
applicable City, State of Illinois, and federal codes, ordinances, laws,
statutes, and regulations, as amended from time to time, concerning the use and
operation of Solar Energy Systems.
      7.   Solar Energy System with electric components must have a UL listing.
      8.   All Solar Energy Systems shall have a lockable, utility accessible,
load breaking, manual disconnect switch, which can be utilized to connect and/
or disconnect all electric Solar Energy System components. The manual
disconnect switch shall be located not more than four (4) feet from the
building’s electric service meter. The manual disconnect switch shall not be
obstructed from access in any manner, including, but not limited to,
landscaping, shrubs, trees, terraces, fencing, etc.
      9.   All Solar Energy Systems shall have the following caution labels
installed and/or placed on the Solar Energy System:
         a.   A “Caution Solar Electric System” label shall be installed and/or
placed adjacent to the manual disconnect switch.
         b.   “Caution Solar Circuit” directional labels shall be placed on any
and all DC raceways and equipment and shall depict the direction of the
electrical flow inside said raceway and/or other equipment. Said “Caution Solar
Circuit” directional labels shall be located and spaced out not more than every
ten (10) feet along said raceway.
         c.   All caution labels shall be weather resistant and reflective,
with a red background and white lettering with a minimum of 3/8 inch lettering.
      10.   Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems and/or Flush Mounted Solar
Energy Systems are permitted to be installed on any roof area.
      11.   Non-Flush Mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted on a building
with a flat roof if the solar collector(s) is/are completely screened from view
to an observer five (5) feet above the ground at any point along an abutting
property line.
      12.   The solar collector surface area and set back area on the roof for
Building Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be provided and shown on the
application with review and approval by the City Fire Department.
      13.   The solar collector surface area of Building Mounted Solar Energy
Systems shall not exceed more than 60% of the roof area of the principal
building on the property.
      14.   Reflection angles from solar collector surfaces shall be oriented
away from neighboring windows.
      15.   Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be permitted only as an
accessory use on property that is zoned and located in one of the following
zoning districts: AG-1 (Agricultural) District, AG-2 (Agricultural) District,
C-1 (Commercial) District, C-2 (Commercial) District, I-1 (Industrial)
District, or I-2 (Industrial) District, or I-3 (Industrial) District.
      16.   Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems may be permitted only as an
accessory use on property that is zoned and located in a R-1 (Residential)
District or in a R-2 (Residential) District, but only with approval by majority
vote of the City Council.
      17.   Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not be placed in any
front yard or within the side and/or rear yard setbacks; and fencing shall be
installed around the perimeter of Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems. Such
fencing shall obscure the view of the Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems from
neighboring properties and from the public view of vehicles passing by the
property where the Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems are located.
      18.   Maximum Permitted Height & Building Projection/Extension:
         a.   The Solar Energy System shall conform to the height regulations
of the zoning district in which the property where the Solar Energy System is
to be erected, constructed, installed, or mounted is located.
         b.   Non-Flush Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not extend above the
highest point on the roof line or a parapet wall.
         c.   Solar Energy Systems shall not project/extend beyond the exterior
wall of any building on which said Small Solar Energy System has been
installed, mounted, or built.
      19.   An Illinois electrician must install and connect all electrical
components of Solar Energy Systems that are erected, constructed, or installed;
and all such electrical work shall be done in compliance with applicable rules,
regulations, requirements, codes, and standards as set forth in the 2020
edition of the National Electrical Code (NEC) and/or NFPA 70 (part of the
National Fire Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, a
private trade association), or the subsequent current edition in existence at
the time of such electrical work. (Ord. 4128, 10-3-2022)
10-15A-4: SELF-CONTAINED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A Self-Contained Solar Energy System shall be limited to an aggregate Solar
Collector Surface area of less than or equal to 6 square feet. Otherwise, the
provisions of this Chapter 15A shall not apply to a Self-Contained Solar Energy
System. (Ord. 4128, 10-3-2022)
10-15A-5: PENALTY:
In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedy available to the City, any
person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter 15A shall, for each
offense, be fined and punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code for each separate offense. Each day upon which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 4128,
10-3-2022)
CHAPTER 16
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
10-16-1: Purpose, Intent, And Applicability
10-16-2: Definitions
10-16-3: Special Use Only
10-16-4: Special Use Permit Applications - Application Fee And Annual Renewal
Fee
10-16-5: Penalty - Remedies
10-16-1: PURPOSE, INTENT, AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to provide regulations regarding
the retail dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate
limits of the City. Each adult-use cannabis dispensing organization shall
comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(P.A. 101-0027) (Act), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided in this Chapter. In the
event the Act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or City regulations
shall apply. (Ord. 4105, 5-16-2022)
10-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A retail facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing only
at retail cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or
related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis
patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
SUCH RETAIL FACILITY: An adult-use cannabis dispensing organization. (Ord.
4105, 5-16-2022)
10-16-3: SPECIAL USE ONLY:
   A.    An Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization may only be located and
permitted in an Agricultural-1 (AG-1) District, Agricultural-2 (AG-2) District,
Commercial-1 (C-1) District, Commercial-2 (C-2) District, Industrial-1 (I-1)
District, Industrial-2 (I-2) District, or Industrial-3 (I-3) District, but only
when authorized and approved as a Special Use by the City Council after public
hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, only one (1) Special Use
permit for an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall be issued and in
effect within the City at the same time, unless and until the City Council
would affirmatively vote, in their sole discretion, to increase the number of
said Special Use permits.
   B.   In determining whether to grant such Special Use the following
components of a proposed Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization (also
referred to in this Chapter as “such retail facility”) shall be evaluated based
on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property in the
context of the existing and intended future use of the properties including the
following factors:
      1.   The impact of such retail facility on existing or planned uses
located within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   The proposed structure in which such retail facility will be
located, including co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square
footage, security installations/security plan and building code compliance.
      3.   The hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/
employees.
      4.   The anticipated parking demand and available private parking supply.
      5.   The anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent
roadway capacity and access to such roadways.
      6.   The site design, including access points and internal site
circulation.
      7.   The proposed signage plan.
      8.    The compliance with all requirements provided in paragraph C. of
Section 10-16-3 following, as applicable.
      9.   Such other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance
with this Chapter.
   C.   A Special Use permit for an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
retail facility (also referred to herein as “such retail facility”) as may be
permitted in the zoning districts described in above paragraph A of Section 10-
16-3 shall also be subject to the following additional requirements,
restrictions, and conditions:
      1.   Such retail facility shall not be located within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home, public park, or public library. Learning centers and
vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school
for purposes of this subparagraph.
      2.   Such retail facility shall not be located in a dwelling unit or
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing
property zoned or used for residential purposes.
      3.   At least Seventy-Five Percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by such retail facility shall be devoted to the activities of
such retail facility as authorized by the Act, and no such retail facility
shall sell food for consumption on the premises other than as authorized in
paragraph 5 below in the same tenant space.
      4.   Such retail facility shall not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
      5.   Such retail facility shall not permit or allow or host any on-site
consumption of cannabis.
      6.   Such retail facility shall provide for one off street parking space
per 100 square feet of floor area; provided, however, that the City may require
that additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed under
this Chapter.
      7.   No Special Use shall be changed except by authorization of the City
Council after a public hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
      8.   A Special Use as described herein shall be limited solely to the
sole record title owner(s) and tenant(s) of such retail facility to be granted
such Special Use who exist as of the time of the granting of such Special Use
under this Chapter. As a condition prerequisite for the granting and
maintenance of such Special Use, any operator of such retail facility who is
not the record title owner of said property granted such special use must have
at the time of the granting of such Special Use and maintain thereafter a
written lease with such existing owners for such retail facility that is the
subject of the Special Use. Such operator shall provide a copy of such written
lease agreement to the City with the application for a Special Use under this
Chapter.
      9.   A Special Use as described herein shall also terminate, without
further action, immediately upon any of said existing record title owners, and/
or tenants, and/or operators leasing or subletting or assigning in whole or in
part such retail facility to anyone other than to said existing record title
owners and/or said existing tenants of such retail facility granted such
Special Use.
      10.   A Special Use as described herein shall also terminate, without
further action, immediately upon any future transfer of ownership, in whole or
in part, of said property granted such Special Use to anyone other than to one
of the existing record title owners of such retail facility granted such
Special Use or to their respective heirs or testamentary devisees.
      11.   A Special Use as described herein shall also, without further
action, immediately terminate: a) upon the exercise of any other use of any
kind, nature, or extent whatsoever on the property granted such Special Use
under; or b) upon the exercise of any other use not permitted in such zoning
district where such retail facility is located; or c) upon the majority
affirmative vote of the City Council, exercised in its sole discretion, upon
any violation of any one or more of the terms, restrictions, provisions, or
conditions of a Special Use, as described herein.
      12.   Any and all other requirements, restrictions, or conditions as the
City Council believes necessary or appropriate and directs to further the
purposes of such zoning districts and to address any one or more or all of the
factors set forth in this Chapter.
      13.   A Special Use as described herein shall also immediately terminate,
without further action, if a Five Thousand Dollar ($5,000.00) annual
nonrefundable renewal fee is not paid to the City on each 12-month anniversary
date of the initial issuance of the Special Use permit.
      14.   The applicant for a Special Use permit shall file an affidavit with
the City affirming compliance with a Special Use that may be granted under this
Chapter and compliance with any and all other applicable requirements of the
Taylorville City Code. (Ord. 4105, 5-16-2022)
10-16-4: SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION - APPLICATION FEE AND ANNUAL RENEWAL
FEE:
   A.    A Special Use permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Enforcing Officer. The application must be on a form approved by the Zoning
Enforcing Officer and must be accompanied by such documents and descriptive
information sufficient to enable the Plan Commission and City Council to
determine whether the requirements of this Chapter will be satisfied, and such
other information as may be specified on the application form. The application
for a Special Use permit must also be accompanied by the application fee
required for each such retail facility. The Special Use permit application fee
is a non-refundable Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for each application for
such retail facility; and the aforesaid annual nonrefundable renewal fee for
said Special Use permit shall be Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).
The Zoning Enforcing Officer will review the application materials for
completeness and may request that the applicant provide additional documents
and/or information. When the Zoning Enforcing Officer determines that the
application is complete, the Zoning Enforcing Officer will forward a copy of
the application to the City Council and Plan Commission.
   B.   The City Council and Plan Commission will conduct a public hearing on
the application within ninety (90) days after the application is determined by
the Zoning Enforcing Officer to have been satisfactorily completed and
submitted and following the statutory minimum 15-day public notice publication
in the Breeze-Courier or in a local newspaper published within the City. (Ord.
4105, 5-16-2022)
10-16-5: PENALTY - REMEDIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, or any operator, person or entity
of any kind, nature or extent whatsoever to own, lease, maintain, or operate an
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization within the City without a Special
Use permit issued by the City that is not in compliance with any one or more of
the terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions, or conditions as stated in
this Chapter or with any one or more of the terms, provisions, requirements,
restrictions, or conditions contained in a Special Use issued pursuant to this
Chapter.
   B.   The City may revoke the Special Use permit if the Adult-Use Cannabis
Dispensing Organization is operated or maintained in violation of any one or
more of the terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions, or conditions as
stated in this Chapter or with any one or more of the terms, provisions,
requirements, restrictions, or conditions contained in a Special Use permit
issued pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other right or remedy of the
City, each owner, tenant, and operator that is granted such Special Use permit
shall be assessed a fine or penalty in an amount of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each violation of any one or more terms, provisions, requirements, restrictions
or conditions of such Special Use or for failure to comply with any provision
of this Chapter. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense. A violation hereof may be established by a
preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 4105, 5-16-2022)
TITLE 11
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Jurisdiction; Contents
11-1-3: Authority And Purpose
11-1-4: Severability
11-1-5: Interpretation; When Plats Required
11-1-6: Definitions
11-1-7: Official Map
11-1-8: Plat Officer
11-1-9: Variances
11-1-10: Amendments
11-1-11: Penalty
11-1-12: Subdivision Review Procedure
11-1-13: Soil And Water Conservation District
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title may be cited as THE CITY OF TAYLORVILLE, ILLINOIS, SUBDIVISION AND
OFFICIAL MAP ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-1-2: JURISDICTION; CONTENTS:
   A.   The subdivision and site development jurisdiction of the city shall
include all land lying within the city and within the areas set forth and
described as being contiguous or adjacent to the city within one and one-half
(11/2) miles from the city limits, but outside the city.
   B.   When the one and one-half (11/2) mile subdivision and site development
jurisdiction of the city and that of another municipality overlap, a
contractual agreement between the city and the other municipality may be
established which designates subdivision jurisdiction boundaries in the overlap
area. In the absence of such agreement, the jurisdiction shall extend to a
median line equidistant from the city's boundary and the boundary of the other
municipality nearest to the boundary of the city at any given point on the
line. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
   C.   The subdivision maps herein referred to and identified by the titles
thereon as "Taylorville and Environs, Official Map 'A', and Official Map 'B',
Lake Taylorville Area", are adopted herein as a part hereof together with all
explanatory matters thereon. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-1-3: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Authority: This title is adopted under the authority of division 12,
Illinois municipal code 1 .
   B.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this title to promote growth and
development and to regulate and control the division of land within the
subdivision approval jurisdiction of the city in order to: 1) provide for the
legal and orderly division of land by requiring proper description,
monumentation and recording of subdivided land, and 2) to promote growth of the
community which protects the public health and safety and provides essential
public services to existing and future residents. The goals and objectives of
the subdivision regulations and official maps as set forth and made a part
hereof are as follows:
      1.   To provide for the harmonious development of the city and its
environs as outlined and for the coordination of streets and subdivisions with
other existing or planned streets and for the preservation of adequate open
spaces for traffic, light and air and for the distribution of population and
traffic to the extent that favorable conditions in regard to health, safety and
general welfare are protected or created;
      2.   To assure that development will follow proposals of the overall
comprehensive plan for the city and the environs embraced herein;
      3.   To assure that adjacent developments will properly relate to one
another;
      4.   To assure that a coordinated effort will be made between utilities,
service and developers so that streets and other improvements will be prope///
/.rly installed; and
      5.   To assure that a minimum level of improvements will be required of
all subdividers. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
11-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, provision or portion of this title is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the title
shall not be affected by that decision. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-1-5: INTERPRETATION; WHEN PLATS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a subdivider of land within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the city to subdivide land into lots, blocks, streets, alleys,
or public open space unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the state
and the provisions of this title. It shall be unlawful to divide land without
obtaining tract survey approval, when required.
   A.   Conflicts With Deeds And Covenants: In case of any conflict between
this title or part thereof and the whole or part of any existing or future
private covenants or deeds, the most restrictive shall apply.
   B.   Exemptions From Provisions: The provisions of this title shall not
apply, except as noted with respect to tract surveys, and no plat is required
in any of the following instances 1 :
      1.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
(5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access;
      2.   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      3.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land except where the transfer results in the creation of
another buildable lot;
      4.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for the use
as a right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines, which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      5.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      6.   The conveyance of land owned for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with public use;
      7.   Conveyance made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
      8.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements
of access. If a division is made prior to October 1, 1973, for which an
exemption is claimed pursuant to this subsection B8, and the division results
in one part being greater than five (5) acres and the other part being less
than five (5) acres, then the subsequent division of the part greater than five
(5) acres shall qualify for the exemption set forth in subsection B9 of this
section. If a division is made on or after October 1, 1973, for which an
exemption is claimed pursuant to this subsection B8, and the division results
in one part being greater than five (5) acres and the other part being less
than five (5) acres, then the subsequent division of the part greater than five
(5) acres shall not qualify for the exemption set forth in subsection B9 of
this section.
      9.   The sale of a single lot less than five (5) acres from a tract of
five (5) acres or larger when a survey is made by a registered surveyor;
provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
subsequent lots from the same larger tract of land, as determined by the
dimensions and configuration of the larger tract on October 1, 1973, and
provided that this exemption does not invalidate any other local requirements
applicable to the subdivision of the land.
      10.   The division of a lot of record as of March 3, 1998, if the new
lots created by such division, together with any structures existing as of the
date of the division, meet all requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city
with respect to the zoning district in which such new lots are located, and not
involving any new streets or easements of access. Provided, however, that this
exemption shall not apply to the further division of any lots created thereby.
   C.   Tract Survey: A tract survey shall be required for a division or
subdivision of land for which no plat is required under subsection B of this
section. All tract surveys shall be approved and recorded in accordance with
sections
11-10-1 through
11-10-4 of this title. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.
11-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
All words used in the present tense include the future tense; all words in the
singular include the plural, and all words in the plural include the singular.
   ALLEY: A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side
of a property which abuts a street.
AS-BUILT PLANS: Final plans showing any changes from the construction plans,
indicating in detail how the project was constructed. Such plans show all
public facilities as built on the surface and underground, both on public
property and on easements and also indicate all private utility locations that
are known. Details shown include: sanitary and storm sewers, manholes, invert
grades, bench marks, location of sanitary sewer laterals, street inlets,
hydrants, general flow of surface water, and grades for drainage swales on the
lot. The "as-built plans" carry the seal of a registered professional engineer
certifying that construction was completed in conformance with the plans and
specifications.
   BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets,
parks, railroad rights of way or bodies of water.
   CITY: The city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL: The council of the city of Taylorville, Illinois.
   CITY ENGINEER 1 : City engineer of Taylorville, Illinois, or person
designated to act in the capacity of the city engineer in the review of
engineering data as outlined herein where the services of a city engineer are
specifically mentioned. If a person is designated to act in the capacity of
city engineer, said person must be a registered professional engineer with a
civil engineering degree.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The drawings prepared in the manner and containing the
data, documents and information required by chapter 4 of this title.
   COVENANT: A private agreement written into the deed in which property owners
of the development promise to do or refrain from doing certain acts.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A permanent street, with a single access point, that ends in a
turnaround and cannot be further extended without taking property not dedicated
as a street. A cul-de- sac begins at its point of intersection with a street
with multiple access.
   DEDICATE: To transfer ownership of land, either fee simple or a partial
interest, for a public use, and for a public body to accept it for that public
use.
   DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural watercourse, swale, depression or ditch for the
drainage of surface waters and storm waters.
   EASEMENT: A liberty, privilege or advantage which a party or the general
public may have regarding the land of another. The remainder of the rights in
the land remain in the hands of the owner who retains the legal title.
   EXISTING TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY: Any public road in the township which is owned
and maintained by the township.
   FINAL PLAT: The drawing of a subdivision prepared in the manner and
containing the data, documents and information required by this title showing
lots of record and which is to be recorded.
   FLAG LOT: A lot located behind another lot or parcel with access to a public
street only by a narrow strip of land extending from the buildable area of the
lot to the street.
   HALF STREET: A street dedicated to less than its full planned width.
   LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A form of land subdivision which involves the
construction of a multi-family or commercial building on a lot or parcel of
land one acre or more in size or two (2) or more principal multi-family or
commercial buildings on a lot or parcel of land of any size served by an
internal street and utility distribution.
   LOCATION MAP: A preliminary drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
containing the data and information required by this title.
   LOT: The tract within a subdivision marked by the subdivider as a numbered
tract to be offered as a unit of land for sale or transfer of ownership.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION: The creation of a total of up to four (4) lots (counting
the original tract from which the lots are created) which front along a public
road.
   OFFICIAL MAP: Map established herein 1  and on which may be indicated
proposed public improvements for the purpose of coordinating construction of
public improvements with future community development.
   OFFICIAL PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Taylorville, Illinois,
comprehensive plan.
   OWNER: Any or all persons, entities, trusts, or corporations holding legal
title to the land to be subdivided. If the owner is a trust, all beneficiaries
shall be listed as owners. If the owner is a corporation, all principals and
officers shall be listed as owners.
   PAVEMENT WIDTH: The distance from the edge of the pavement to the edge of
the pavement but not including curb and gutter.
   PLAN COMMISSION: Plan commission of the city of Taylorville, Illinois 3 .
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A form of land subdivision that allows the
development of ten (10) or more acres of land with variations of some of the
restrictions of standard zoning and subdivision regulations.
   PLAT: The action of officially subdividing land or the final plat which is
approved by the village and recorded.
   PLAT OFFICER: The person appointed to occupy the office created herein, in
which office is vested the chief administrative and enforcement duties as
outlined in these standards 1 .
   PRELIMINARY PLAN: A plan of proposed subdivision or greater area prepared in
the manner, and containing the data, documents and information, required by
this title.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which the principal use of the lot, on
which it is located, is conducted.
   PRIVATE STREET: A purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the
use of a limited number of persons or purposes and which is not a publicly
dedicated street.
   PUBLIC CROSSWALK: A ten foot (10') right of way through the interior of a
block in which a sidewalk meeting the construction standards of this title is
built.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainageway,
water main, sidewalk, parkway or other facility which the village or other
governmental unit owns, maintains or operates.
   RECORD: To file a final plat approved by the city of Taylorville with the
Christian County recorder of deeds.
   RESERVE STRIP: Narrow strip of land between a street adjacent to the
property line and the adjacent property, the strip being retained in private
ownership to prevent access of the neighboring property to an improved and
dedicated street.
   REVERSE FRONTAGE: A condition whereby both fronts and rears of properties
face on streets.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land which has been dedicated in fee simple to a
public body for streets, alleys and other public improvements as determined by
the public body.
   SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit connected with the sewer system that
is designated to carry liquids and solids other than storm water to the
Taylorville sanitary district.
   SERVICE ACCESS STREET: A street parallel to and adjacent to a major street
which provides access from the major street to abutting properties.
   SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance required between the building and
the lot line adjoining the street right of way.
   SHALL: Means something is mandatory; "May" means something is discretionary.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A layout of the site prepared in the manner and
containing the information required by this title.
   SKETCH PLAN: A general layout of a proposed subdivision prepared in the
manner and containing the information required by this title.
   STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for carrying storm sewer to a drainage
course.
   STORM WATER: Water from roof downspouts, basement footing perimeter drains
and yard drains as well as surface runoff.
   STREET, ROAD AND ALLEY: Rights of way dedicated to and accepted for the
public use and affording a means of access to abutting property.
Alley: Minor way used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of
property otherwise abutting on a street.
Collector Street (Or Collector Road): A trafficway which carries traffic
between sections of the community or which serves as a connector between rural
areas and the community.
Local Street (Or Local Road): A trafficway which serves primarily for access to
abutting property.
Major Street (Or Major Highway): A trafficway connecting communities or
connecting to limited access trafficways which, in turn, connect to other
communities.
   STUB STREET: A street which is intended to be extended but which temporarily
ends.
   SUBDIVIDER: Any or all owners, agents or persons, controlling land who
commence proceedings under this title by submitting location and sketch maps to
the plan commission or by making land improvements in the form of buildings,
drives, and utilities, but not necessarily involving the actual division of
land.
   SUBDIVISION OF LAND: The: a) division of land into two (2) or more parts,
any of which is less than five (5) acres in size (see subsection
11-1-5B of this chapter for exemptions), b) dedication of streets or easements
of access, or c) creation of a planned unit development. In the event a
subdivision is a planned unit development, the standards and regulations of
this title shall govern.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS: The Christian County superintendent of highways.
   SURETY: A bonding agency that is financially qualified to do business in the
state of Illinois.
   THROUGH LOT: Any lot which is not a corner lot and which adjoins two (2)
streets that are parallel or within forty five degrees (45°) of being parallel
to each other.
   TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER: The township highway commissioner for the
township in which the subdivision is located.
   TRACT SURVEY: A land survey, made by an Illinois professional land surveyor,
complying with the requirements of section 1 of "An Act to Revise the Law in
Relation to Plats" 5  as now or hereafter amended, and section 35 of the
"Revenue Act of 1939" 6  as now or hereafter amended.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: Any sign, signal marking or device placed on or
adjacent to a street or highway by authority of the city of Taylorville, the
state of Illinois department of transportation, or Christian County
superintendent of highways.
   WATER DEPARTMENT: The water department of the city of Taylorville. (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998; amd. Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 9, article G of this code.
1 1. See section
  11-1-7 of this chapter.
3 2. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
1 1. See section
  11-1-8 of this chapter.
5 1. 765 ILCS 205/0.01.
6 2. 35 ILCS 200/9-55.
11-1-7: OFFICIAL MAP 3 :
   A.   Map Established And Adopted: There is hereby established for the city
and contiguous area an official map which is included herein by reference and
adopted as part of these regulations.
   B.   Procedures: The official map may show sites for planned public
facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the official map
may include, but are not limited to, sites for new trafficways or widening of
existing trafficways, school and recreational sites, public building sites and
sites for future storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility
easements.
      1.   Whenever the official map indicates the necessity for providing a
site for a planned public facility, the city council may require that the site
for the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting
approval to such plat, and furthermore, that such site be held for that
specific use for a period of one year from the date of final plat approval.
      2.   Whenever a site for public use shown on the official map has been
required to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the responsible agency having
jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated or commence
proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from date of
approval of such plat, and if it does not do so within such period of one year,
the land so designated may then be used by the owners in any other manner
consistent with this title and the appropriate zoning regulations 2 .
   C.   Amendments Or Additions To Map: Amendments to the official map,
including the indication of additional public sites to be shown on the map,
shall be considered amendments to this title and, therefore, shall be as
specified in section
11-1-10 of this chapter. Any agency requesting the establishment on the
official map of a future public site or easement which is not included in the
comprehensive plan shall indicate to the plan commission the need for the site
in the particular location specified. The plan commission, before making a
favorable recommendation for the inclusion on the official map of such site by
the city council, shall find that the public site location is consistent with
the comprehensive plan of the community and shall so indicate in its minutes.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
 
Notes
3 3. See also subsection
  11-1-2C of this chapter.
2 1. See title 10 of this code.
11-1-8: PLAT OFFICER:
The office of plat officer is hereby established in which is vested the duty of
administration of these regulations as specified herein and such other related
regulations as are assigned to that office by the city council. The plat
officer, to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council, shall be a person who is qualified by professional or practical
training and experience to conduct the affairs of that office. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
11-1-9: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: The city council hereby reserves authority to vary the
strict applications of any of the provisions herein contained, but such
variances shall only be exercised upon written recommendation of the plan
commission which, in turn, shall make such recommendation upon recommendation
of the plat officer, city engineer or upon its own motion. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
   B.   Site Development Plans: The standards and requirements of these
regulations may be modified by the city council in the case of "Site
Development Plan" as defined herein, in accordance with the standards and
requirements as set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
11-1-10: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this subdivision ordinance shall be made by the city council as
provided by statute; providing, however, that no amendment shall be adopted
without first referring the proposed amendment to the plan commission and
receiving a report therefrom; except, however, if no report is received within
ninety (90) days, it shall be deemed to be approved by the plan commission.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation of this title
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-1-12: SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURE:
 No. Of Prints Reviewed By Payment Approval Valid For
                 No. Of Prints Reviewed By   Payment           Approval Valid
                                                               For
Location map                   TPC1
minor            20            City council  $100.00           1 year
subdivision
Location and     21            TPC1          $100.00           1 year
sketch maps                    City council
Preliminary plan 19            TPC1          $500.00           3 years
                               City council
Construction     6             City engineer Plan review and   1 year
plans                                        inspection fee2
                               TPC1          $500.00 plus plan
Final plat       20            City council  review and        2 years
                                             inspection fee2
Preliminary plan 19            TPC1          $500.00           3 years
reaffirmation                  City council                    renewable 1 time
Minor            17            TPC1          $275.00           2 years
subdivision                    City council
Large scale                    TPC1          $250.00 plus plan
development      20            City council  review and        2 years
                                             inspection fee2
Tract survey     5             Plat officer  $100.00           180 days
Site development               TPC1          $250.00 plus plan
plan             20            City council  review and        2 years
                                             inspection fee2
 
Notes:
1.   TPC: Taylorville plan commission.
2.   Plan review and inspection fee: A minimum of 3 percent of estimated
construction cost for public improvements and/or public infrastructures (see
section
11-5-3 of this title).
(Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
11-1-13: SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT:
   A.   Costs: Prior to approval of any petition, application, or proposal to
subdivide any vacant or agricultural lands regarding any territory located in
the Christian County soil and water conservation district, the applicant shall
pay the city clerk the actual amount charged by the Christian County soil and
water conservation district to the city to review and/or report to the city
regarding any such application or petition or proposal and any and all
instruments or documents incident thereto. (Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
CHAPTER 2
LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Purpose
11-2-2: Submission Requirements
11-2-3: Subdivision Site And Site Plan Suitability
11-2-4: Review Process
11-2-5: Validity Of Location And Sketch Maps Approval
11-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the location and sketch maps is to determine the suitability of
the site for subdividing and subsequent development. Suitability shall be
measured by the conformance with the comprehensive plan, effect on natural
resources and natural systems, ability to provide adequate essential services
to the site and conformance with the goals of this title set forth in
subsection 11-1-3B of this title. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-2-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
Information filed with the plan commission shall be of sufficient detail so
that the commission can determine whether and how essential services will be
provided and if the site is suitable.
   A.   Location Map: The location map shall consist of data added to an
existing base map of a suitable scale, covering an area of at least one mile
radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map shall show the
following information:
      1.   North point, scale and date.
      2.   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      3.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      4.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
   B.   Sketch Map: The sketch map shall show the general layout and character
of the proposed development. The scale shall be no more than one hundred feet
(100') to the inch. Exact dimension or engineering plans are not required. The
sketch map shall show the following information:
      1.   North point, scale and date.
      2.   Area to be subdivided with general dimensions.
      3.   Proposed street network and alignments with existing streets.
      4.   General lot layout.
      5.   Potential open space - public parks, existing waterways, drainage or
retention areas, etc.
      6.   Outstanding or unusual natural features and vegetation. (Ord. 2831,
3-3-1998)
   C.   Additional Information: In addition to the information required below,
any other information necessary for the plan commission to determine site
suitability or adequacy of mitigating factors as outlined in section 11-2-3 of
this chapter shall be submitted.
      1.   Title of the proposed subdivision.
      2.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and land surveyor. A contact person should be designated.
      3.   Proposed use and approximate number of housing units.
      4.   Existing and proposed zoning.
      5.   Method of sewage disposal.
      6.   Method of water supply.
      7.   Electric service provider.
      8.   Fire protection district.
      9.   School district.
      10.   Township.
      11.   Gas service provider.
      12.   Percolation test results (1 test per each 4 lots). (Ord. 3216, 1-
18-2005)
11-2-3: SUBDIVISION SITE AND SITE PLAN SUITABILITY:
   A.   Essential Utilities And Public Services: Land proposed to be subdivided
shall have essential utilities and public services available within a
reasonable distance and time period. Land to which these essential utilities
and services will not be so provided shall be deemed unsuitable for
subdividing. Essential utilities and services and criteria for determining if
they can adequately be provided shall include the following:
      1.   Sewage Disposal:
         a.   Sanitary sewer service provided by the city of Taylorville shall
be the preferred method of sewage disposal. If sanitary sewer service is
currently available to the land proposed to be subdivided, it shall be the
sewage disposal method used.
         b.   If sanitary sewer service is not currently available but the land
is within the ultimate service area as identified in the Taylorville sanitary
district's facility plan and the sanitary district determines that sewer
service will be available within a reasonable period, the land may be deemed
suitable for subdividing if:
            (1)   On site sewage disposal facilities can and will be provided.
         c.   If the land cannot be served with sanitary trunk sewers within a
reasonable period, or if the land is not within the ultimate service area as
identified in the Taylorville sanitary district's facility plan and therefore
shall be unsuitable for subdividing unless it can be shown that adequate
private sewage systems can be provided.
      2.   Water Supply:
         a.   An Illinois environmental protection agency approved public water
supply shall be the preferred method of water supply.
         b.   Private wells may be permitted for development outside the city
if the developer can demonstrate that it is not feasible to extend water mains
to the land proposed to be subdivided. As a minimum guideline, the extension of
one hundred twenty feet plus or minus (120'±) of water main per lot of the
preliminary plan shall be deemed feasible. This distance shall be measured
between the nearest suitable public water main and the proposed development.
Mains within the development shall not count toward this extension footage.
      3.   Fire Protection: Land proposed to be subdivided shall meet the
following conditions in order to be deemed suitable for subdividing:
         a.   Land shall be within the area served or to be served by the
Taylorville fire department or within a fire protection district, if possible;
         b.   There shall be a public road providing adequate access for
emergency vehicles to the site. Roadways shall have an all weather driving
surface (minimum oil and chip) with twenty feet (20') of unobstructed width.
Where a bridge is required to be used as a part of the most direct fire truck
access route, it shall have a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen feet six
inches (13'6") and be constructed and maintained to carry the live loads
imposed by firetrucks; and
         c.   There shall be a system of water mains or other source of water
adequate for firefighting purposes. Specific fire flows shall be determined by
the Taylorville fire department using a standard published by the insurance
service office entitled "Guide For Determination Of Required Fire Flow".
         d.   A full sprinkler system installed with adequate water available,
as determined by the National Fire Protection Association standards 13 or 13D
depending on the occupancy of the building, shall also satisfy this
requirement.
      4.   Streets: The suitability of existing streets for access to the
proposed subdivision and/or for incorporation into the proposed subdivision's
street system shall also be considered. A street shall be considered suitable
if:
         a.   The street is constructed of all weather material (concrete,
asphalt, oil mat); and has an adequate base course.
         b.   The paved area is at least twenty feet (20') wide with a roadbed
twenty four feet (24') wide; and
         c.   The street has good drainage.
If only a portion of the criteria set forth in this subsection A4 is met, the
city engineer, a representative of the Taylorville fire department, and a
representative of the plan commission shall make the recommendation as to
whether the street is suitable for the proposed development or what
improvements must be undertaken to make it possible.
      5.   Police Protection: In determining the suitability of land for
subdivision purposes, the distance that police would have to travel to respond
to a call for service shall be considered. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
   B.   Other Requirements: Land proposed to be subdivided or the site plan for
which approval is requested shall meet the following requirements: (Ord. 3636,
9-3-2013)
      1.   Site must be in conformance with the Taylorville comprehensive plan.
      2.   Development must be in accord with appropriate jurisdictional
floodplain regulations.
      3.   Development must not be located in any environmentally sensitive
area unless the subdivider can show that environmental concerns can be
mitigated.
      4.   Site must be of a shape, size and terrain so that usable lots and
streets in conformance with this title can and will be created.
      5.   Development must not have a major conflict with existing use of
adjacent property (wastewater treatment plants, power plants, major industrial
plants, landfills, certain agricultural uses, etc.) unless it is shown that
factors which cause the conflict can and will be mitigated.
      6.   Development must not cause major off site impacts and problems
relating to, but not limited to, streets, drainage water system, parks. If it
is determined by the plan commission that major off site impacts will result,
the subdivider must agree to mitigate the portion of the impact caused by the
subdivision.
      7.   When soils in the area to be developed have severe limitations for
building site development or sanitary facilities as determined by the USDA
natural resources conservation service, the subdivider shall submit information
indicating how these limitations will be addressed. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
      8.   Any proposed subdivision of land or site plan shall not be approved
where a portion of such land to be subdivided or where the land located within
a site plan is currently within the corporate limits of the city and the
remaining portion of land to be subdivided or included within a site plan is
located outside the corporate limits of the city until and unless the portion
outside the corporate limits of the city is annexed into the city by a city
ordinance upon a proper written petition of annexation signed by the owners of
record of such land and by at least fifty one percent (51%) of the electors who
reside upon such land. This annexation requirement shall apply regardless of
whether or not the proposed subdivision of land or the land included within the
site plan will be serviced by any city water or sanitary or storm sewer
services. (Ord. 3636, 9-3-2013)
11-2-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider or his/her representative shall file one 24-inch by 36-
inch print of the location and sketch maps and supporting data in the office of
the city clerk with a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The location
and sketch map will be forwarded to the city engineer for his review and
technical approval. If approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/or
representative may then submit twenty (20) prints plus one 11-inch by 17-inch
print of the location and sketch map to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks
prior to the plan commission meeting dates, which are the first and/or third
Mondays of the month, if needed. If not approved by the city engineer, the
subdivider and/or representative will be notified of the changes that need to
be made and resubmitted. The location and sketch map will be reviewed according
to the filing deadline and review schedule established by the plan commission
and then the city council. The city engineer shall have up to twelve (12)
working days for his review. (Ord. 3361, 12-17-2007)
   B.   The city clerk shall retain two (2) prints on file and distribute the
location map and sketch maps and support data as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district;
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways, if applicable;
One print to the Christian County soil and water conservation district;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable;
One print to the appropriate school district; and
One print to the Christian County department of public health. (Ord. 3216, 1-
18-2005)
   C.   The entities listed in subsection B of this section shall transmit any
comments on suitability of the site in writing to the plan commission within
seven (7) calendar days of receipt.
   D.   The plan commission shall make a recommendation to the city council
with respect to the suitability of the site and the proposed layout no later
than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with the
city clerk. Lack of action within the allotted time period shall constitute a
negative recommendation to the city council.
   E.   After receiving the plan commission's recommendation, the city council
shall, at its next regularly scheduled council meeting, approve or disapprove
the location and sketch maps based on the suitability criteria outlined in
section
11-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-2-5: VALIDITY OF LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS APPROVAL:
The location and sketch maps shall be valid for a period of one year after city
council approval. If a preliminary plan has not been submitted within the one
year period, approval of the location and sketch maps shall expire. If interest
is renewed in subdividing the site at a later time, the entire location and
sketch maps review process and submission requirements shall be repeated. (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION:
11-3-1: Purpose
11-3-2: Submission Requirements
11-3-3: Preliminary Plan Review Process
11-3-4: Plan Commission Action
11-3-5: City Council Action
11-3-6: Validity; Reaffirmation
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The preliminary plan is intended to provide a detailed layout of the proposed
subdivision showing the location of public improvements, lot drainage and open
space areas. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-3-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall show the information required in subsection
B of this section on plan sheets no larger than twenty four by thirty six
inches (24 x 36") with matching lines if two (2) or more sheets are necessary.
The scale shall be no more than one hundred feet (100') to the inch. All
dimensions shall be to the nearest foot.
The preliminary plan shall be consistent with the current zoning district
classification of the property.
   B.   Information to be shown on the plan sheets shall include:
      1.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded;
the names and addresses of the engineer, registered land surveyor, subdivider
and owner of the tract with the name and address of the contact person with
whom any notice is to be sent;
      2.   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions;
      3.   A notation stating "preliminary plan not to be recorded by recorder
of deeds";
      4.   Total acreage;
      5.   Location of all present property lines and section lines;
      6.   The location of all streets, watercourses, and other existing
features within the area to be subdivided and within two hundred feet (200') of
the site;
      7.   Location and dimensions of existing buildings and their proposed
disposition;
      8.   The existing utilities, drainage courses and culverts including the
location and size of water mains and sewer outlets within the area to be
subdivided and on the adjacent land;
      9.   Contours referring to the United States geological survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain;
      10.   The elevation of the 100-year floodplain if any portion of the land
to be subdivided would be submerged by the flood. Adequate buildable area must
be provided above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain;
      11.   Lot numbers;
      12.   Proposed location of sewer mains (may be shown on a supplemental
sheet);
      13.   The proposed storm drainage system including preliminary drainage
computations when detention or retention is likely to be needed (may be shown
on a supplemental sheet). An assessment of long term erosion, sedimentation and
runoff changes caused by the subdivision should be included;
      14.   Proposed location of water mains and fire hydrants;
      15.   Location and width to the nearest foot of all proposed streets,
alleys and their associated rights of way;
      16.   Location and width to the nearest foot of lots;
      17.   Location and width to the nearest foot of all utility easements.
The subdivider shall determine the correct location of all easements to be
shown on the preliminary plan from the utility companies;
      18.   The location of areas to be reserved for public use;
      19.   The minimum setback requirements for the appropriate zoning
district;
      20.   Proposed staging of final plats if more than one final plat will be
submitted based on traffic, utilities and other factors which would determine
the sequence of development with the least impact on existing residents of the
city;
      21.   Draft of subdivision covenants relating to the requirements of this
title;
      22.   Written approval of the location of road access by the governmental
entity with road jurisdiction; (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
      23.   Provide an electronic file of the preliminary plan in either
AutoCAD format or MicroStation format to the city engineer. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-
2000)
11-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider or his/her representative shall file one 24-inch by 36-
inch print of the preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision in the office of
the city clerk with a filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The
preliminary plan will be forwarded to the city engineer for his review and
technical approval. If approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/or
representative may then submit eighteen (18) prints plus one 11-inch by 17-inch
print of the preliminary plan to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to
the plan commission meeting dates, which are the first and/or third Mondays of
the month, if needed. If not approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/
or representative will be notified of the changes that need to be made and
resubmitted. The preliminary plan will be reviewed according to the filing
deadline and review schedule established by the plan commission and then the
city council. (Ord. 3361, 12-17-2007)
   B.   The city clerk shall retain two (2) prints on file and distribute the
prints as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer (a written response must be provided);
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or the Illinois
department of transportation if applicable;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district; and
One print to the appropriate school district. (Ord. 3216, 1-18-2005)
The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements in writing
to the plan commission within one week of receipt. Receipt of the plan must be
acknowledged.
   C.   The plan commission shall recommend to the city council that it approve
or disapprove the preliminary plan no later than the plan commission's second
regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with the city clerk.
However, no review will take place and no recommendation will be made by the
plan commission until the city council has approved the location and sketch
maps. Failure by the plan commission to act by the end of the second regularly
schedule meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval of the plan.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-3-4: PLAN COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Recommendation Of Approval: If the plan commission finds that the
preliminary plan meets the requirements of this title, the plan commission
shall forward three (3) prints of the preliminary plan to the city council,
together with minutes of all meetings at which the preliminary plan was
considered. The chairman shall indicate the plan commission's recommendation of
approval on the plan in substantially the following language:
The Plan Commission of the City of Taylorville recommends that this preliminary
plan of subdivision be approved. This is not an approval of the final plat and
is not to be recorded.
         By:    
         Date:    
   B.   Recommendation Of Disapproval: If the plan commission finds that the
preliminary plan does not comply with the requirements of this title, it shall
inform the subdivider of its recommendation of disapproval at the meeting when
a vote is taken, followed within seven (7) calendar days by a written
recommendation of disapproval stating the noncompliance found. Unless the
subdivider indicates its desire to amend the preliminary plan in accordance
with subsection C of this section, either verbally at the plan commission
meeting (which shall be reflected in the minutes) or in writing within seven
(7) calendar days of the receipt of the written recommendation, then three (3)
prints of the proposed preliminary plan with the written findings of the plan
commission recommending disapproval shall be submitted to the city council,
together with minutes of all meetings at which the preliminary plan was
considered. The chairman shall indicate the plan commission's recommendation of
disapproval on the plan in substantially the following language:
The Plan Commission of the City of Taylorville recommends that this preliminary
plan of subdivision be disapproved.
         By:    
         Date:    
   C.   Amended Preliminary Plan: If the subdivider desires to amend the
preliminary plan prior to its being considered by the city council, the
subdivider shall submit thirteen (13) prints of the amended plan to the city
clerk, which shall be reviewed according to the filing deadline and review
schedule established by the plan commission. No filing fee shall be necessary
if the amended preliminary plan is filed within two (2) calendar months of the
date the plan commission recommends disapproval. The city clerk shall transmit
copies of the amended plan as described in subsection
 11-3-3B of this chapter, and review or proceed as indicated in that
subsection. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-3-5: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
Not later than the second regularly scheduled meeting after its receipt of the
prints of the preliminary plan recommending approval or disapproval by the plan
commission and of the minutes of the plan commission meetings considering the
preliminary plan, the city council shall consider approval or disapproval of
the preliminary plan. At such meeting, the subdivider may appear and be heard
by the city council if it so desires. The city council shall, by resolution,
approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, and shall appropriately endorse the
prints of the preliminary plan, as follows:
(Dis)approved by resolution of the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Taylorville this            day of           , 19           .
               
            Mayor
Attest:
               
            City Clerk
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-3-6: VALIDITY; REAFFIRMATION:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of three (3) years
after city council approval. If the final plat has not been submitted to the
plan commission within said three (3) year period, or if submitted, no final
plat is approved, the preliminary plan shall expire.
   B.   If the subdivider has not submitted a final plat within three (3) years
after preliminary plan approval, but wishes to avoid expiration of the plan,
the subdivider shall seek reaffirmation of the plan by submitting thirteen (13)
prints to the city clerk for review according to the review schedule
established by the plan commission in accordance with sections
11-3-3,
 11-3-4 and
11-3-5 of this chapter no later than thirty five (35) months after the initial
city council approval. If the subdivider has submitted a final plat within said
three (3) year period, but is not approved during or after said three (3) year
period, the subdivider may avoid expiration of the preliminary plan by making
the same preliminary plan reaffirmation submission described above, provided
that if the disapproval of the final plat occurs during or after the thirty
fifth month, the submission required shall be made within one month of such
disapproval. In such event, the review process in sections
11-3-3,
11-3-4 and
11-3-5 of this chapter shall be followed.
   C.   Where reaffirmation of the preliminary plan is sought, the plan
commission shall recommend any changes in the plan it deems necessary to meet
the requirements of this title. If the subdivider has not resubmitted the
preliminary plan with the required changes to the city council within thirty
(30) days after the plan commission meeting requiring changes, or if the
resubmitted plan is disapproved, the plan shall expire at that time or at the
end of any appeal process provided for in this title, whichever is later.
   D.   A preliminary plan may be reaffirmed one time. If a final plat has not
been submitted to the plan commission within three (3) years from the date of
the reaffirmation, or if submitted, is not approved, the plan shall expire.
   E.   Final plat approval shall extend the validity of the preliminary plan
for three (3) years from the date of final plat approval, provided that the
plan commission may require any changes necessary to meet the requirements of
this title, and in such an event, the provisions of subsection C of this
section with respect to resubmission shall apply. The preliminary plan may be
reaffirmed one time after each final plat approval. If another final plat has
not been resubmitted within three (3) years from the date of the reaffirmation,
the preliminary plan shall expire. In the event a preliminary plan expires, a
subdivider wishing to proceed with subdivision of the land involved must
resubmit a location and sketch map for review and proceed as in the case of an
original submittal. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
   F.   An additional five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee shall be paid by any
subdivider who seeks reaffirmation of the preliminary plan under this section.
(Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
CHAPTER 4
CONSTRUCTION PLANS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Purpose
11-4-2: Submission Requirements
11-4-3: Construction Plan Review Process
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
Construction plans are intended to show the design of public improvements for
the subdivision so that a determination can be made as to whether city
standards are met and whether the improvements are compatible with existing
public improvements. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-4-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
Construction plans shall be submitted on sheets not larger than twenty four by
thirty six inches (24 x 36") and to a scale of not more than fifty feet (50')
to the inch. Construction plans shall include the following information:
   A.   Cover sheet showing the location of the development; scales and symbols
that are used; index to sheets; summary of quantities; appropriate place for
approval of the city engineer; and the signature and seal of a registered
professional engineer.
   B.   North arrow and bench marks with their elevations noted. Bench marks
shall be referenced to mean sea level datum as determined by the United States
geological society.
   C.   Plan sheets showing the locations of all existing streets, right-of-way
lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage ditches, easements,
rear lot drainage, direction of storm drainage flow, survey monuments, water
mains, fire hydrants, and any other appurtenance or structure that might
influence design considerations.
   D.   Profile sheets indicating the existing ground line and proposed grades
and elevations for all proposed streets, sanitary sewers, drainage structures,
drainage ditches, and rear lot drainage. Elevations shall be referenced to the
United States geological society datum.
   E.   Typical sections showing the right-of-way lines, proposed pavement
widths, pavement thickness, base thickness, subbase thickness, subgrade, crown,
curbs and gutters, sidewalks and design data when required.
   F.   Detail sheets showing the details of manholes, inlets, catch basins,
curbs and gutter, drainage structures and any other structure or appurtenance
to be constructed, or reference made to the standard specifications for road
and bridge construction in Illinois and/or highway standards published by the
Illinois department of transportation.
   G.   Design computations for storm sewer design, for special structures and
pavement designs with required and for anticipated fire flow.
   H.   Detailed description of erosion control measures to be taken during
construction.
   I.   Proof of application for an access permit from the township road
commissioner, county highway department or Illinois department of
transportation when access to a township, county or state highway is involved.
   J.   Proof of application for a 404 permit if any dredging, riprapping, fill
work or similar activities will be conducted in or around streams.
   K.   Other specific additional information may be requested by the city
engineer.
   L.   Permits for sanitary sewer and water main construction if required.
   M.   Percolation test results for each lot if private sewage disposal
systems are to be utilized. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
   N.   A detailed estimate of construction costs, which shall also include the
sum of quantities and unit prices of each pay item, shall be submitted to the
city engineer. (Ord. 2918, 8-2-1999)
   O.   A letter from the utility company stating that the proposed street
lighting system meets their minimum requirements. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
11-4-3: CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   After receiving approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall
submit six (6) sets of construction plans to the city clerk who shall retain
one set on file and distribute the remaining as follows:
      1.   One set to the city engineer;
      2.   One set to the county superintendent of highways when the
subdivision is located outside the corporate limits of Taylorville;
      3.   One set to the Taylorville sanitary district;
      4.   One set to the appropriate highway authority if access is required;
and
      5.   One set to the Christian County department of public health when any
part of the land to be platted will not be served by a public sewer system.
(Ord. 2939, 1-18-2000)
   B.   Construction plans shall be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) calendar
days before the final plat is to be submitted for review.
   C.   The city engineer shall complete his review within thirty (30) calendar
days after all items of information required by this section have been
submitted in writing.
   D.   Within thirty (30) calendar days after complete submission, the city
engineer shall notify the subdivider's engineer of approval of the plans or of
any required changes unless the review time is extended for no more than
fourteen (14) calendar days by the city engineer in a letter to the
subdivider's engineer listing reasons for the extension. If plans must be
resubmitted, the city engineer shall also inform the subdivider's engineer of
the number of sets of plans to be submitted.
   E.   When construction plans are resubmitted with the required changes, they
shall be rereviewed within fourteen (14) calendar days unless the review time
is again extended by the city engineer in the manner set forth in subsection D
of this section.
   F.   The city engineer shall notify the subdivider's engineer and the plat
officer of the approval of the construction plans. Construction plans shall not
be approved until proof of acquisition of a township, state, or county access
permit or 404 permit, if applicable, is submitted. The city clerk shall also
send a notice of approval to the:
County superintendent of highways, township road commissioner, or Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable;
Plan commission;
Taylorville sanitary district;
Water department;
Other utility companies involved. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION AND BONDING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Approval Of Construction Plans
11-5-2: Notification Of Construction
11-5-3: Review And Inspection Fees
11-5-4: Inspection Of Construction
11-5-5: Security For Public Improvements
11-5-6: Length Security In Effect; Forfeiture
11-5-7: Approval Of Public Improvements
11-5-1: APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Approval of the construction plans shall give the subdivider the right to begin
construction of the subdivision improvements. Construction must be started
within one year of approval of the construction plans. If construction is not
started within the year, reapproval by the city engineer shall be required
before construction is started. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-5-2: NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The city engineer shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours before
construction begins. Construction shall begin only after approval of
construction plans and payment of the review and inspection fee as set forth in
section
11-5-3 of this chapter. Whenever construction stops for twenty four (24) hours
or longer, the city engineer shall be notified twenty four (24) hours before
construction begins again. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-5-3: REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES:
Before starting construction of any public improvements and/or public
infrastructures, the subdivider shall be assessed and shall deposit with the
city clerk for the city an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the estimated
construction cost for such public improvements and/or public infrastructures
(including, but not limited to, grading, drainage, curbs, gutters, storm and
sanitary sewer detention ponds, roadway, sidewalk, sewer, water line and other
improvements which are to be dedicated to public use or which benefit the
subdivision generally) as approved by the city engineer. The city clerk shall
cause such funds to be deposited in the general fund of the city.
The foregoing fee is intended to reimburse the city for charges of the city
engineer in connection with the review and inspection of the preliminary plans,
final plats, and the construction of public improvements and/or public
infrastructures during the project or development. In the event that the
engineering expenses incurred by the city are in excess of the amount initially
paid by the subdivider, the city shall bill the subdivider for the difference,
and such amount shall be paid by the subdivider prior to acceptance by the city
of such public improvements and/or public infrastructures. However, the
subdivider shall not be entitled to any refund in the event the fees actually
charged to the city by the city engineer are less than three percent (3%) of
the estimated construction costs.
The aforesaid estimated construction costs for such public improvements and/or
public infrastructures should be calculated by the city engineer after his
review of such construction plans and the engineer's bill should be submitted
to the city shortly after such review.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this code, approval of any and all
final plat(s) and/or large scale development(s) is(are) conditioned upon full
payment of said review and inspection fee. (Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
11-5-4: INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Presence Of Subdivider's Observer: The subdivider's engineer shall have
a full time qualified resident observer present on the construction site for
the following:
      1.   Approval of the subgrade prior to paving; and
      2.   Continuous observation of all phases of the curb paving operation,
construction of sanitary mains and appurtenances, construction of storm sewer
and appurtenances, and construction of water main.
   B.   Presence Of Subdivider's Contractor Superintendent: The subdivider's
contractor shall have a superintendent on the job site at all times while
construction is in progress. The superintendent shall be responsible for the
entire construction procedure. In his absence, the superintendent shall
indicate to the subdivider's observer, the person temporarily responsible for
the conduct of the work.
   C.   Inspection By City Engineer: All required improvements to be installed
under the provisions of this title shall be checked during the course of
construction by the city engineer. The cost of any reinspection of any required
improvement found to be faulty or not in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications shall be paid by the subdivider to the city. The testing of any
concrete, asphalt, soil, other materials or workmanship shall be done at the
direction of the city and at the expense of the subdivider. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
11-5-5: SECURITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
If construction has not been completed and approved by the city engineer before
the final plat is submitted to the city council, security in the amount equal
to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated construction costs
(including, but not limited to, grading, drainage, roadway, sidewalk, sewer,
water line and other improvements which are to be dedicated to public use or
which benefit the subdivision generally) of the public improvements shall be
filed with the city clerk in order to ensure completion of the public
improvements as required by this title within a reasonable length of time
without cost to the city. The form and sufficiency of security shall be subject
to the approval of the city attorney and city engineer. Security may be in the
form of a bond issued by a commercial surety licensed to do business in the
state, or it may be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit issued by an
Illinois or national bank of at least one year in duration, which provides for
automatic annual renewals thereof unless at least sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of its term or any renewal thereof, written notice of nonrenewal is
sent by certified mail to the city.
The bond or letter of credit shall, by its terms, secure payment of not only
the construction of the public improvements but also of any additional review
and inspection fees charged by the city engineer and imposed by the city
pursuant to section
11-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-5-6: LENGTH SECURITY IN EFFECT; FORFEITURE:
The security shall remain in effect until it is released by the city council
upon acceptance of the public improvements 1 . All public improvements must be
completed within two (2) years from the date when the security was approved. If
public improvements have not been completed within said two (2) years, the
subdivider shall forfeit the security in the amount necessary for the city to
carry out the construction or repairs so that the public improvements meet the
standards of this title, plus administrative costs involved. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-6-7 of this title.
11-5-7: APPROVAL OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
After the city engineer informs the city that the following conditions have
been met, the public improvements shall be accepted by the city:
   A.   The city engineer has inspected the construction and all necessary
repairs and corrections, and certifies that the public improvements required by
this title have been constructed.
   B.   "As built plans" have been prepared by the subdivider's engineer and
delivered to the city engineer.
   C.   The city engineer has received a signed statement of a registered
professional engineer stating that the public improvements have been observed
during construction and are installed to the specifications shown on the
construction plans.
   D.   The improvements, such as drainage swales and the like, which are not
to be dedicated to public use but which benefit the subdivision generally, have
been built to specifications shown in the construction plans. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
CHAPTER 6
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Submission Requirements
11-6-3: Final Plat Review Process
11-6-4: Submission Of Final Plat To City Council
11-6-5: City Council Approval
11-6-6: Recording The Final Plat
11-6-7: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The final plat is intended to provide the accurate location of lots, monuments
and property dedicated to public use. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-6-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat need not cover the entire preliminary plan area. It may cover
only the portion which the subdivider presently wishes to record and develop in
accordance with the staging approved with the preliminary plan. The final plat
submission shall include the following information on the plat and accompanying
documents:
   A.   Final Plat: The final plat shall be drawn in black India ink on a
reproducible material to a scale of not more than one hundred feet (100') to
the inch. Maximum size of the plan sheets shall be twenty four by thirty six
inches (24 x 36"). If more than one sheet is used, an index map shall be
included on the first sheet. The final plat shall show:
      1.   The name of the owner and subdivider;
      2.   North point, scale and date of preparation and latest revisions;
      3.   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles;
      4.   General land legal description of the plat with total acreage;
      5.   All lots designated by numbers and other grounds designated by names
and numbers;
      6.   Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions;
      7.   The location of all easements provided for public use, services or
utilities. Easements shall include anchor space for pole lines;
      8.   An accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be
dedicated for public use;
      9.   Lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names;
      10.   The line of departure of one street from another;
      11.   The names and widths of adjoining streets;
      12.   The dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, easements, and other areas for
public or private use. Linear dimensions shall be given to the nearest one one-
hundredth (1/100) of a foot;
      13.   Radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency and central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners;
      14.   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating: "Approval of this
final plat by the City of Taylorville does not constitute a guarantee that well
water is of adequate quantity or quality for residential needs or that a
suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed on each lot." Any guarantees
are the subdivider's responsibility;
      15.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the federal emergency
management agency;
      16.   A notation stating any setback required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district; (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998)
      17.   House numbers secured and approved by the Christian County 911
office for the subdivision. It shall be the responsibility of the developer of
the subdivision to secure said house numbers from the Christian County 911
office. (Ord. 3252, 10-3-2005)
   B.   Accompanying Documents: The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      1.   Letter from the city engineer approving the construction plans;
      2.   Proof of acquisition of an access permit from either the state of
Illinois, township road commissioner, or the county highway department,
whichever applies;
      3.   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat;
      4.   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself;
      5.   Certification of perpetual maintenance of drainage areas and common
areas;
      6.   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate 2 seepage fields) on each lot, if applicable;
      7.   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
title;
      8.   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney as required by the state
statutes concerning drainage; (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
      9.   Letter from the Christian County 911 coordinator/office indicating
approval of the house numbers listed in the final plat. The planning and zoning
commission shall approve final plats of the subdivision only after lot numbers
are assigned on the final plat by the subdivision developer and approved by the
Christian County 911 office/coordinator. (Ord. 3252, 10-3-2005)
11-6-3: FINAL PLAT REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider or his/her representative shall file one 24-inch by 36-
inch print of the final plat of the proposed subdivision in the office of the
city clerk with a filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus, if it has
not already been paid, the review and inspection fee established pursuant to
section
11-5-3 of this title to be deposited in the appropriate city account. A final
plat shall be reviewed only after approval of the preliminary plan by the plan
commission and the city council and approval of the construction plans by the
city engineer. Preliminary plans and final plats will not be reviewed at the
same meeting. However, if the preliminary plan is being reaffirmed, the final
plat may be reviewed and approved at the same meeting if there are not major
changes required to reaffirm the preliminary plan. The final plat will be
forwarded to the city engineer for his review and technical approval. If
approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/or representative will then
submit nineteen (19) prints plus one 11-inch by 17-inch print of the final plat
to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to the plan commission meeting
dates, which are the first and/or third Mondays of the month, if needed. If not
approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/or representative will be
notified of the changes that need to be made and resubmitted. The final plat
will be reviewed according to the filing deadline and review schedule
established by the plan commission and then the city council. (Ord. 3361, 12-
17-2007)
   B.   The city clerk shall retain two (2) prints and shall distribute the
final plats as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district;
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to any other utility company involved;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable; and
One print to the Christian County department of public health. (Ord. 3216, 1-
18-2005)
The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements in writing
to the plan commission within one week of receipt. (Ord. 2939, 1-18-2000)
   C.   The plan commission shall review the final plat to determine if it
meets the requirements of this title and conforms to the preliminary plan
previously submitted.
The plan commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the final plat
no later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plat was filed.
Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled meeting shall
constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      1.   Disapproval: If the plan commission finds that the final plat does
not meet the requirements of this title, the subdivider shall be notified in
writing of the plan commission's disapproval and of the noncompliance found.
      2.   Approval: If the plan commission finds that the final plat meets the
requirements of this title, the following shall be printed or stamped on the
original plat and three (3) prints and signed by the chairman of the plan
commission:
The Final Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the City Council for
approval by the Taylorville Plan Commission subject to the certifications set
forth in Section
11-6-4.
      By:    
            Chairman
      Dated:    
         Taylorville Plan Commission
   D.   The plan commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and two
(2) prints to the city clerk for immediate reference to the city council. One
print of the endorsed final plat shall remain on file with the plan commission.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-6-4: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT TO CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Upon receipt of the endorsed original final plat and two (2) prints,
the city clerk shall retain one print on file and shall deliver one print to
the city engineer.
   B.   The city clerk shall deliver the original final plat to the city
council at its next regular session after receiving the documents from the plan
commission, along with the applicable documents generated by the plan
commission with respect to the final plat.
   C.   The final plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the city council
and shall not be approved by the city council until the following have been
received:
      1.   Written certification from the city engineer that the public
improvements required by this title have been approved as described in section
11-5-7 of this title or, in lieu of construction, a security has been provided
as described in section
11-5-5 of this title.
      2.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Christian County
clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   D.   If the requirements of this section have not been met within two (2)
years from the final plat approval by the plan commission, the existing final
plat shall expire and must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new final plat.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-6-5: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
When the requirements of section
11-6-4 of this chapter have been met, the city council may, by resolution,
approve the final plat, accept the security, if any, and authorize the mayor to
sign the plat for and in the name of the city, with the city clerk attesting to
it. The city clerk shall retain one print on file. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-6-6: RECORDING THE FINAL PLAT:
When the final plat has been approved by the city council and signed by the
mayor and the city clerk, the original tracing shall be recorded in the office
of the recorder of deeds of Christian County, Illinois. If the final plat is
not recorded within two (2) years after approval by the city council, the plat
must be resubmitted to the plan commission to determine if any changes in the
final plat are needed to meet the requirements of this title. No title to any
lots shall be conveyed until the original tracing is recorded. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
11-6-7: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
After the city engineer has approved the public improvements as described in
section
11-5-7 of this title and has received a signed statement from the subdivider
stating that all contractors and subcontractors have been paid and that there
are no liens against the property, the city engineer shall issue a letter to
the subdivider and the city council stating that the public improvements meet
the city's standards. Within one month after receiving the city engineer's
approval, the city council shall release the security, if any, and accept the
public improvements.
In areas within the city's subdivision limits, but outside the city's corporate
limits, the city engineer, county superintendent of highways, and Taylorville
sanitary district, if appropriate, shall jointly determine whether the
standards of this title have been met. If met, the city engineer shall so
indicate in a letter to the subdivider and the city council. The city council
shall then release the bond, if any. The county superintendent of highways, as
a representative of the appropriate township highway commissioner, shall
indicate in a letter to the city engineer, approval of the streets to Christian
County standards, which shall constitute acceptance of the streets by the
appropriate township highway commissioner; the executive director of the
Taylorville sanitary district shall indicate in a letter to the city engineer
approval of applicable sanitary sewer facilities, but acceptance of the
dedication by the Taylorville sanitary district shall be by ordinance. (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 7
DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR
REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-7-1: State Specifications
11-7-2: Right Of Way Of Streets
11-7-3: Street Design
11-7-4: Lot And Block Design
11-7-5: Erosion And Sediment Control
11-7-6: Utility Easements; Location Of Utilities
11-7-7: Surface Water Drainage
11-7-8: Backfill Over Underground Utilities
11-7-9: Sewage Disposal
11-7-10: Water Supply
11-7-11: Electric Distribution
11-7-12: Street Lighting
11-7-13: Public Areas And Open Spaces
11-7-1: STATE SPECIFICATIONS:
Unless stated otherwise in this Title, all construction of public improvements
shall be performed in accordance with the latest revised edition of the State
of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction adopted by
the Illinois Department of Transportation and the Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. If an engineering design or
construction situation arises not covered by the above cited standard
specifications or in the following sections, the decision of the City Engineer
shall be followed. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-2: RIGHT OF WAY OF STREETS:
   A.   The location and width of all streets shall not be less than the
following:
      Street Type   Right Of Way
   1. Major highway   120'
   2. Major street   80'    -100'
   3. Collector street   60'
   4. Local street   50'
   5. Cul-de-sac   110' diameter
   6. Alley   20'
   7. Existing Township road   70'
   8. Proposed Township road   70'
   B.   Additional rights of way may be required for drainage, slope,
maintenance or other reasons not directly related to street classifications.
   C.   For subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, additional rights of way
shall be dedicated, as needed, to meet the above requirements. This shall be
done as follows:
      1.   The entire additional right of way shall be provided when the
subdivision is located on both sides of the existing street.
      2.   One-half (1/2) of the required right of way shall be provided when
the subdivision is located on only one side of the existing street. However, in
no case shall the resulting right-of-way width be less than fifty feet (50').
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-3: STREET DESIGN:
The following requirements shall be incorporated into the design of all
streets:
   A.   Vertical Alignment:
      1.   Grades: The maximum grade on a major street shall be five percent
(5%). The maximum grade on all other streets (other than a major highway) shall
be eight percent (8%). The minimum grade on all streets shall be 0.40 percent.
All street grades shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      2.   Vertical Curves: All grade changes shall be connected by vertical
curves. The length of vertical curves shall not be less than thirty (30) times
the algebraic difference in rates of grade for crest curves and thirty five
(35) times the algebraic difference for sag curves. When speed limits are to be
posted greater than thirty (30) miles per hour, vertical curvature standards
shall be used as contained within the latest revision of A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets (AASHTO) for urban local, collector and arterial
streets by the respective classification. The minimum length of vertical curves
on all types of streets shall be ten feet (10').
   B.   Horizontal Alignment:
      1.   Horizontal Curves: When a center line deflection angle is greater
than one degree (1°), the following curves shall be required in the street:
major and collector streets shall have a minimum center line radius of three
hundred feet (300') and a minimum length of curve of one hundred feet (100');
major and collector streets having a design speed and/or expected posted speed
greater than thirty (30) miles per hour shall be consistent with the latest
revision of the horizontal curvature requirements of ASSHTO a policy on
geometric design of highways and streets for the appropriate roadway
classification; all other types of streets shall have a minimum center line
radius of one hundred feet (100'). The pavement in all cases shall be wide
enough to allow the movement of a WB-50 design vehicle, as described in the
state of Illinois, department of transportation design manual.
      2.   Intersections: Intersections of major and collector streets with
roadways of the same classes shall not be closer than one-quarter (1/4) of a
mile from any other such functionally classed roadways' intersections. These
intersections shall be located at the quarter mile grid points.
      3.   Street Offsets: Street center line offsets shall not be less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125'), unless otherwise warranted to the
satisfaction of the city engineer.
      4.   Curb Corners: All curb corners shall have a minimum radius of twenty
five feet (25').
   C.   Pavement Standards: All material and construction of pavement for
collector and local streets shall be in accordance with the appropriate
sections of the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specification
for Road and Bridge Construction, Current Edition, and meeting the following
minimum requirements:
      1.   Subgrade: the subgrade shall be graded and compacted to not less
than 95% of the standard laboratory dry density. The moisture content shall be
a minimum 80% of the optimum moisture content and shall not exceed 110% of the
optimum moisture content.
         a.   Prior to placing aggregate subbase, the subgrade shall be
inspected by the City and, if deemed necessary by the City, proof rolling using
a fully loaded tandem truck shall be performed by the developer’s contractor.
      2.   Aggregate Subbase:
         a.   Hot-mix Asphalt Surface: a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches
of aggregate base course, IDOT CA-6 (Type A or Type B), graded and compacted to
not less than 100% of the standard laboratory density.
         b.   Portland Cement Concrete Surface: a minimum thickness of four (4)
inches of aggregate base course, IDOT CA-6 (Type A or Type B), graded and
compacted to not less than 100% of the standard laboratory density.
      3.   Pavement Surface:
         a.   Hot-mix Asphalt: a minimum total thickness of four (4) inches of
Hot-mix Asphalt pavement consisting of a minimum two (2) inches Hot-mix Asphalt
Binder Course, IL-19.0, N50 and a minimum of two (2) inches Hot-mix Asphalt
Surface Course, Il-9.5, Mix “C”, N50. Compaction of the Pavement Surface shall
meet IDOT Standards.
         b.   Portland Cement Concrete: a minimum total thickness of six (6)
inches of unreinforced Portland Cement Concrete, IDOT Class PV.
All material and construction of pavement for major streets shall be in
accordance with the appropriate sections of the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, Current
Edition, and meeting the following minimum requirements:
      1.   All major street pavements shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements contained in the latest, revised edition of the Illinois
Department of Transportation design manual and shall be designed for a twenty
(20) year life cycle. The minimum requirements listed in the tables of the
design manual shall govern at all times and as stated here:
         a.   An Illinois bearing ratio of 3.0 (IBR = 3.0) shall be used in
pavement design unless the developer’s engineer submits a soil test report
justifying a different IBR.
         b.   Vehicular traffic volumes and vehicle classification percentages
used in the design shall be approved by the City.
      2.   Minimum Subgrade Requirements: The subgrade shall be graded and
compacted to not less than 95% of the standard laboratory dry density. The
moisture content shall be a minimum 80% of the optimum moisture content and
shall not exceed 110% of the optimum moisture content.
         a.   Prior to placing aggregate subbase the subgrade shall be
inspected by the City and if deemed necessary proof rolling using a fully
loaded tandem truck shall be performed developer’s contractor.
      3.   Minimum Aggregate Subbase Requirements:
         a.   Hot-mix Asphalt Surface: a minimum thickness of ten (10) inches
of aggregate base course, IDOT CA-6 (Type A or Type B), graded and compacted to
not less than 100% of the standard laboratory density.
         b.   Portland Cement Concrete Surface: a minimum thickness of five (5)
inches of aggregate base course, IDOT CA-6 (Type A or Type B), graded and
compacted to not less than 100% of the standard laboratory density.
      4.   Minimum Pavement Surface Requirements:
         a.   Hot-mix Asphalt: a minimum total thickness of five (5) inches of
Hot-mix Asphalt pavement consisting of a minimum three (3) inches Hot-mix
Asphalt Binder Course, IL-19.0, N50 and a minimum of two (2) inches Hot-mix
Asphalt Surface Course, Il-9.5, Mix “C”, N50. Compaction of the Pavement
Surface shall meet IDOT Standards.
         b.   Portland Cement Concrete: a minimum total thickness of seven (7)
inches of unreinforced Portland Cement Concrete, IDOT Class PV.
   D.   Pavement Width: All streets shall be improved with pavements to an
overall width in accordance with the following general guidelines, which are
subject in every case to the discretion of the city:
 
Type Of Street   Pavement Width1
Alley            20 foot minimum
Collector street 36 foot minimum
Cul-de-sac       90 foot diameter
Local street     27 foot minimum
Major highway    As required by IDOT or applicable agency
Major street     40 foot minimum
 
      1.   Edge of pavement to edge of pavement.
Different widths may be used depending on the anticipated traffic volumes and
parking demand. These widths of pavement shall be determined by the Plan
Commission and the City Engineer in consultation with the engineer for the
subdivider. If a pavement width narrower than the above stated minimum results
from this consultation, the subdivider shall install no-parking signs at his
expense.
   E.   Curb And Gutter:
      1.   The standard curb and gutter required adjacent to flexible pavement
shall be a mountable type constructed of Portland cement concrete with the
following dimensions: twenty four inches (24") wide, eight inches (8") thick on
the front face (pavement side), ten inches (10") thick on the back face, seven
inches (7") thick at center line (flow line), and a ten inch (10") radius in
the flow line. The curb and gutter adjacent to concrete pavement, if poured
monolithically, may be limited to the thickness of the pavement.
      2.   In subdivisions proposed to have streets with an anticipated daily
traffic volume of two thousand five hundred (2,500) or more, a barrier-type
curb and gutter similar to Type B6.18 as described in the State of Illinois,
Department of Transportation Highway Standards shall be used. Other locations
where a barrier-type curb and gutter are required shall be determined by the
engineer for the subdivision and the City Engineer.
   F.   Pavement Crown: The minimum crown used on all pavements shall be one-
quarter inch (1/4") per foot measured from the edge of the pavement to the
center line of the street.
   G.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Local streets that are also cul-de-sac streets
shall be no more than six hundred feet (600') long unless necessitated by
topography in which case they shall be no longer than one thousand feet
(1,000') unless provision is made for an interim turnaround with a radius
sufficient to accommodate emergency vehicles and/or a median entrance (see
subsection I of this Section). A turnaround shall be provided at the closed end
having an outside roadway diameter of at least ninety feet (90') edge to edge
of pavement and a street right-of-way diameter of one hundred ten feet (110').
No obstructions shall be permitted in the cul-de-sac turnaround.
   H.   Stub Streets: Access shall be provided to adjoining property not yet
subdivided. Proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such unsubdivided property. At the end of all temporary stub streets, a
barricade meeting the provisions of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices shall be installed by the subdivider. Stub streets in excess of
two hundred fifty feet (250') shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac
with an outside roadway diameter of at least ninety feet (90'). The type of
construction shall be determined by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall
dedicate a temporary easement to the appropriate street authority in the amount
needed in excess of the normally required right of way for the temporary
turnaround. When the street is extended in the future, the extra turnaround
pavement shall be removed and curb and gutters and sidewalks constructed by the
subdivider who is constructing the street extension.
   I.   Multiple Access: Any area of development containing seventy (70) or
more single-family lots (or equivalent population) shall be served by two (2)
functioning points of access. Where higher densities of development are
proposed, a divided type entrance roadway may suffice with a median of adequate
width to ensure continued emergency access lanes on one side. Depending on
location and height of nearby poles or trees, the required median width shall
range between twelve (12) and thirty feet (30'). This type of roadway
construction is intended to accommodate higher density developments and not to
lengthen the overall length of a cul-de-sac.
   J.   Restriction Of Access: When a subdivision or a portion of it adjoins a
major street, no lot shall have direct access to the major street. The lot
shall have adequate depth for screen planting on the portion of the lot
contiguous to the major street.
   K.   Street Names And Street Signs:
      1.   A proposed street that is in alignment with and/or joins an existing
named street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the
proposed name of a street duplicate the name of an existing street within the
plat jurisdiction of this Title. The use of the suffix "street", "avenue",
"boulevard", "driveway", "place", "court", or similar description shall not be
a distinction sufficient to constitute compliance with this requirement.
      2.   Street name signs shall be erected at all intersections within the
City's jurisdiction at the expense of the subdivider and shall be subject to
the specifications of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   L.   Private Streets: There shall be no private streets platted in any
subdivision. Every subdivision lot shall be served from a publicly dedicated
street.
   M.   Alleys: Alleys are not recommended in residential subdivisions unless
deemed necessary by the Plan Commission.
   N.   Ramps: Where sidewalks cross a barrier-type curb and gutter as
described in subsection E of this Section, ramps shall be constructed to
accommodate the handicapped. These ramps shall be constructed to the lines and
grades shown on the standard sidewalk ramp example. Inlets for storm drainage
shall not be located so that a pedestrianway will be interrupted by the inlet
grates. Other locations where these ramps are required shall be determined by
the City Engineer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2391.png]
 
   O.   Typical Street Section:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.png]
 
   P.   Median And Islands: Where medians or islands are proposed they shall be
constructed with barrier or curbing. All medians and islands shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider and/or a subdivision association to maintain.
No sign may be installed in the median which blocks the sight distance at the
intersection. If such a sign is to be installed, detailed plans for the sign
shall be submitted with the construction plans for approval. In no case shall
an island or median contain any other sign or structure except as may be placed
for traffic control under the direction of the City Engineer.
The subdivider or subdivision association may landscape medians or islands.
Ground cover may not exceed a maximum height of twelve inches (12"). Any
additional living plant material must be maintained to allow visibility across,
over or through medians and islands at a height of three to ten feet (3–10')
above the adjacent roadway pavements.
   Q.   Subdivisions Outside City Limits: Subdivisions within the one and one-
half (11/2) mile subdivision jurisdiction, but outside of the corporate City
limits.
      1.   Streets and roadways within the one and one-half (11/2) mile
subdivision limits, but outside of the corporate City limits may be constructed
by the developer as follows:
         a.   Roadbed will be forty feet (40').
         b.   Base course will be thirty feet (30').
         c.   Surface will be twenty four feet (24').
         d.   Cul-de-sac will have a base course diameter of one hundred feet
(100').
         e.   Cul-de-sac will have a surface diameter of ninety feet (90').
         f.   Open ditches will have a minimum depth of eighteen inches (18").
         g.   The aggregate base course shall be minimum of eight inches (8").
         h.   The surface shall be a minimum of bituminous surface treatment
Class A-3.
         i.   Right of way shall be a minimum of seventy feet (70').
         j.   Sidewalks shall not be required. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998; amd. Ord.
4122, 8-15-2022)
11-7-4: LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN:
   A.   Size Of Lots: Minimum lot sizes shall be the minimum for the applicable
zoning district of Taylorville or Christian County, except when a private
sewage system is necessary. When a private sewage disposal system will be used
for any length of time, lots shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
   B.   Lot Arrangement:
      1.   Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
substantially radial to curved street lines. However, for purposes of solar
orientation, side lot lines need not be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines provided that side lot lines run within
twenty degrees (20°) east or west from due north to due south. If side lot
lines are being varied for solar orientation, layout and building setbacks
shall also be oriented with their long axis running from east to west, with a
possible variation of twenty degrees (20°) to the southwest or twenty degrees
(20°) to the southeast.
      2.   Each lot shall front upon a public street.
      3.   Flag lots shall be permitted only if the Plan Commission determines
that no public health and safety problems or additional costs or difficulties
providing Municipal services will result.
      4.   Through lots shall be permitted only when access is prohibited to
one street as described in subsection
11-7-3J of this Chapter.
      5.   All lots must contain sufficient buildable area.
   C.   Sizes Of Blocks: Blocks shall not be less than four hundred feet
(400'), nor more than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), in length
measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed block area. In blocks
over eight hundred feet (800') in length, the Plan Commission may require one
or more public crosswalks with a right of way of not less than ten feet (10')
in width to extend entirely across the block at locations deemed necessary at
intervals not closer than four hundred feet (400').
   D.   Survey Monuments: All survey monuments shall be located and be made of
the appropriate material as required by State law.
   E.   Lot Grading:
      1.   Trees that cannot be saved, stumps, boulders, and other similar
items shall be removed.
      2.   All grading in the subdivision shall be related to the topography of
the surrounding area. All street embankments shall be raised at least one and
one-half feet (11/2') above the high water elevation.
      3.   All building lots shall be graded or have natural slopes that will
properly allow surface drainage to flow away from the principal structures to
be located on the lot.
      4.   Grading in the subdivision shall provide alternate drainageways for
the purpose of carrying water away from homes and preventing damage during
periods of heavy rainfall. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-5: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   During construction of public improvements, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to ensure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of 2-year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep runoff velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins and release mechanisms
shall be included with the construction plans.
   B.   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within fifteen (15) days after final grading to
all areas where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed.
Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation,
expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and
kind and quantity of mulch for temporary or permanent vegetative control
measures shall be included with the construction plans. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-6: UTILITY EASEMENTS; LOCATION OF UTILITIES:
   A.   Utility Easements:
      1.   Utility easements shall be provided along front, rear or side lot
lines for the purpose of erecting and maintaining one or more of the following
facilities: storm sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, gas mains,
underground electric lines, telephone lines, cable TV and such other utilities
reasonably required for an urban building.
      2.   Easements shall be minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width. A utility
may be located in the street right of way if the respective company so desires
and appropriate permits have been obtained.
      3.   Alternate locations for various utilities shall be decided upon by
the appropriate utility companies, subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. In no case shall streets, permanent buildings, or other manmade
improvements that obstruct surface drainage be placed on rear or side lot
easements.
      4.   It is the responsibility of the subdivider to notify all utility
companies in writing when the land to be developed has been graded in
accordance with the construction plans and is ready for installation of a given
utility.
   B.   Location Of Utilities:
      1.   Utilities (sewers, electric, water, gas and cable TV), whenever
possible, shall be located in the public right of way or front lot easement in
the following manner: water and electric lines shall be located on the south
and east sides; sanitary sewer and gas lines shall be located on the north and
west sides. In some cases, however, electric lines may also be located on the
north and west sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2395.png]
 
      2.   The placement of storm sewers or electric lines in the rear of a lot
is not acceptable unless circumstances determined by the City Engineer require
their placement in the rear, in which case the following easement diagrams
indicate placement:
         a.   Ten Foot Easements: When an easement will not include sanitary
sewer or surface drainage systems, a ten foot (10') easement width shall be
sufficient and the utilities shall be located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2397.png]
 
         b.   Fifteen Foot Easements: When an easement will include either a
sanitary sewer system or a surface drainage system, but not both systems, a
fifteen foot (15') easement shall be required and the utilities shall be
located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2399.png]
 
         c.   Twenty Foot Easements: When a utility easement will include both
a sanitary sewer system and a surface drainage system, a twenty foot (20')
easement shall be required and the utilities shall be located as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ce2362dc3a28b4c35c62d9592967ba89cc09c380/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2401.png]
 
         d.   Ten Foot Access Easement: When sanitary or storm sewers are
located in the rear of a lot, a ten foot (10') easement in the side yard shall
be required from the street right of way to each manhole or inlet. (Ord. 2831,
3-3-1998)
11-7-7: SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   All subdivisions shall be developed with adequate surface drainage.
Surface water drainage improvements shall consist of storm sewers and/or open
channels, inlets, catch basins and manholes designed and constructed to conform
with standards established by the Illinois Department of Transportation and by
the City Engineer and shall adequately drain the area being developed including
drainage from other areas which naturally drain through the area being
developed. In any event, and in all cases in which there is to be any
connection to the city's storm sewer main, the property owner (developer) shall
pay the cost to extend the storm sewer main the entire width or length
( depending upon the direction of such extension) of the subdivision to be
serviced and/or for such additional distance or direction along the subdivision
to be serviced, as determined by the City Council from time to time, and shall
be installed at the maximum depth and at minimum grade as determined by the
City Engineer or the street and sewer superintendent, so that such extension,
after completion thereof, immediately borders adjacent property in such a
manner that future extensions can directly be made to service adjacent property
or properties.
   B.   If, as the result of subdivision development, surface water is
deposited in existing roadside ditches in quantities exceeding their capacity,
the developer shall improve the ditches and replace culverts as needed to
handle the flow.
   C.   Unless engineering evidence is presented to the City Engineer
warranting exceptions, storm sewers for all developments shall be designed and
constructed to meet the following criteria:
 
Major streets:  10-year storm frequency
All other area: 5-year storm frequency
 
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide grade
control for rear lot drainage to each lot owner. Swales are not public works
which shall be dedicated to and accepted by the City; nevertheless, no
construction surety shall be fully released until the City Engineer has
approved the swales in the subdivision. The City Engineer will not approve any
swale until adequate turf and/or grass has been established at the elevations
set forth in the construction plans. Upon approval by the City Engineer, it
shall be the lot owner's responsibility to maintain the drainage course and to
keep it free from features that restrict natural drainage.
   E.   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all of the areas indicated on the preliminary
plan.
      1.   The controlled release of storm water runoff shall not exceed the
release or discharge rate which existed at the site prior to development for a
ten (10) year storm event. This rate shall be known as the predeveloped
discharge rate. In the case of multiple discharge locations, no location shall
discharge at a rate higher than the predeveloped discharge rate for a ten (10)
year storm event for that location under any set of conditions. The controlled
release rate in any case shall not exceed the rated capacity of the existing
natural downstream outlet channel, culvert, structure or storm sewer system as
determined by the City Engineer. The rate at which storm water runoff is
transported into a designated storage area may be as determined by the design
engineer and is unrestricted.
      2.   A natural or surface channel system shall be designed with adequate
capacity to convey the storm water runoff from all tributary upstream areas
through the development. This bypass channel shall be designed to carry the
peak rate of runoff from a fifty (50)-year storm assuming all storm sewers are
blocked and that the upstream areas are fully developed and have been saturated
with antecedent rainfall. No habitable structures shall be constructed within
this channel; however, streets and parking or playground areas and utility
easements shall be considered compatible primary uses.
      3.   Storm water runoff capacity of detention facilities and discharge
rates from such facilities shall be calculated by analyzing volume and rate of
runoff during pre- and post-development conditions for the ten (10)-year and
the one hundred (100)-year recurrence intervals. Storage capacity and discharge
rates shall be based on the maximum calculated volume and peak flow of storm
waters, respectively. Storage facilities shall be designed using the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS) method of calculating runoff discharge rate and
total volume of storage. The rational method of calculating runoff may be used
for subdivisions less than one hundred (100) acres. The storage volume shall be
provided for the fully developed site development that is tributary to the area
designated for detention purposes. The control structure for discharge shall
maintain the release rate at or below the rate established in subsection E.1.
of this Section for all rainfall events of one hundred (100)-year or less
frequency.
      4.   Detention reservoirs or dry bottom storm water storage areas shall
be designed to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other
types of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent
flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains, and both shall be provided with a
positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility with
adequate capacity. The combination of storage of the water from a one hundred
(100)-year storm and the design release rate shall not result in a storage
duration in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. Maximum depths of planned storm
water storage shall not exceed four feet (4') unless the existing natural
ground contours and other conditions lend themselves to greater storage depth,
which shall be approved by the City Engineer. Minimum grades for turf areas
shall be 0.6% and maximum slopes shall be ten percent (10%). Storage area side
slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical and a
ten percent (10%) slope or less shall be used whenever possible. If slopes
greater than ten percent (10%) are necessary to meet storage requirements or
area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the City Engineer, and
suitable erosion control shall be provided in addition to the protection
required to ensure public health and safety. Outlet control structures shall be
designed as simply as possible and shall require little or no maintenance and/
or attention for proper operation. Each storm water storage area shall be
provided with a method of emergency overflow in the event that a storm in
excess of the one hundred (100)-year return frequency storm occurs. The
emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function without maintenance
and/or attention and shall become part of the natural or surface channel system
described in a preceding paragraph. Hydraulic calculations, signed and sealed
by an Illinois licensed Professional Engineer, shall be submitted to
substantiate all design features. Both outlet control structures and emergency
overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the
public health and safety. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept to a
minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will not be
permitted without complete protection for the public safety. The use of
restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and shall be used only as a last
resort when no other method is feasible.
      5.   Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be
designed with all of the items required for detention reservoir storage areas
except that a low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity
outlet shall not be required. However, the following additional conditions
shall be complied with:
         a.   Water surface area shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the
tributary drainage area.
         b.   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from
wave action.
         c.   Minimum normal water depth shall be six feet (6'). If fish are to
be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth (¼) of the pond area
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') deep.
         d.   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond
level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.
         e.   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface water
level at normal pool. Hydraulic calculations, signed and sealed by an Illinois
licensed Professional Engineer, shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
         f.   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided,
if necessary. Design calculations, signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed
Professional Engineer, to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration
facilities shall be submitted with construction plans. Agreement for the
perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Plan Commission.
      6.   The maintenance adoption of any detention facility required by this
Sub-section shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real estate where
the detention facility is located, and such owner shall do so in compliance
with the plans approved by the Pan Commission prior to construction of the
detention facility, and in compliance with the ordinances of the City and with
the Taylorville City Code. If such owner fails to maintain the detention
facility, then the City:
         a.   May institute an action for injunctive relief to require such
owner so to maintain the detention facility; or
         b.   May take the necessary actions to maintain the detention facility
and shall be authorized to institute any legal proceedings necessary to recover
from such owner the sums of money expended by the City in so maintaining the
detention facility.
      7.   Where developments form only a portion of the watershed or contain
portions of several watersheds, the requirements for providing storage shall be
based upon that portion of the area being developed as compared to the total
watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be
acceptable whenever it is justified and feasible. As a watershed is developed
with a series of storm water storage facilities, due consideration will be
given for calculations of the allowable release rate and capacity of the
natural or surface channel system as described in subsection E2 of this
Section.
      8.   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash flood runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for storm
water runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or drainage
construction on the project site.
      9.   The construction of the storm water control systems shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide certain benefits to the surrounding
properties, negotiations for public participation in the cost of such
development may be feasible.
      10.   The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge
capacity to the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the storm water
runoff control system as provided in subsection E4 of this Section shall give
due consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for the
reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved and/
or roofed over. The use of natural gravel deposits for the lower portions of
storm runoff storage areas, the flattening of drainage slopes and the retention
of existing topography are samples of possible recharge methods.
      11.   During the construction phase of land development, facilities shall
be provided by appropriate stock-pile design, to prevent the erosion and
washing away of the earth. Silting of downstream areas shall be prevented
through the strategic use of silting basins, sodding of runoff channels, silt
fences, ditch checks, etc. and by limiting the period of time during which the
earth is stripped of vegetation.
      12.   Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all items
covered in this Section. Plans, specifications and all calculations for storm
water runoff control and storm sewers shall be signed and sealed by an Illinois
licensed Professional Engineer and submitted for review and approval as part of
the construction plan submillal or as part of the site plan submillal for all
developments.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998; amd. Ord. 3240, 8-15-2005; Ord. 4309, 6-2-2025)
11-7-8: BACKFILL OVER UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
   A.   Where an underground utility is to be placed in an area which has a
permanent type street or sidewalk surface, or upon which such a surface is to
be constructed within a period of one year, the backfill above the utility or
in case of sewers, above the top of the granular cradle, to the level of the
bottom of the permanent type pavement shall be made. This material will be in
all areas where utility trenches cross the pavement subgrade except in areas
which will be lime treated or areas where rock will be used to stabilize the
subgrade. The backfill shall be IDOT CA-6 or CA-7 crushed stone. Boiler slag
will not be permitted.
   B.   As an alternate, the use of "flowable fill" will be permitted. This mix
shall consist of a lean concrete mix with no less than fifty (50) pounds of
cement per cubic yard, two hundred (200) to six hundred (600) pounds of fly
ash, two thousand (2,000) to three thousand (3,000) pounds of fine aggregate
and thirty five (35) to sixty five (65) gallons of water. Minimum twenty eight
(28) day compressive strength shall not be less than 150 psi.
   C.   In areas not now subject to vehicular traffic, nor in the opinion of
the City Engineer likely to be within a period of one year, backfill may be
made with selected excavation material which is free from clods and stones,
provided such trench backfill is adequately jetted from the bottom up
completely filling the trench immediately after backfilling. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-
1998)
11-7-9: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers: When a subdivision is located within the service area
of a public sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be constructed
throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve adequately each
building lot.
      1.   Public sanitary sewers shall be located in the north or west
boulevard (between curb and sidewalk) within the street right of way or in a
fifteen foot (15') easement behind the sidewalk within the house setback area.
Parallel sewer lines along the street may be used. Sanitary sewers shall not be
located in the rear yard.
      2.   Under no circumstances shall the entrance of storm water or
groundwater to the sanitary sewers be permitted.
      3.   All sanitary sewers collections and disposal systems shall comply
with the ordinances of the City, the Taylorville Sanitary District, and the
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   B.   Private Sewage Disposal System: Where no public sanitary sewerage
system is available, individual sanitary disposal systems shall be installed to
service individual dwelling units according to conditions set forth in Section
 11-2-3 of this Title. These sanitary disposal systems shall be installed in
accordance with the latest revised edition of the Illinois private sewage
disposal licensing act and private sewage disposal code promulgated by the
Illinois department of public health and applicable ordinance of the city.
Sufficient area shall be provided to accommodate two (2) seepage fields. (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998)
   C.   Connection To City's Sewer Main: In any event, and in all cases in
which there is to be any connection to the city's sanitary sewer main, the
property owner (developer) shall pay the cost to extend the sanitary sewer main
the entire width or length (depending on the direction of such extension) of
the property to be serviced and/or for such additional distance or direction
along the subdivision to be serviced, as determined by the city council from
time to time, and shall be installed at the maximum depth and at minimum grade
as determined by the city engineer or the street and sewer superintendent, so
that such extension, after completion thereof, immediately borders adjacent
property in such a manner that future extensions can directly be made to
service adjacent property or properties. (Ord. 3242, 8-15-2005)
11-7-10: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Public Water Supply:
      1.   Water mains not less than six inches (6") in diameter shall be
constructed throughout the entire subdivision. Larger diameter pipes may be
required by the city to provide for future transmission needs, in which case,
the city shall pay any additional costs.
      2.   Every water supply system shall be designed in such a manner as to
provide an area fire flow meeting the requirements established by the
Taylorville fire department. Water mains larger than six inches (6") in
diameter shall be installed at the subdivider's expense if needed to provide
the area fire flow required by the insurance services office guild for
determination of required fire flow. A minimum of one thousand (1,000) gallons
per minute with a residual pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch shall
be required. Fire hydrants with shutoff valves at each hydrant shall be
installed throughout the entire system at maximum intervals of six hundred feet
(600') or less if required by the fire department. All fire hydrants shall be
three (3) nozzle hydrants with threads as specified by the Taylorville fire
department and shall have flow characteristics similar to those of a five and
one-fourth inch (51/4") hydrant valve.
   B.   Private Water Supply: When a public water supply is not feasible and
the subdivision is outside the corporate limits of Taylorville, a private well
may be used. Wells shall be constructed according to the Illinois water well
pump installation code. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-11: ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION:
The underground electric distribution system shall be installed on utility
easements along front lot lines. Transformers shall normally be placed on every
other lot line with secondary conductors and distribution pedestals installed
on the opposite side of the street. In some instances, transformers may be
installed on both sides of the street. All primary and secondary cables shall
be in conduit. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-7-12: STREET LIGHTING:
Streetlights shall be installed along public streets in the city by the
subdivider. The utility company shall design or approve the design of the
street lighting system. Streetlights shall be placed at all intersecting
streets and at a maximum interval of four hundred feet (400'). (Ord. 2958, 4-3-
2000)
11-7-13: PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES:
   A.   Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably
located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or
neighborhood use as well as public service areas.
   B.   When a proposed school, neighborhood park, electric substation, water
storage tank, recreation area, or public access to water frontage shown on the
official map, is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the
city council may require as a condition of final plat approval, that such space
within the subdivision be reserved and not developed for a period not to exceed
one year from the date of such final plat approval. Within the one year period,
the appropriate public agency may acquire the reserved property in the manner
provided by law. If the reserved site is not acquired and no legal action is
filed within the one year period, the reservation shall become void and the
site previously reserved may then be used by the developer for other purposes.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 8
MINOR SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Location Map
11-8-3: Final Plat Submission Requirements
11-8-4: Review Process
11-8-5: Submission Of Minor Subdivision Plat To The City Council
11-8-6: Recording The Minor Subdivision Plat
11-8-7: Limitations On Minor Subdivisions
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   A minor subdivision is the creation of a total of up to four (4) lots
(counting the original tract from which the lots are created) which front along
a public road.
   B.   The minor subdivision is designed to allow the sale of said lots
without the delay and expense of the conventional subdivision process. (Ord.
2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-2: LOCATION MAP:
   A.   Location Map Submission Requirements: The location map shall consist of
data added to an existing base map of a suitable scale covering an area of at
least one mile radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map
shall show the following information:
      1.   Title of proposed subdivision;
      2.   North point, scale and date;
      3.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and registered land surveyor, with the name and address of the contact
person to whom any notice is to be sent;
      4.   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage;
      5.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided;
      6.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided;
      7.   Existing and proposed zoning;
      8.   Method of sewage disposal;
      9.   Method of water supply;
      10.   Electric service provider;
      11.   Method of fire protection;
      12.   School district;
      13.   Township; and
      14.   Gas service provider.
   B.   Location Map Review Process:
      1.   The subdivider shall submit twenty (20) prints of the location map
to the city clerk according to the filing deadline and review schedule
established by the plan commission.
      2.   The city clerk shall retain two (2) prints and distribute the
remainder as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district;
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways, if applicable;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or the Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable;
One print to the Christian County department of public health;
One print to the Christian County soil and water conservation district; and
One print to the appropriate school district. (Ord. 3216, 1-18-2005)
      3.   The entities listed in subsection B2 of this section shall transmit
their comments on suitability of the site in writing to the plan commission
within one week of receipt.
      4.   The plan commission shall review the suitability of the site based
on comments received and the suitability criteria outlined in section
11-2-3 of this title. The plan commission shall either approve or disapprove
the location map based on the suitability of the site at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after the plan was filed. If the location map is disapproved,
the owners shall be informed in writing of the noncompliance found. The
commission's decision may be appealed to the city council as described in
section
11-1-9 of this title. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-3: FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Final Plat Submission Requirements: The final plat shall be consistent
with the current zoning classification of the property.
The following shall be submitted on a plan drawn to the scale of no more than
one hundred feet (100') to the inch or in accompanying documents:
      1.   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions;
      2.   Names and addresses of the owner, engineer and registered land
surveyor;
      3.   Total acreage;
      4.   Lot numbers;
      5.   Existing utilities and drainage courses within and adjacent to the
site;
      6.   Location of all present property lines, section lines, streets,
buildings and watercourses within one hundred feet (100') of the area;
      7.   Location of proposed lots, setback lines and utility easements;
      8.   Contours referring to the United States geological survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer at his
sole discretion;
      9.   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating: "Approval of this
final plat by the city of Taylorville does not constitute a guarantee that well
water is of adequate quantity or quality for residential needs or that a
suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed on each lot". Any guarantees
are the subdivider's responsibility;
      10.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the federal emergency
management agency;
      11.   A notation stating any setback required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
   B.   Accompanying Documents: The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      1.   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land, or his duly authorized attorney, as required by state
statutes concerning drainage;
      2.   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself;
      3.   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat;
      4.   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate 2 seepage fields) on each lot, if applicable;
and
      5.   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
title. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider or his/her representative shall file one print of the
minor subdivision in the office of the city clerk with a filing fee of two
hundred seventy five dollars ($275.00). The minor subdivision will be forwarded
to the city engineer for his review and technical approval. If approved by the
city engineer, the subdivider and/or representative may then submit seventeen
(17) prints of the minor subdivision to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks
prior to the plan commission meeting dates, which are the first and/or third
Mondays of the month, if needed. If not approved by the city engineer, the
subdivider and/or representative will be notified of the changes that need to
be made and resubmitted. The subdivision will be reviewed according to the
filing deadline and review schedule established by the plan commission and then
the city council. The city engineer shall have up to twelve (12) working days
for his review. (Ord. 3361, 12-17-2007)
   B.   The city clerk shall retain one print on file and shall distribute the
remainder as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer;
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or the Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district; and
One print to the appropriate school district. (Ord. 3216, 1-18-2005)
The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements to the plan
commission within seven (7) calendar days of receipt.
   C.   The plan commission shall recommend approval or disapproval no later
than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with the
city clerk. Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled
meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      1.   Disapproval: If the plan commission finds that the minor subdivision
plat does not meet the requirements of this title, it shall specify its
disapproval in writing and state the noncompliance found.
      2.   Approval: If the plan commission finds that the minor subdivision
plat meets the requirements of this title, the subdivider shall submit the
original and three (3) prints to the plan commission. The following shall be
printed or stamped on the original plat and prints and signed by the chairman
of the plan commission:
The Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the City Council for approval by
the Taylorville Plan Commission subject to the certifications set forth in
Section
 11-6-2.
         By:    
            Chairman
         Dated:    
         Taylorville Plan Commission
   D.   The plan commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and two
(2) prints to the city clerk for immediate reference to the city council. One
print of the endorsed minor subdivision plat shall remain on file in the plan
commission office. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-5: SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Upon receipt of the endorsed original minor subdivision plat and two
(2) prints, the city clerk shall retain one print on file and shall deliver one
print to the city engineer.
   B.   The city clerk shall deliver the original minor subdivision plat to the
city council at its next regular session after receiving the documents from the
plan commission.
   C.   The minor subdivision plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the
city council and shall not be approved by the city council until the following
have been received:
      1.   Written certification from the city engineer that the plat has been
reviewed and any required public improvements have been approved as described
in section
11-6-7 of this title or, in lieu of construction, a security has been provided
as described in section
11-5-5 of this title.
      2.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Christian County
clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   D.   If the requirements of this section have not been met within two (2)
years from plan commission approval, the existing approvals and recommendations
shall expire and the plat must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new minor
subdivision. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-6: RECORDING THE MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT:
   A.   When the minor subdivision plat has been approved by the city council
and signed by the mayor and city clerk, the original tracing shall be recorded
in the office of the recorder of deeds of Christian County, Illinois.
   B.   If the minor subdivision plat is not recorded within two (2) years
after approval by the city council, the plat must be resubmitted to the plan
commission to determine if any changes in the plat are needed to meet the
requirements of this title. No title to any lots shall be conveyed until the
original tracing is recorded. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-8-7: LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
Only one minor subdivision shall be allowed for any parcel of record existing
March 3, 1998. If three (3) lots have been created from a parcel of record
after said date, all additional divisions at a later time shall follow
conventional subdividing procedures. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 9
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Submission Requirements
11-9-3: Standards And Requirements
11-9-4: Review Process
11-9-5: Commission Action
11-9-6: Review By The City Council
11-9-7: Construction Plans
11-9-8: Construction And Securities
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The site development plan is intended to provide a detailed layout of
buildings, utilities, other improvements and construction details to ensure
that city public health and safety standards, subdivision and zoning
requirements are met.
   A site development plan is required for all developments, except for the
following:
   A.   Detached single and two-family dwellings locales on individual lots,
including accessory structures.
   B.   Multiple-family dwelling developments containing six (6) dwelling units
or less, and contained within one (1) structure.
   The permitted uses and densities and other requirements of the site's
existing zoning district shall be met. However, yard and other bulk
requirements can be varied within the site if more than one building is
proposed.
(Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 3580, 9-4-2012; Ord. 4309, 6-2-2025)
11-9-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The site plan shall include the following information at a scale of no more
than one hundred feet (100') to the inch:
   A.   Title of the development;
   B.   North point, scale and date;
   C.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider, engineer,
and land surveyor. A contact person should be designated;
   D.   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles;
   E.   Acreage;
   F.   On site vehicular circulation;
   G.   Parking;
   H.   Sidewalks;
   I.   Sewer distribution;
   J.   Site grading;
   K.   Storm drainage and detention/retention of storm water;
   L.   Location of structures;
   M.   Water distribution and size of mains;
   N.   Location of fire hydrants and valves;
   O.   Street profiles and typical cross sections;
   P.   Yard setbacks;
   Q.   Landscape plans;
   R.   Location of outdoor lighting and signs;
   S.   Traffic analysis if more than two hundred (200) cars are to be
accommodated on site; and
   T.   Seal and signatures of a registered professional engineer.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998; amd. Ord. 3580, 9-4-2012; Ord. 4309, 6-2-2025)
11-9-3: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The plans must comply with all standards and requirements of applicable city
codes including this title, the zoning ordinance, official map and any
building, housing and fire codes.
   A.   Yard Requirements:
      1.   For all residential developments:
 
Front yard 25 feet
Rear yard  20 feet or 20 percent of the lot depth, whichever is greater
Side yard  5 feet minimum, 1 side yard; 12 feet minimum, 2 side yards
 
      2.   For all commercial and industrial districts:
 
Front 15 feet
yard
Rear  20 feet; where a rear lot line abuts an alley, ½ of the width of such alley
yard  may be considered in meeting the rear yard requirements
Side  10 feet
yard
 
      Yard area shall be open area and not be used for parking.
      When a commercial or industrial development abuts or adjoins a
residential district on a side or rear yard, an additional ten feet (10') shall
be required for each yard that abuts or adjoins a residential district. The
proposed commercial or industrial development shall be screened on each side
abutting or adjoining a residential district by a wall, opaque fence or densely
planted compact hedge not less than five feet (5') in height.
      For all developments the front yard shall be that area fronting a public
street and which contains the main entrance to the main building or
development. Only one front yard shall be required for each development.
   B.   Pavement Width: Streets and drives within the development shall be of
sufficient width to accommodate unimpeded movement of fire vehicles. Pavement
width shall vary depending upon parking along the street and direction of
vehicle movement.
   C.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall provide pedestrian movement within the
development and to existing public streets or sidewalks. Sidewalks shall also
be constructed along streets adjoining the development. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of four feet (4') wide, four inches (4") thick and be constructed of
Portland cement concrete.
   D.   Right Of Way: The developer shall dedicate right of way as required by
this title for all public streets adjacent to the site development.
   E.   Surface Water Drainage: All site developments shall provide adequate
surface water drainage improvements conforming to Section
11-7-7.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998; amd. Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000; Ord. 3580, 9-4-2012; Ord. 4309,
6-2-2025)
11-9-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The developer or his/her representative shall file one 24-inch by 36-
inch print of the site plan of the proposed development in the office of the
city clerk with a filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus, if it
has not already been paid, the review and inspection fee established pursuant
to section
11-5-3 of this title, to be deposited in the appropriate city account. The site
plan will be forwarded to the city engineer for his review and technical
approval. If approved by the city engineer, the subdivider and/or
representative may then submit nineteen (19) prints plus one 11-inch by 17-inch
print of the final plat to the city clerk at least two (2) weeks prior to the
plan commission meeting dates, which are the first and/or third Mondays of the
month, if needed. If not approved by the city engineer, the developer and/or
representative will be notified of the changes that need to be made and
resubmitted. The site plan will be reviewed according to the filing deadline
and review schedule established by the plan commission and then the city
council. The city engineer shall have up to twelve (12) working days for his
review. (Ord. 3361, 12-17-2007)
   B.   The city clerk shall retain four (4) prints on file and distribute the
remaining prints as follows:
Seven (7) prints to the plan commission;
One print to the water department;
One print to the street and sewer department;
One print to the health and building officer;
One print to the city engineer;
One print to the Christian County superintendent of highways;
One print to the appropriate township highway commissioner or Illinois
department of transportation, if applicable;
One print to the Taylorville fire department;
One print to the Taylorville sanitary district. (Ord. 3216, 1-18-2005)
The reviewing entities shall review the plans for conformance with city codes
and transmit any comments or requirements in writing to the plan commission
within seven (7) calendar days of receipt. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-9-5: COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Recommendation Of Approval: If the plan commission finds: 1) that the
site plan meets the requirements of this title; 2) that the site plan meets the
requirements of other city ordinances pertaining to zoning, building, and fire
safety; and 3) utilities will be adequate, the plan commission shall indicate a
recommendation for approval on three (3) copies of the plan in substantially
the following language:
This site development plan is recommended for approval by the Taylorville Plan
Commission.
         By:    
         Date:    
The prints so endorsed shall be forwarded by the city clerk to the city council
for further disposition, along with the minutes of the meeting at which the
plans were approved. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
   B.   Recommendation Of Disapproval: If the plan commission does not make the
findings in subsection A of this section, it shall inform the developer of its
findings in writing and state the noncompliance found, and shall endorse three
(3) copies of the site plan with its recommendation of disapproval, and shall
forward the plans to the city council for further disposition, along with
minutes of the meeting at which the plans were disapproved.
If the developer desires to amend the disapproved plan prior to consideration
by the city council, the developer shall submit thirteen (13) prints of the
amended plan to the plat officer, which shall be reviewed according to the
filing deadline and review schedule established by the plan commission. No
filing fee shall be necessary. The plat officer shall transmit copies of the
amended plan as described in section
11-9-4 of this chapter and review will proceed as indicated in said section.
(Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-9-6: REVIEW BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
The site development plans shall be reviewed by the city council as soon as
practicable after review by the plan commission. The developer may appear and
be heard at the city council meeting at which the site development plan is
considered. The city council shall approve or disapprove the plan by ordinance
or resolution; and the mayor shall endorse the site development plan in the
same manner as prescribed herein for subdivision preliminary plans. Approved
plans shall expire, if not completed in the same manner as set forth herein for
final subdivision plats. (Ord. 2958, 4-3-2000)
11-9-7: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
The developer shall submit construction plans for private drives, streets,
sidewalks, grading, drainage and utilities to the city engineer for review in
the same manner and for the same review and inspection fees as prescribed
herein for subdivision plats. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-9-8: CONSTRUCTION AND SECURITIES:
No building permits shall be issued for any structure or mobile homes unless
the large scale development plan has been approved by the city council and
construction work either has been installed according to the approved
construction plans or a security provided in the same manner as set forth in
this title for final plans of subdivisions. Security for completion of private
drives, streets, grading, and drainage shall not be required for purely
residential developments containing less than eight (8) living units. However,
utilities and other facilities serving a public function must be built or
security provided. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
CHAPTER 10
TRACT SURVEY
SECTION:
11-10-1: Purpose
11-10-2: Submission Requirements
11-10-3: Review Process
11-10-4: Recording
11-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Tract survey approval shall be required as set forth in section
11-1-5 of this title.
   B.   Tract survey approval is designed to ensure that all divisions of land
comply with the state plats act, this title and the appropriate zoning
ordinances. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-10-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
When a tract survey is required by this title, the following shall be
submitted:
   A.   Land survey.
   B.   Certification by a professional Illinois land surveyor, together with a
surveyor's seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
   C.   A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
11-10-3: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Five (5) copies of the tract survey shall be submitted to the plat
officer accompanied by the appropriate fee.
   B.   The plat officer shall review the survey to ensure that it conforms to
the pertinent requirements of this title and applicable zoning regulations. The
owner shall be notified of tract survey approval or disapproval within one
working day.
      1.   Disapproval: If the plat officer finds that the tract survey does
not meet the requirements of this code, the disapproval and noncompliance found
shall be specified in writing.
      2.   Approval: If the plat officer finds that the tract survey does meet
the requirements of this code, the following shall be printed or stamped on the
original and prints signed by the plat officer:
County of Christian   )
         )   SS
State of Illinois   )
   I, City of Taylorville Plat Officer, do hereby approve this tract survey
this            day of                                  , 19           .
 
      
City of Taylorville Plat Officer
   C.   The plat officer shall keep one copy and transmit four (4) copies of
the approved tract survey to the owner for recording. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
11-10-4: RECORDING:
After the tract survey has been recorded, the original shall be recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Christian County, Illinois. If the tract is
not recorded within one hundred eighty (180) days of plat officer approval, the
approval shall be null and void. (Ord. 2831, 3-3-1998)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: Base Flood Elevation
12-1-4: Duties Of The Zoning Officer
12-1-5: Development Permit
12-1-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
12-1-7: Protecting Buildings
12-1-8: Subdivision Requirements
12-1-9: Public Health And Other Standards
12-1-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
12-1-11: Variances
12-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-13: Penalty
12-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
 12-1-3 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers) and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
   A.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   B.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   D.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   E.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   F.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Taylorville, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Taylorville, or that may be
annexed into the city of Taylorville, that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the city of Taylorville are generally identified
as such on panel number(s) 275, 300, 400, and 425 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Christian County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated June 16, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas
of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Christian County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Taylorville or that may
be annexed into the city of Taylorville are generally identified as such on the
flood insurance rate map prepared for Christian County by the federal emergency
management agency and dated June 16, 2011.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency
management agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodways for each of the floodplains of the city of
Taylorville shall be according to the best data available from federal, state,
or other sources.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
   IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water
resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/
office of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the
floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred
(6,400) acres or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a
permit from the department. (Ill. adm. code title 17, part 3700.30.) The
department may grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a
statewide permit which meets the standards defined in section
12-1-6 of this chapter.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
   NFIP: National flood insurance program.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   A.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   B.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does
not include:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for each of the floodplains delineated as an
"A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Christian County shall
be according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   B.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Christian County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of Taylorville, or that may be annexed into the city
of Taylorville, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
flood insurance study of Christian County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated June 16, 2011. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER:
The zoning officer of the city of Taylorville shall be responsible for the
general administration of this chapter and ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of
Taylorville meet the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the zoning
officer of the city of Taylorville shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
12-1-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
12-1-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
12-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
12-1-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
12-1-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
 12-1-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
12-1-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall not issue
a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the zoning
officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey elevation to be
below the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be
shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and
which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements
of this chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below
the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
The zoning officer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
The zoning officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The zoning
officer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources statewide permit 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
12-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   E.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
12-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-
2011)
12-1-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Taylorville shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the board of appeals for a
variance. The board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city
council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   Conditions For Granting Variance: No variance shall be granted unless
the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   Notification: The board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of
section
12-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property, and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         b.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   D.   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
 12-1-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
12-1-7B of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
12-1-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Taylorville or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
12-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the city attorney may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
city attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Taylorville shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Taylorville shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   B.   The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The city attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall
be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Taylorville from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-
2011)
12-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Taylorville to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program
including: December 6, 1993. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 3507, 3-21-2011)
TITLE 13
SPECIAL PROJECTS OR REQUESTS
CHAPTER 1
ADDITIONAL FEES
SECTION:
13-1-1: Basis And Requirements
13-1-1: BASIS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Basis For Additional Fees: In order to properly consider, review, and
evaluate requests and to prepare necessary preliminary and final documents and
instruments for matters relating to subdivisions, zoning classifications or
reclassifications, zoning special uses, zoning variances, petitions for
annexation, annexation agreements, water and/or sewer main systems, extensions
within or outside the city's corporate limits, large scale developments,
commercial and/or industrial and/or multi-residential development projects, the
city necessarily utilizes, depending upon the applicant's or petitioner's or
developer's request, the services of the city engineer, the city attorney,
surveyors, financial consultants, and other professional consultants and the
city may also necessarily incur certain fees and costs, depending upon the
particular request(s), relating to newspaper publication costs for public
notices and public hearings, postage and mailing costs, copying costs, title
work and title insurance fees and costs, recording fees, Christian County soil
and water conservation review fees, easement, right of way, and dedication
acquisition costs, releases and subordination agreement costs, costs for
attendance by the members of the plan commission and/or of the zoning board of
appeals and other city officers at their respective meetings or at public
hearings and other fees and costs.
   B.   Title Work: Before the city will consider any request (herein
"application") to extend city water and/or sewer main systems within or outside
the city's corporate limits and/or to approve any subdivision and/or annexation
and/or annexation agreement and/or project and/or development that is
anticipated to require any easement(s) and/or right(s) of way and/or dedication
(s) or conveyance(s) in favor of the city, the applicant(s) shall furnish to
the city clerk, at the applicant's(s') sole cost and expense, a title insurance
policy commitment(s) issued by a reputable company with an effective date on or
after any such application. Such title insurance policy commitment(s) must
evidence clear and merchantable and marketable title in such applicant(s) and,
if applicable, in others where such extensions may be required, and identify
all lien holders and other interest holders in such property in order for the
city to initially determine the nature and extent of any releases of interest
and/or subordination agreements and/or any other instruments the city may
require prior to approval and/or construction of any such extension,
subdivision, annexation, annexation agreement, project or development.
   C.   Required Nonrefundable Initial Fees And Payment Agreement:
      1.   Nonrefundable Initial Fees: In addition to submittal of the
aforesaid title insurance policy commitment(s), if applicable, the following
nonrefundable initial fees for each of the following matters (herein referred
to as "project(s)" or "development(s)") shall be paid by the petitioner(s),
applicant(s), or developer(s) to the city, through the city clerk's office, if
the mayor determines that the services of the city engineer and/or city
attorney and/or surveyors and/or financial consultants and/or other
professional consultants engaged by the city will be necessary or appropriate
regarding any such project or development:
Annexation agreements                       $250.00
Annexation petitions                        100.00
Commercial and/or industrial projects       350.00
Large scale/site developments               350.00
Multi-residential development projects      350.00
Subdivisions                                250.00
Water and/or sewer main extensions (inside  250.00  (excluding subdivisions)
city)
Water and/or sewer main extensions (outside 500.00
city)
 
      2.   Required Payment Agreement: Regarding any aforesaid project or
development, the petitioner(s) or applicant(s) or developer(s) shall also sign
a payment agreement with the city at the time of payment of such nonrefundable
initial fees. Such payment agreement shall be in such form as may be approved
by the city council, from time to time, and shall require such petitioner(s) or
applicant(s) or developer(s) to fully pay the city, in addition to any and all
other required fees and costs imposed elsewhere in this code, for all
engineering and/or attorney fees and costs, newspaper publication costs,
postage and mailing costs, title work and title insurance fees and costs,
recording fees, Christian County soil and water conservation review fees,
easement, right of way, and dedication acquisition costs, releases and
subordination agreement costs, court reporter fees and costs, costs for
attendance by the members of the plan commission and/or of the zoning board of
appeals and other city officers at their respective meetings or at public
hearings and other fees and costs, and any and all other fees and costs
incurred or to be incurred by the city, after credit is given for said paid
nonrefundable initial fees and after credit is given for any other paid
required fees and costs imposed elsewhere in this code. Such full payment shall
be paid within fifteen (15) days of the city's submittal, from time to time, of
an invoice or invoices for such services, fees, and costs relating to such
projects or developments regardless of whether or not such projects or
developments, in whole or in part, is or are approved or denied by the city or
abandoned or withdrawn by such petitioner or applicant or developer. The city
shall not approve any such projects or developments until and unless such
petitioner or applicant or developer makes such full payment to the city. The
city reserves the right from time to time, in its sole discretion, to reduce or
eliminate the amount of said nonrefundable initial fees and costs and/or to
reduce said fees and costs required to be paid to the city under any aforesaid
payment agreement after the city determines, in its sole discretion, the
positive effect any such proposed project or development may have on economic
stimulation, encouragement, development and growth and/or the retention or
future increase of employment opportunities within the city or its environs
and/or future revenue potential to the city. (Ord. 3206, 11-15-2004)
CHAPTER 2
REBATE OF REAL ESTATE TAXES FOR ANNEXED PROPERTY
SECTION:
13-2-1: Rebate
13-2-1: REBATE:
Any property annexed into the city shall be subject to real estate taxes
attributable to the city for the entire calendar year in which such property is
annexed into the city and thereafter while such property remains within the
city's corporate limits. However, unless otherwise provided in an annexation
agreement, upon the owner's submittal of a paid real estate tax bill for the
entire calendar year in which such property is annexed into the city evidencing
that the city was paid the real estate taxes attributable to the city for such
entire calendar year, the city clerk shall reimburse to the owner(s) of such
annexed property that pro rata portion of the real estate taxes attributable to
the city for the period of time during such first calendar year that the
property was not annexed into the city. (Ord. 3220, 2-22-2005)
TITLE 14
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 1
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY
SECTION:
14-1-1: Local State Of Emergency Declared
14-1-1: LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      EMERGENCY: (1) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of
law; or (2) Any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including
outbreak of disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion, or eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits
of the city, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
      CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the city except officials of any
governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to
said civil emergency.
   B.   Declaration: Whenever an emergency, as defined in subsection A. of this
section exists, the Mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a Local
State of Emergency by means of a written declaration of the Mayor, under oath,
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency, describing the nature
of the emergency and declaring that a Local State of Emergency exists in
accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. This declaration
must be filed with the municipal clerk as soon as practicable after issuance.
   C.   Curfew Authorized: After proclamation of a Local State of Emergency by
the Mayor, he or she may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he or she deems reasonable and
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or she
deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
   D.   Orders Authorized: After the proclamation of a Local State of
Emergency, the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare,
and to address these issues caused threatened by the emergency, may take any or
all of the following actions by executive order during the state of emergency:
      1.   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
      2.   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the City for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality; and
      3.   In the event the Local State of Emergency extends beyond the current
fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the City during the existence of the
Local State of Emergency.
   E.   Duration: The declaration herein authorized shall be effective for a
period of up to until the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of
the City Council, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor or
his or her interim emergency successor, indicating that the civil emergency no
longer exists. The Mayor or his or her interim emergency successor, shall have
the power to re-proclaim the existence of an emergency at the end of each
period during the time said emergency exists.
   F.   Notice: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the City Clerk
shall notify the news media situated within the City, and shall cause a copy of
the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency and any curfew to be
posted at the following places within the City: the City municipal building,
the City police station, the City fire station, and the local post office.
   G.   Violations: Any person violating the provisions of this section or
executive     orders issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense
against the City and shall be punished as provided by Section
1-4-1 of the Taylorville City Code.
   H.   Effect On Other Ordinances: Nothing contained in this Chapter 1 shall
be construed to impair the powers contained in the Taylorville City Code,
giving powers to the police and fire departments, but shall be construed
together with existing ordinances and Taylorville City Code provisions now in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. (Ord. 3951, 4-6-
2020)
