TEUTOPOLIS, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 1115, passed 12-3-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Teutopolis shall be designated
as the Code of Teutopolis, and may be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   COUNTY. Effingham County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Effingham County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with “judgment.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER. Any time previous to the day on which the
ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any time
after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and all
bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 2025, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser, and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the village.
POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the employ of a
village as members of the Department of Police who are, or shall hereafter be,
appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
 (5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the Village of Teutopolis.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the
village.
   VILLAGE, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The Village of Teutopolis,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners, principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is unable to write, his
or her proper mark, or an electronic signature as defined in the Uniform
Electronics Transaction Act, 815 ILCS 333, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Prior Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Village Board may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
(Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
(Prior Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(Prior Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
(Prior Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
(Prior Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Village
Board or a certain village officer or employee to make additional regulations
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of
a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and
not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
   all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each and every
violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10.99)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND OFFICIALS
      
32.   POLICIES GENERALLY
      
33.   FINANCES AND FUNDS
CHAPTER 30: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Municipal League Risk Management Association
   
30.02   Part-time police officers
   
30.03   Park District
   
30.04   Plan Commission
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MUNICIPAL LEAGUE RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   The Village Board does hereby authorize and approve membership in the
Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the President
and Clerk to execute an intergovernmental cooperation contract with the
Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a
period of one year beginning the date the Association commences providing risk
coverage to its members and each year thereafter unless this section is
repealed.
   (B)   Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the Association a sum of
money to be determined by the Association at the time of application based on
the needs of the Association and the loss experience of the member, which sum
shall constitute the cost of the member’s first-year contribution for
membership in the Association. Membership contributions for second and
subsequent years shall be calculated in accordance with the loss experience of
the village and the needs of the Association, including total losses and
expenditures of the Self-Insured Retention Fund of the Association.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 846, passed 12-3-2014)
§ 30.02 PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointment. Subject to the hiring standards set forth below, the
Village President and Board of Trustees may, from time to time and upon the
advice and recommendation of the Chief of Police, appoint certain persons as
part-time police officers of the Department.
   (B)   Duties. A part-time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
Police Department Policy Manual, but the number of hours a part-time officer
may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-time police officers shall
be trained in accordance with the state’s Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et
seq.) and the rules of the state’s Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
   (C)   Hiring standards.
      (1)   Any person employed as a part-time police officer must meet the
following standards:
         (a)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound
health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;
         (b)   Be at least 21 years of age;
         (c)   Pass a medical examination;
         (d)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate;
         (e)   Possess a valid state driver’s license;
         (f)   Possess no prior felony convictions; and
         (g)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have
been honorably discharged.
      (2)   The village is an equal opportunity employer and shall not
discriminate on the basis of race, sex, religious beliefs, or any other basis
prohibited by law. Final hiring approval is at the sole discretion of the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Disciplinary standards. 
      (1)   Part-time police officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part-time police officers serve at the
discretion of the village authorities, shall not have any property rights in
said employment, and may be removed by the village authorities at any time.
Part-time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and orders
issued by the Police Department.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Chief of
Police from suspending without pay any member of the Department for a period of
not more than five days, but he or she shall notify the President and Board of
Trustees in writing of such suspension. Any police officer so suspended may
appeal to the Board to review the suspension within 30 days after the
suspension and upon such appeal, the Board may sustain the action of the Chief
of the Department, may reverse it with instructions that the officer receive
pay for the period involved, or it may suspend the officer for an additional
period of not more than 30 days or discharge the officer and/or demote the
officer depending on the facts presented.
(Prior Code, § 30.02) (Ord. 814, passed 5-16-2012)
§ 30.03 PARK DISTRICT.
   (A)   The village relinquishes all control and management of the planning,
establishing, and maintaining of the municipal recreation program within its
boundaries to the village’s Park District, and relinquishes its levy for
recreation purposes to the Park District.
   (B)   The village shall, six months from the date of this section, turn over
to the Park District any and all funds and tax moneys in its possession on that
date, which funds were received by it from the Playground and Recreation Tax,
and shall from time to time thereafter turn over to the Park District all such
funds and tax moneys as shall be received from levies adopted prior to the
effective date of this section.
(Prior Code, § 30.03) (Ord. 575, passed 1-17-1990)
§ 30.04 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Purpose. In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation
of a Comprehensive Plan, for the guidance, direction, and control of the growth
and development of the village, a Plan Commission, which shall be a department
of the village government, is hereby created under the authority of an Act of
the General Assembly of the state entitled the “Illinois Municipal Code,” being
65 ILCS 5, as now in force and effect.
   (B)   Membership. Said Plan Commission shall consist of seven members, to
include the following:
      (1)   The Village President shall be an ex-officio member of said
Commission with power to vote; and
      (2)   Six other members, citizens of said village, appointed by the
Village President on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on
said Plan Commission, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Term of office. Appointed members shall be appointed and serve for a
term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the same method of
appointment for unexpired terms only. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation, except that if the President and Board of Trustees so
provide, the Secretary may receive such compensation as is fixed by said
governing body and be paid for by proper appropriation.
   (D)   Procedure. Immediately following their appointment, the members of the
Plan Commission shall meet, organize, and elect such officers as it may deem
necessary and adopt, and later change or alter rules and regulations, or
organization and procedures consistent with village ordinances and state laws.
The Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings that shall be
open at all times to public inspection. The Commission shall also file an
annual report with the Village Board setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.
   (E)   Powers and duties. Said Plan Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees a
plan or plans for the development and redevelopment of said village and
contiguous unincorporated territory, not more than one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits of said village and not included in said
municipality. Such a plan or plans, when adopted by the President and Board of
Trustees, shall be known as the official plan, or part thereof, of the village.
Such plan or plans may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official plan, or
part thereof, of the village. To provide for the health, safety, comfort, and
convenience of the village and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivision, or unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment,
including reasonable requirements for public streets, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, and other public
grounds;
      (2)   To prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees,
from time to time, such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be
deemed necessary by the President and Board of Trustees or by the Plan
Commission;
      (3)   To prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees,
from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in
pursuance of such official plan;
      (4)   To give aid to the officials, President, and Board of Trustees
charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the
official plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official plan;
      (5)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities and for the general purpose of public understanding;
      (6)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and
other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area; and
      (7)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers created and
granted under authority of an Act of the General Assembly of the state,
entitled the “Illinois Municipal Code,” as now in force and effect, as may be
conferred by the President and Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Land subdivision or resubdivision. Following the adoption of an
official plan in the manner prescribed in the Act, no map or plat or any
subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of
the village, or in contiguous territory outside of, and distant not more than,
one and one-half miles from such limits and not included in any other
municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, and public grounds in
conformity with any requirements applicable thereto in such official plans.
   (G)   Improvements. The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for
its consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans, and data relative to public
improvement of any nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereof
if it deems a report necessary or advisable for the consideration of the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (H)   Expenditures. The Commission may, at the discretion of the President
and Board of Trustees, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other
necessary expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the
President and Board of Trustees from the public funds. If the Plan Commission
shall deem it advisable to secure technical advise or services, it may be done
upon authority of the President and Board of Trustees and appropriation by the
President and Board of Trustees made therefor.
(Prior Code, § 30.05) (Ord. 425, passed 2-3-1965)
CHAPTER 31: BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Incorporation
Officials
   
31.015   Representatives
   
31.016   Election
   
31.017   Qualifications; appointive office
   
31.018   Oath
   
31.019   Certificate of appointment
   
31.020   Business
   
31.021   Compensation
   
31.022   Bond
   
31.023   Clerk
   
31.024   Treasurer
   
31.025   Attorney
Board of Trustees
   
31.040   Trustee meetings
   
31.041   Ordinance language
   
31.042   President
Rules of Order
   
31.055   Quorum
   
31.056   Debate
   
31.057   Member requirements
   
31.058   Motions
   
31.059   Blanks
   
31.060   Questions
   
31.061   Introduction
   
31.062   Voting
   
31.063   Violation of the rules
   
31.064   Committees
   
31.065   New business
   
31.066   Petitions
   
31.067   Payments
   
31.068   Record keeping
   
31.069   General order
Public Participation in Meetings
   
31.080   Public participation
   
31.081   Policy
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 INCORPORATION
   Upon a petition presented to the Board of Trustees of the village of
[illegible] legal voters of said village asking to submit to the legal voters
of said village for and against organization under general law. Upon which
election notices where posted on May 1, 1874 in five of the most public places
in said town according to law. Whereupon an election was held on May 30, 1874,
the result of which election was as follows: 42 votes cast for village
organization under general law and [illegible] against village organization
under general law.
(Prior Code, § 31.001) (Ord. passed 8-1-1874)
OFFICIALS
§ 31.015 REPRESENTATIVES.
   The officers of said village shall consist of one President, six Trustees,
one Clerk, one Treasurer, one Police Chief, one Building Official, one
Secretary of the Plan Commission and as many police officers as the President
and Board of Trustees shall at such times as are needful appoint, and one
Village Attorney. Each of said officers shall discharge the duties required of
them in their various offices by statute and the legal ordinances of said
village, and for the discharge of their duties they shall have full power and
authority, and for a failure shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 31.015) (Ord. 1, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.016 ELECTION.
   The President and Board of Trustees shall be elected by the people of said
village and in conformity to the general election laws of the state as near as
practicable and, upon their election and due qualification, they shall appoint
one Treasurer, one Police Chief, one Village Clerk, and one Village Attorney,
which appointments shall be made at the first regular meeting of the President
and Board of Trustees after the annual election, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, and shall hold their respective offices until their successors are
duly elected and qualified. Said Village President shall hold his or her office
for four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 31.016) (Ord. 1, passed 12-2-1899; Res. 445, passed 7-19-2000)
§ 31.017 QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office unless
that person is a qualified elector of the village or otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   The aforesaid residency requirements do not apply, however, to
municipal engineers, health officers, attorneys, or other officers who require
technical training or knowledge to an appointed Village Treasurer or to an
appointed Village Clerk, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 944, passed 6-3-2020)
§ 31.018 OATH.
   (A)   All officers of this village, whether elected or appointed, shall,
before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe
the following oath or affirmation, to-wit: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as
the case may be) that I will support the constitution of the United States and
the constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will discharge the duties
of the office of (whatever it may be) according to the best of my ability.”
   (B)   Which oath or affirmation shall be filed with the Clerk and all such
officers, except Trustees and Village Attorney, shall, before entering upon the
duties of their respective offices, execute a bond with security, to be
approved by the Board of Trustees, payable to the village in such penal sum as
may by resolution or ordinance be directed, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office, and the payment of all moneys received
by such officer according to the law and ordinance of said village; provided,
that in no case shall the President’s bond be fixed at a less sum than $5,000,
nor shall the Treasurer’s bond be fixed at a less sum than the amount of the
estimated tax and special assessments for the current year, which bond shall be
filed with the Clerk, except the bond of the Clerk which shall be filed with
the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 31.018) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.019 CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT.
   All officers elected or appointed within and for this village, except the
Clerk, President, and Trustees, shall be commissioned by warrant given under
the corporate seal and signed by the Clerk and President of the Board of
Trustees. The President of the Board of Trustees shall issue a certificate of
appointment or election under the seal of the corporation to the Clerk thereof,
and any person having been an officer of the village shall, within five days
after notification and request, deliver to his or her successor in office all
property, books, and effects of every description in his or her possession
belonging to the village or appertaining to his or her said office, and upon
refusal to do so, he or she shall be liable for all the damages caused thereby
and such a penalty as may by ordinance be prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 31.019) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.020 BUSINESS.
   No officer may be directly or indirectly interested in any contract, work,
or business of the village or the sale of any article, the expense price or
consideration of which is paid from the Treasury or by any assessment levied by
any act or ordinance, nor in the purchase of any real estate or any property
belonging to the corporation or which shall be sold for taxes or assessments,
or by virtue of legal process at the suit of said corporation.
(Prior Code, § 31.020) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.021 COMPENSATION.
   The respective fees of the officers of this village shall be such as may be
provided by ordinance, and shall neither be increased nor decreased during
their term of office.
(Prior Code, § 31.021) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.022 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the village
officers shall execute a bond with security, to be approved by the corporate
authorities, which bond shall conform in form and substance to 65 ILCS 5/3.1-
10-30, or any statute of similar import.
(Prior Code, § 31.022)
§ 31.023 CLERK.
   (A)   Clerk.
      (1)   The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal of said village, to be
provided under the direction of the President and Board of Trustees, and he or
she shall have power as Clerk of such village to administer oaths in all
matters concerning the village when the same are to be administered. He or she
shall have possession of all papers belonging to the village and shall attend
all meetings of the Board of Trustees of the village and keep a full, faithful,
and correct record of all its proceedings in his or her journal or docket, and
copies of all papers duly filed in his or her office, and transcript from the
journals and other records and files of his or her office, certified by him or
her, under the corporate seal, shall be evidence in all the courts in like
manner as if the original was produced.
      (2)   The Clerk shall record in his or her journal all ordinances passed
by the President and Board of Trustees, and at the foot of the record of each
ordinance so recorded shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and
publication or posting of such ordinance, which record and memorandum or a
certified copy thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal
publication or posting of such ordinance for all purposes whatsoever.
      (3)   The Clerk shall exercise all the duties and powers of Comptroller
of said village.
   (D)   Deputy Clerk.
      (1)   The Village Clerk may appoint the Deputy Clerk who shall have the
power and duty to execute all documents required by any law to be executed by
the Clerk and affix the seal of the village thereto whenever required. In
signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village
Clerk followed with the word, “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s name and the words,
“Deputy Clerk.”
      (2)   The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by such
Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk’s
office in the village hall, and only when either written direction has been
given by the Village Clerk to such Deputy Clerk to exercise such power or the
Village Board has determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions.
(Prior Code, § 31.023) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899; Ord. 1023, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 31.024 TREASURER.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall be appointed by the President and Board of
Trustees at the first meeting of the said Board in the month of May of each
year and shall hold his or her office for a term of two years.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her
office, execute a bond payable to the village aforesaid in such sum as the said
Board may by resolution direct. Which said bond is conditioned for the faithful
performance of his or her duties as such Treasurer and shall be subject to the
approval of the said Village Board.
   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money belonging to
said village and shall keep a full and accurate account of same, pay out all
orders signed by the President and countersigned by the Village Treasurer or
one of two appointed Trustees, and make a report to said Board at each regular
monthly meeting of all money on hand on the first day of the last preceding
month, the amount received during that month, from what source received, the
amounts paid out, and upon what account.
   (D)   He or she shall keep the funds of the various appropriations separate
and distinct.
(Prior Code, § 31.024) (Ord. 131, passed 3-14-1928; Ord. 1023, passed 11-15-
2023)
§ 31.025 ATTORNEY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to appear in all suits in
which the village is interested, either as plaintiff or defendant, as the case
may be, on behalf of the village.
   (B)   He or she shall at all times, when necessary, or when called upon,
advise the Board to the best of his or her knowledge and ability upon all
matters of law arising within the scope of the welfare of the village and the
powers and duties of the Board, for which he or she shall be compensated at his
or her regular hourly rate or as otherwise agreed between the Board and the
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 31.025) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 31.040 TRUSTEE MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular meeting of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the
first and third Wednesdays of each month from and after the passage of this
section.
   (B)   The meeting hour of said Board of Trustees shall be at 7:00 p.m.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called at any time when the interest of the
village may require it by order of the President, or any two of the members of
the Board of Trustees, by giving verbal or written notice of the time of
holding the same to each of the Trustees who may be found within the village,
or by leaving a written notice thereof at their usual place of abode.
   (D)   No business shall be transacted by the Board unless the President and
three of the Trustees be present, or in case of the absence of the President or
of his or her inability to act, unless four of the Trustees shall be present.
(Prior Code, § 31.040) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899; Ord. passed 7-7-1917)
§ 31.041 ORDINANCE LANGUAGE.
   The style of ordinances passed in this village shall be as follows: “Be it
ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Teutopolis,
Effingham County, Illinois.”
(Prior Code, § 31.041) (Ord. 129, passed 3-14-1928)
§ 31.042 PRESIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   The President of this village shall be President of the Board of
Trustees hereof and shall preside at all meetings of said Board, but shall not
vote in assembly only in case of a tie, when he or she shall give the casting
vote.
      (2)   He or she shall perform the duties and exercise the powers
conferred upon the Mayor of a city and administer the order of business
thereof.
   (B)   All warrants drawn upon the Treasury must be signed by the President
and countersigned by the Clerk, stating the particular fund or appropriation to
which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and no money shall
otherwise be paid than upon such warrants so drawn, except as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 31.042) (Ord. 2, passed 12-2-1899)
RULES OF ORDER
§ 31.055 QUORUM.
   The President shall, if present, take the chair at the hour appointed for
the meeting of the Board; if he or she be not present, the Board shall elect a
temporary chairperson who shall act in his or her stead. The members being
called to order the roll of members shall be called, and, if a quorum be
present, the presiding officer shall cause the minutes of the last preceding
meeting to be read, unless such reading be dispensed with by vote.
(Prior Code, § 31.055) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.056 DEBATE.
   No motion shall be put or debated until it is seconded, and every question
shall be distinctly stated by the President before it is open for debate. Every
motion shall be reduced to writing if the President or any member shall so
demand. When any question is put, if the President be in doubt or a division is
called for by any member, the decision may be by a rising vote.
(Prior Code, § 31.056) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.057 MEMBER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The President may call on any member to perform the duties of
chairperson; no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the adjournment
of the particular meeting.
   (B)   Every member, previous to speaking on any question, shall rise from
his or her seat and audibly address the presiding officer as “Mr. President;”
such member shall not, however, speak further until he or she is recognized by
the presiding officer.
   (C)   No member shall speak more than twice to the same question unless
permitted by the Board.
(Prior Code, § 31.057) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.058 MOTIONS.
   (A)   When a motion made has been stated by the President or a committee
report made, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the Board; it may,
however, be amended or laid on the table or, with the consent of the Board, be
withdrawn at any time before a vote is taken thereon.
   (B)   When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received
but to adjourn; to lie on the table the previous question; or to postpone
indefinitely, when several motions shall have preference in the order in which
they are herein named. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order; it shall
be decided without debate. The yeas and nays shall always be taken on a motion
to adjourn.
   (C)   A motion for the previous question or to lay the question on the table
until decided shall preclude all amendment of debate on the main question.
   (D)   The previous question shall be as follows: “Shall the main question
now be put?”
   (E)   A motion to postpone consideration of a question indefinitely or to
adjourn it to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all amendments
to the main question.
(Prior Code, § 31.058) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.059 BLANKS.
   When a blank is to be filled and different sums or times are proposed, the
question shall first be put on the largest sum and the longest time.
(Prior Code, § 31.059) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.060 QUESTIONS.
   When a question before the Village Board contains two or more distinct
propositions, any member may call for a division of the question and the vote
shall be taken on each distinct proposition separately.
(Prior Code, § 31.060) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.061 INTRODUCTION.
   Every ordinance shall be introduced and read before the final passage
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 31.061) (Ord. passed 6-2-1917)
§ 31.062 VOTING.
   (A)   The yeas and nays shall be taken on the question of the passage of all
ordinances or propositions to create any liability against the village, or for
the appropriations or expenditures of its money; in all other cases such vote
shall be taken at the request of any member; in either case the vote shall be
entered on the record of proceedings.
   (B)   Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote unless excused by
the Village Board, or unless he or she shall be, or may become, directly
interested in the matter pending, in which case no such member shall vote.
(Prior Code, § 31.062) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.063 VIOLATION OF THE RULES.
   If any member shall transgress the rules of the Board, the President or any
member may call him or her to order; when so called to order, such member shall
at once resume his or her seat. If such member persists in the violation of the
rules, the presiding officer may name him or her by his or her personal name
and command him or her to be seated. If he or she still persists, he or she
shall be on motion censured by a majority vote of the members present; at any
stage prior to the passage of such vote of censure, the Board may on motion
allow the transgressing member to resume the floor that he or she may explain.
(Prior Code, § 31.063) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.064 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The standing committees shall be appointed annually and may be as many
as needed.
   (B)   Select committees may be appointed for the consideration of any
particular question or matter by resolution of the Board in the manner
prescribed by the resolution adopted.
   (C)   When any committee, standing or special, shall be appointed, the Clerk
shall notify the chairperson thereof and deliver to him or her the names of the
members thereof written, 48 hours after the appointments made; the chairperson
shall call the members together and, on the appearance of a quorum, it shall
proceed to the transaction of such business as is or may come before it.
   (D)   All committees to whom any matter may be referred shall report in
writing, stating the facts, giving their opinion thereon, and appending to
their report all papers to them referred. Such report shall be signed by the
concurring members. Minority reports may be submitted, signed by the
disinterested member or members.
   (E)   On the acceptance of a final report from a select committee, such
committee shall stand discharge without vote, unless it be otherwise ordered.
   (F)   All reports made by committees or officers of the village, all
resolutions adopted, all ordinances as presented and passed, all
communications, petitions, and the like received, and generally all papers
presented to or acted on, shall be filed and carefully preserved by the Village
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 31.064) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.065 NEW BUSINESS.
   All new business introduced at any meeting shall be referred to the
appropriate committees unless, on motion, it is referred to a select committee
or lay over until the next meeting. This rule shall never be suspended unless
on the affirmative votes of five members.
(Prior Code, § 31.065) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.066 PETITIONS.
   All petitions or communications addressed to the Village Board shall be in
writing and filed with the Village Clerk, and not withdrawn unless by leave of
the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 31.066) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.067 PAYMENTS.
   Unless for the payment of money as provided for by ordinance, all claims
against the village for the payment of money must be in writing and filed with
the Village Clerk at least ten days before the next regular meeting of the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 31.067) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.068 RECORD KEEPING.
   In all cases when a resolution is offered or motion made, it shall be
entered on the journal of the Board; the name of the member offering or making
the same shall also be entered on such record.
(Prior Code, § 31.068) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 31.069 GENERAL ORDER.
   The order of business of this Board shall be as follows:
   (A)   Petition;
   (B)   Reports of officers;
   (C)   Communication;
   (D)   Reports of standing committees;
   (E)   Reports of select committees;
   (F)   Unfinished business; and
   (G)   Resolutions, motions, and the like, on call of roll.
(Prior Code, § 31.069) (Ord. 8, passed 12-2-1899)
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS
§ 31.080 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Definition of meeting. The term MEETING as used in any existing
village resolution, ordinance, or rules shall be defined to mean any gathering,
whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone calls, electronic
means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat, and
instant messaging), or other means of contemporary interactive communication,
of a majority of a quorum of the members of a public body held for the purpose
of discussing public business or such other definition as shall be contained
within the state statutes.
   (B)   Amendment of previous terms. The definition of “meeting” set forth in
division (A) above shall supersede and replace any other definition used in any
previous or existing ordinance, resolution, or policy of the village.
   (C)   Public participation policy. The Board of Trustees of the village, and
each and every board or commission appointed by or otherwise under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Trustees of the village, shall adopt the Public
Participation Policy, as seen in §
31.081, that permits a person to participate and speak at any meeting of the
public body as defined in the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120, provided that such
participation is in compliance with the policy and any applicable laws.
(Ord. 981, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 31.081 POLICY.
   VILLAGE OF TEUTOPOLIS, ILLINOIS
   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION POLICY
Section 1.   Policy Statement. It is the policy of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois,
that any member of the public is provided an opportunity to speak and participate in any
Meeting of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, which is subject to the provisions of the
Open Meetings Act.
Section 2.   Prerequisites. Anyone wishing to speak at a Meeting of the Village of
Teutopolis, Illinois, which is subject to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, must
file a written request with the Village Clerk, on the form provided by the Village Clerk.
This completed form must be submitted to the Village Clerk prior to the Meeting, which
the speaker wishes to address. The form shall be submitted to the Village Clerk prior to
the Meeting being called to order. The form shall include the name of the speaker and the
subject matter. Each request to speak at a Meeting must be submitted on a separate form,
and the forms may not be submitted more than two (2) weeks prior to the Meeting the
speaker wishes to address.
Section 3.   Participation at a Meeting.
         a.   Any person, who has properly submitted the necessary form(s) to speak at a
Meeting, shall be authorized to speak during the public comment portion of the agenda
only.
         b.   Prior to speaking, a person shall identify themselves by name.
         c.   In order to conduct an efficient meeting, all comments by a speaker shall
be limited to five (5) minutes, unless a majority of the Board of Trustees and the
President agree to extend the time.
         d.   Speakers shall address their comments and/or questions to the Board of
Trustees, and not to other members of the audience.
         e.   Persons addressing the Board of Trustees should not expect an answer at the
conclusion of a person’s comments, nor shall they be allowed to question the President or
the Board of Trustees.
Section 4.   Personal and Slanderous Remarks. Any person making personal, impertinent, or
slanderous remarks, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the Board of Trustees may
be requested to leave the Meeting. Any person who does not obey the request of the
President to cease using impertinent, slanderous, or insulting language or otherwise
disrupting the Meeting shall, after a motion by any trustee, and majority vote of the
Board of Trustees, be expelled and directed to the leave the Meeting.
   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION REQUEST FORM
Date: ___________________
I request to speak during the public comment portion of the next Village of Teutopolis,
Illinois, Board of Trustees meeting scheduled for__________________, 20________ I will
have the ability to address those present but understand that this will not be a
question-and-answer format.
Name: ____________________________________
Subject: _____________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________
 
 
(Ord. 981, passed 12-15-2021)
CHAPTER 32: POLICIES GENERALLY
Section
   
32.01   Comprehensive Plan
   
32.02   Freedom of Information Act
   
32.03   Ethics Act
   
32.04   Gift Ban Act
   
32.05   Insurance
   
32.06   Travel reimbursement policy
   
32.07   Reimbursement policy for hiring, training expenses; Police Department
   
32.08   Prohibition of sexual harassment
   
32.09   Paid leave
   
32.10   Return-to-work
   
32.11   Mowing policy
   
32.12   Policy on reporting work-related fatalities and serious injuries
§ 32.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan that is attached to Ord. 1103, marked Exhibit A
and made a part hereof by this reference, to be known as the “2025 Village of
Teutopolis Comprehensive Plan,” be and is hereby adopted as the Comprehensive
Plan of the village.
   (B)   The Comprehensive Plan shall be advisory and in and of itself not be
construed to regulate or control the use of private property in any way, except
as to any part thereof that has been hereafter expressly implemented by an
ordinance duly enacted by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   No amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be adopted that has not
been first submitted to the Plan Commission for its recommendation, to include
the conduct of a public hearing thereon.
   (D)   The Comprehensive Plan shall become effective upon the expiration of
ten days after the date of filing notice of the passage and approval of this
section adopting the Comprehensive Plan in the County Recorder’s office.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 802, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. 1103, passed 8-6-2025)
§ 32.02 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
   (A)   The Village Clerk is hereby designated as the FOIA Officer to whom all
initial requests for access to the public records of the village are to be
referred. Such requests are to be made at the offices of the Village Clerk
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding
public holidays. Except in instances when records are furnished immediately,
the FOIA Officer, or the officer’s designees, shall receive requests submitted
to the village under the Freedom of Information Act, being 5 ILCS 140/1, ensure
that the village responds to requests in a timely fashion, and issue responses
under the Act. The FOIA Officer shall develop a list of documents or categories
of records that the village shall immediately disclose upon request.
   (B)   Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA Officer shall:
      (1)   Note the date the village receives the written request;
      (2)   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request;
      (3)   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request,
including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been
complied with or denied; and
      (4)   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of
the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy
of other communications.
   (C)   The FOIA Officer shall, within six months after January 1, 2010,
successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be developed by the
Public Access Counselor of the state and thereafter successfully complete an
annual training program. Whenever a new Freedom of Information Officer is
designated by the village, that person shall successfully complete the
electronic training curriculum within 30 days after assuming the position.
   (D)   Any records which are the subject of a request under the Freedom of
Information Act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored by the
FOIA Officer, or by an employee of the village acting under the direction of
the FOIA Officer. In no event shall records be retrieved by the party
requesting them or by any person who is not employed by the village.
   (E)   If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether
certified or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the FOIA Officer
pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/6(b). The Village Clerk shall maintain a written
schedule of current fees in the Clerk’s office. The fees so charged shall
reflect the actual cost of copying the records and the cost of certifying
copies, if certification is requested.
   (F)   In the event that a request to inspect village records is denied by
the FOIA Officer, the denial may be appealed to the Public Access Counselor of
the state.
   (G)   The Village Clerk shall prepare:
      (1)   A village information directory;
      (2)   A block diagram of the functional subdivisions of the village;
      (3)   A village records directory; and
      (4)   A records catalogue, all of which shall be substantially in the
same form as the documents attached to Ord. 795 and made a part hereof as
Exhibits “A,” “B,” “C,” and “D.” This information shall also be posted on the
village’s website, if any.
(Prior Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 795, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 32.03 ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of §§ 5 through 15 (5 ILCS 430/5 through 15) and Art.
10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this
section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers
and employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act by any officer or any employee of the village is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act by
any officer or employee of the village is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering, and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme
Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or
rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the state’s Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not
address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 32.03) (Ord. 737, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.04 GIFT BAN ACT.
   (A)   Adoption of Act.
      (1)   The state’s Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.) is hereby
adopted as required by § 83 of the Act (5 ILCS 430/70-5).
      (2)   The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed
official or any employee of the village.
      (3)   All non-salaried appointed or elected officials are exempted from
the Act and the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Ethics Officer. To the extent authorized by law and to the extent
required by § 20-23 of the Act (5 ILCS 430/20-23), the Village Clerk is
appointed to serve as the Ethics Officer of the village. The Ethics Officer’s
duties shall be as provided in § 20-23.
   (C)   State Legislative Ethics Commission; complaints. All complaints for
violations of the Act and this section shall be filed with the state’s
Legislative Ethics Commission (created by 5 ILCS 430/20- 5).
   (D)   Future amendments to state’s Gift Ban Act. Any amendment to the
state’s Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.) that becomes effective after
the passage of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
   (E)   Future declaration of unconstitutionality of state’s Gift Ban Act.
      (1)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares the state’s Gift Ban Act (5
ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.) unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section
shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme Court’s decision becomes
final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. The section shall
be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the
village if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
      (2)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares part of the state’s Gift Ban
Act (5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.) unconstitutional but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the
remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this section
shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this section
relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed
without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 672, passed 5-19-1999)
§ 32.05 INSURANCE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the village to
extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of January 1, 1958, the
benefits of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System as authorized by
the Federal Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. Ch. 7, and amendments thereto.
In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the Village Clerk shall take
such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.
   (B)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to execute an
agreement with the State Employees’ Retirement System of the state’s Social
Security Unit to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in division
(A) above.
   (C)   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose
provided in division (A) above are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts
and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency in such amounts and at
such times as are designated by state laws or regulations.
   (D)   Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the
state agency in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from
amounts appropriated for such purposes.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports
as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 388, passed 2-15-1958; Ord. 398, passed 10-7-1959)
§ 32.06 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The State General Assembly enacted Pub. Acts 99-0604, known as
the Local Government Travel Expense Control Act (“Act”), which became effective
on January 1, 2017.
      (2)   Pursuant to the Act, non-home rule units of local government are
required to establish regulations with respect to allowable travel, meal, and
lodging expenses.
      (3)   The recitals set forth above shall be, and are hereby, incorporated
as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set forth herein.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      PUBLIC BUSINESS. Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry out the
responsibilities of village business.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, Effingham County, Illinois.
   (C)   (1)   The village shall only reimburse the following types of travel,
meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the
following maximum allowable amounts:
         (a)   For the actual cost of public transportation by the most
reasonable and economical means;
         (b)   For the cost of operating a privately-owned automobile or other
vehicle based upon the per-mile reimbursement rate published from time to time
by the Internal Revenue Service of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, which
cost is deemed to include all operating costs, including, but not limited to,
fuel, maintenance, and insurance;
         (c)   For the actual cost of lodging in reasonably priced
accommodations, to include conference-site accommodations, if applicable, but
not to exceed $300 per diem;
         (d)   For the actual cost of meals (to the exclusion of alcoholic
beverages) while traveling, at reasonably priced restaurants, but not to exceed
$75 per diem; and/or
         (e)   Reasonable tips are reimbursable.
      (2)   Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency or other
extraordinary circumstances, the Board of Trustees may approve more than the
maximum allowable expenses set forth above.
   (D)   No reimbursement of travel, meal, or lodging expenses incurred by an
officer or employee of the village shall be authorized unless the “Travel,
Meal, and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form,” as seen in division (G)
below and made a part hereof, has been submitted and approved. All documents
and information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under
the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
   (E)   Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of those listed below may only
be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the Board of Trustees of
the village:
      (1)   Any officer or employee of the village that exceed the maximum
reimbursement allowed under this section; or
      (2)   The president or a member of the Board of Trustees of the village.
   (F)   The village shall not reimburse any officer or employee for any
entertainment expense. Activities which would otherwise be considered
entertainment, but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due
to being ancillary to the purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (G)   Below is the travel, meal, and lodging expense reimbursement request
form.
   TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM
   Before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging may be approved under the Village
Ordinance No. 872 , the following minimum documentation must first be submitted, in
writing, to the corporate authorities of the Village:
   (1)   The name of the individual who received or is requesting the travel, meal,
or lodging expense and the individuals job title or office.
___________________________________
Name of Employee or Officer
_______________________________
Job Title/Office
   (2)   The date or dates and nature of the official business in which the travel,
meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended. Please attach supporting
documentation describing the nature of the official business event or program.
________________________________   _________________________________
Name of Event or Program               Date(s) of Event or Program
________________________________   _________________________________
Location of Event or Program            Purpose of Event or Program
   (3)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses have not
been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or lodging if the
expenses have already been incurred. Please attach either (a) a document explaining
the basis for your estimate if expenses have not yet been incurred or (b) receipts
if the expenses have already been incurred.
   You may also provide such other documentation as would assist the corporate
authorities in considering your request for reimbursement. In the discretion of the
corporate authorities, additional documentation relevant to the request for
reimbursement may be required prior to action by the corporate authorities with
respect to the reimbursement request.
 
 
________________________________   _______________________________
Employee/Officer Signature               Date
 
(Ord. 872, passed 2-15-2017)
§ 32.07 REIMBURSEMENT POLICY FOR HIRING, TRAINING EXPENSES; POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to add the
following provision to the policies of the village as follows:
 
   Reimbursement Agreement for Employees of the Police Department:
All individuals tendered an offer for employment as an officer of the Village
of Teutopolis Police Department, as a condition of employment, shall execute
and deliver to the Village of Teutopolis a reimbursement agreement for hiring,
training, and uniform expenses, on a form to be prescribed by the Village of
Teutopolis, Illinois, from time to time.
 
   (B)   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to provide a notice of the policy
adopted herein to all persons applying for employment as an officer of the
Village Police Department and to all persons tendered an offer of employment as
an officer of the Village Police Department.
   (C)   (1)   Notice of condition of employment.
   NOTICE OF CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS AN OFFICER
   WITH THE VILLAGE OF TEUTOPOLIS POLICE DEPARTMENT OF POLICY     CONCERNING
REIMBURSEMENT OF HIRING, TRAINING AND UNIFORM EXPENSES
 
Ordinance No. 985 of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, requires that all
individuals tendered an offer for employment as an officer of the Village of
Teutopolis Police Department, as a condition of employment, shall execute and
deliver to the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, a reimbursement agreement for
hiring, training, and uniform expenses, on such form as prescribed by the Village
of Teutopolis, Illinois, from time to time.
 
   RECEIPT
 
The undersigned, _______________________________, by execution hereof acknowledges
receipt of the abovesaid notice this __________________ day of ____________,
20_______.
 
                                    Signature:_______________________________
 
 
      (2)   Reimbursement agreement.
   REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT FOR HIRING
   & TRAINING EXPENSES
 
   BY THIS REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT FOR HIRING & TRAINING EXPENSES (hereinafter referred
to as the “Agreement”) entered into this ___________ day of _________________,
______________________, by and between the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois,
(hereinafter referred to as the “Village”), and _____________________________
(hereinafter referred to as the “Applicant”) WITNESETH:
   WHEREAS, the purpose, of this Agreement is to provide for reimbursement to the
Village for the costs of tuition, hiring costs, mileage, uniforms, personal protective
equipment, food and lodging expenses incurred during training, and providing the
Applicant with formal basic training and certification, and all other subsequent
training, if the Applicant fails to complete the basic training course or otherwise
leaves employment with the Village for any reason within thirty-six (36) months of
service, with a minimum of hours per week, as a police officer of the Village of
Teutopolis, Illinois, beginning on the date of hire by the Village; and,
   WHEREAS, Applicant hereby acknowledges that the Village shall incur substantial
expenses in the process of hiring and training the Applicant to be a police officer;
and,
   WHEREAS, it is acknowledged by the Applicant that these expenditures are expected to
be recaptured through services by the Applicant with the Village of Teutopolis Police
Department, and that the Village shall suffer substantial detriment if the Applicant
leaves employment with the Village of Teutopolis Police Department before completing a
reasonable period of service, said reasonable period being deemed to be thirty-six (36)
months from commencement of full-time or part-time service as a Police Officer with the
Village of Teutopolis Police Department.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT:
 
   1.   Reimbursement Obligation: The recitals made in the prefatory portion of this
Agreement are hereby adopted by the parties. In consideration of the foregoing and as
an inducement to the Village to hire, train and employ Applicant, the Applicant agrees
that if he/she fails to complete the basic training course for any reason, or if he/she
is terminated, resigns or otherwise ceases to be employed by the Village for any reason
whatsoever during the thirty-six (36) month period beginning on the date of hire by the
Village in which the Applicant becomes an employee of the Village, he/she shall
reimburse the Village for the total costs incurred by the Village in connection with
the hiring and training of the Applicant (hereinafter referred to as the “Reimbursement
Obligation”). The Reimbursement Obligation shall include, but is not limited to,
tuition, hiring costs, training costs, mileage, personal protective equipment, costs of
uniforms, and food and lodging expenses incurred during training.
   2.   Terms of Repayment: Complete payment of the Reimbursement Obligation shall be
made within twelve (12) months of failing to complete the basic course or cessation of
employment with the Village. Payments should be made in equal monthly installments,
with the first payment being due and payable on the first (1st) day of the month
following the month during which the cessation of employment occurs, and on the first
(1st) day of each month thereafter until paid in full. The Village may set-off against
and apply any sums due to the Applicant as wages, including, but not limited to any
amounts received for unused sick, personal, or vacation days, at the time said
Applicant’s Reimbursement Obligation first becomes due and owing. The Applicant agrees
that in the event of his/her failure to make any payment required pursuant to this
Agreement in a timely manner, the total amount of the Reimbursement Obligation then
remaining unpaid, shall immediately become due and payable. The Applicant further
agrees that in the event that Applicant defaults on the Reimbursement Obligation
contained herein, the Applicant shall be responsible for all reasonable collection
costs and attorney fees incurred by the Village in the enforcement of this Agreement.
   3.   Condition of Employment: The Applicant’s signing of this Agreement is a
condition of employment in the event he/she is hired as a police officer with the
Village of Teutopolis Police Department. However, the Applicant understands that
nothing in this Agreement provides contractual rights to, or a guarantee of employment
for any specified period of time.
   This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties on this subject and
supercedes all prior agreements or understandings on this subject. This Agreement can
be modified only in writing signed by both parties.
   This Agreement shall be effective the date first mentioned above.
 
___________________________________      Date: _____________________
President _________________________,
Village of Teutopolis, Illinois
 
Attest: ____________________________      Date: _____________________
 
____________________, Village Clerk
 
________________________________      Date: ____________________
____________________, Applicant
 
 
      (3)   Reimbursement of hiring, training.
NOTICE TO APPLICANTS FOR EMPLOYMENT AS AN OFFICER WITH THE VILLAGE OF TEUTOPOLIS
POLICE DEPARTMENT OF POLICY CONCERNING REIMBURSEMENT OF HIRING, TRAINING AND
UNIFORM EXPENSES
 
Ordinance No._____ of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, requires that all
individuals tendered an offer for employment as an officer of the Village of
Teutopolis, Police Department, as a condition of employment, shall execute and
deliver to the Village of Teutopolis, a reimbursement agreement for hiring,
training, and uniform expenses, in such form as prescribed by the Village of
Teutopolis, Illinois, from time to time.
   RECEIPT
   The undersigned, _______________, by execution hereof acknowledges receipt of
the abovesaid notice this __________ day of _______________, 20____.
                        Signature: __________________________________________
 
(Ord. 985, passed 4-6-2022)
§ 32.08 PROHIBITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees of the village, adopted a policy
prohibiting sexual harassment in compliance with Pub. Acts 100-0554.
      (2)   The State General Assembly recently enacted the Workplace
Transparency Act, Pub. Acts 101-0221, requiring all local governmental bodies
to adopt an ordinance or resolution amending their existing sexual harassment
policies to incorporate a mechanism for reporting and independent review of
allegations of sexual harassment made against an elected official of the
governmental unit by another elected official of a governmental unit.
      (3)   It is the intent of the Board of Trustees that all prior existing
sexual harassment policies of the village shall be superseded by the Policy
Prohibiting Sexual Harassment adopted by this section.
   (B)   The Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment, attached as Exhibit A to the
ordinance codified in this section, be and it is hereby approved and adopted as
a policy of the village.
(Ord. 933, passed 2-5-2020)
§ 32.09 PAID LEAVE.
   The village hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all village
employees as set forth in the village personnel policies and procedures, any
collective bargaining agreements to which the village is a party, and all other
binding legislative actions governing paid leave adopted by the Board of
Trustees, as the same may be amended from time to time. However, in no event
shall the village, as an employer, provide less than one day of paid leave per
year to any village employee.
(Ord. 1027, passed 12-20-2023)
§ 32.10 RETURN-TO-WORK.
   (A)   The village is committed to providing a safe work environment for its
employees. It is the intention of the village to provide employees who have
sustained work-related injuries with the opportunity to return to or remain on
the municipality's payroll during periods of partial incapacity resulting from
these injuries. Every effort will be made to ensure that employees receive
quality medical care and are returned to the work environment as soon as they
are physically able.
   (B)   Employees who may work in a limited capacity, but who are temporarily
not capable of performing the full scope of their regular job duties, may
receive a temporary job assignment through the village's return-to-work
program.
   (C)   Job assignments will be based on specific medical restrictions
provided by licensed physicians. If work is available for the injured employee
and the physical requirements of such work do not violate any medical
restrictions, the employee will be required to perform the alternate job
assignment.
   (D)   The village’s return-to-work program will be coordinated by the
Village President. The Village President may be reached by phone at 217-857-
3543 or by email at villagepresident@teutopolis.com. The Village President is
responsible for ensuring that the village's return-to-work program being fully
utilized and followed.
(Ord. 1089, passed 6-18-2025)
§ 32.11 MOWING POLICY.
   (A)   The Village's Public Works Department shall conduct mowing operations
in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Employees shall only be permitted to mow areas that can be safely
mowed using equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions;
      (2)   No riding mower or tractor shall be used to mow the steep slope
angles around the sewer lagoon, unless specialized equipment is procured to
allow for the area to be safely mowed; and
      (3)   Employees shall ensure that all safety mechanisms, including
interlocks, are operational prior to operating mowing equipment.
   (B)   A copy of this policy shall be posted at the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1108, passed 8-6-2025)
§ 32.12 POLICY ON REPORTING WORK-RELATED FATALITIES AND SERIOUS INJURIES.
   (A)   As required by 56 Ill. Admin. Code, part 350.410(a)(1), the village
shall report to Illinois OSHA:
      (1)   All work-related fatalities within eight hours; and
      (2)   All work-related inpatient hospitalizations, all amputations, and
all losses of an eye within 24 hours.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall be the individual responsible for reporting
the fatal or serious work-related injury as required by 56 Ill. Admin. Code,
part 350.410(a)(1). Should the Village Clerk be unavailable within the
applicable timeframe, the Village President shall report the injury.
   (C)   The Village Clerk, Village President, and village employees have been
provided documentation of the requirements and procedures for reporting fatal
or serious work-related injuries as defined by 56 Ill. Admin. Code, part
350.410(a)(1). Specifically, the Illinois Department of Labor form identifying
Illinois OSHA's Reporting Requirements attached to Ord. 1108 has been posted on
the employee bulletin board located at Village Hall.
(Ord. 1108, passed 8-6-2025)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCES AND FUNDS
Section
   
33.01   Water Fund tax
   
33.02   Telecommunications tax
   
33.03   Locally imposed and administered taxes; rights and responsibilities
   
33.04   Sewerage Fund tax
   
33.05   Fire Department tax
   
33.06   Municipal use tax
   
33.07   Service occupation tax
   
33.08   Retailers’ occupation tax
   
33.09   Hotel and motel tax
§ 33.01 WATER FUND TAX.
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-131-1, the Water Fund tax rate of the village
be and is hereby increased from 0.01666% to 0.05%.
   (B)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-131-1, the village be and is hereby
authorized to levy and collect annually a further tax not to exceed 0.033% of
the value of the taxable property to be used exclusively for the purpose of
supplying water to the village.
(Prior Code, § 33.01) (Ord. 807, passed 8-3-2011)
§ 33.02 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
      DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
      GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money,
whether paid in money or otherwise; including cash, credits, services, and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor, or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit
is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS
CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the
interstate inter-office channel provided within the state. However, GROSS
CHARGE shall not include:
         (a)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
            1.   The tax imposed by this section;
            2.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
being 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.;
            3.   The tax imposed by I.R.C. § 4251;
            4.    911 surcharges; or
            5.   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions
of 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 9-222, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers’ bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the
state’s Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public
Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5.
         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
such municipality;
         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
         (d)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under 220
ILCS 5/9- 222.2 to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time
specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this section has already been paid to a retailer, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
         (g)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
         (h)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices; or
         (i)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, being 35 ILCS 635/1 et
seq.
      INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside this state.
      INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
      PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition or consumption of use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
      RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion,
upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty
of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.
      RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
      SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, state universities created by statute, and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
      SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, being 35 ILCS 638/
1 et seq. For air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean
the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in the state where
bills are sent.
      TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability
as authorized by ordinance.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this section, PRIVATE LINE means a
dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the
customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of
channels from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this section. For purposes of this section,
PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that term as defined in § 2-27 of
the Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/2-27.
   (B)   (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts
or privileges:
         (a)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or
receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a
rate of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer; and
         (b)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or
receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a
rate of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this division (B), any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such
other state, which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state.
      (2)   The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality.
   (C)   (1)   The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this section
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
      (2)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this section shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
   (D)   On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last
day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this section on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the state’s Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, § 5-50), being 35 ILCS
636/5-1 et seq. and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the
Department to implement the Act.
   (E)   (1)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims
to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this section on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
      (2)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant.
The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer
applies because of the person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
      (3)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall
not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale, unless the
person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any
sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Prior Code, § 33.02) (Ord. 715, passed 9-18-2002)
§ 33.03 LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAXES; RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the village’s procedures
in connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, being 50 ILCS
45/1 et seq.
      CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The village’s President and Board of Trustees.
      HEARING OFFICER. An administrative individual appointed by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities, to conduct
hearings and to issue final determinations regarding the collection of all
locally imposed and administered taxes.
      LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Clerk is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees, or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
section to give full effect to this section. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this section and the
Act.
      LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code, being 35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq. or fees
collected by the village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
      NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
      TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
      TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, Effingham County, Illinois.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit, or other scheduled act of
the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; and
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
   (D)   Any notice, payment, remittance, or other filing required to be made
to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is physically received by the village on or before the due date, or received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village with adequate
postage prepaid.
   (E)   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied
in the following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period;
second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the
penalty for the applicable period.
   (F)   (1)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily
paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
      (2)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
      (3)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows.
         (a)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in
writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
            1.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
            2.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
            3.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
            4.   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
            5.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest, and penalties overpaid,
and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however,
that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any moneys to the village.
         (b)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
            1.   Grant the claim; or
            2.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
         (c)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
   (G)   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this section.
      (1)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The tax;
         (b)   The time period of the audit; and
         (c)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.
      (2)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if
the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30
days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
      (3)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
      (4)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption, or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to, and available for, inspection by
the village.
      (5)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
      (6)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
      (7)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
   (H)   (1)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of
tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any
tax. The notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   The reason for the assessment;
         (b)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         (c)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         (d)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund,
and collection process.
      (2)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
      (3)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
      (4)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within
the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit, or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
      (5)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
   (I)   (1)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under division (H) above, the local
tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. The taxpayer
may request that a hearing officer conduct the hearing rather than the local
tax administrator.
      (2)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
      (3)   At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit, or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator/
hearing officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision.
   (J)   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and
owing, through audit, assessment, or other bill sent, the tax must be paid
within the time frame otherwise indicated.
      (1)   The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or non-payment of the tax to be 9%
per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
      (2)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment
penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the
time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the
village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a
failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for
the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.
A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty
is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   (K)   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty, or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.
   (L)   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer
for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
   (M)   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
   (N)   (1)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a
taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or
assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an
application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the
tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay
the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application, but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application.
      (2)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before
the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
      (3)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed
as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
   (O)   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal
or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk’s office.
   (P)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
   (Q)   This section shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this section, this section
shall be controlling.
(Prior Code, § 33.03) (Ord. 690, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 33.04 SEWERAGE FUND TAX.
   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-143-1, the Sewerage Fund tax rate of the village be
and is hereby increased from 0.01666% to 0.10%.
(Prior Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 687, passed 10-18-2000)
§ 33.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT TAX.
   (A)   The state’s Municipal League is hereby authorized by the corporate
authorities of this municipality to receive and examine the reports and
payments of the 2% Fire Department taxes tendered to this municipality by
foreign fire insurance companies writing such business on property located
within the corporate limits of this municipality.
   (B)   The state’s Municipal League shall establish a permanent Fire
Insurance Tax Bureau in which there shall be kept a permanent, accurate, and
complete record of all such tax payments received from foreign fire insurance
companies and the distribution of such payments to the municipalities, and all
such records shall be open to the inspection of any municipal official during
reasonable office hours.
   (C)   This municipality hereby agrees to pay to the state’s Municipal League
for the cost of maintaining the services of the aforementioned Fire Insurance
Bureau a fee of 7%, based upon the amount of the 2% Fire Department taxes
actually collected by the League and received by the municipality. Such 7% fee
to be paid the League not later than 30 days after the receipt of tax payments
by this municipality. The state’s Municipal League is hereby further authorized
to carry on necessary correspondence with the foreign fire insurance companies
owing taxes to this municipality on behalf of this municipality, for the
purpose of increasing the tax payments of the insurance company to this
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 33.05) (Res. 529, passed - -)
§ 33.06 MUNICIPAL USE TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible
personal property which is purchased outside the state at retail from a
retailer and which is titled or registered with an agency of the state
government. The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of such
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use
Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., approved July 14, 1955, as amended.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the state’s Department of Revenue for
all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
(Prior Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 529, passed 12-3-1980; Ord. 536, passed 1-6-1982)
§ 33.07 SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of 0.75% of the gross
receipts received from such business, in accordance with the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/8-11-5.
   (B)   Every service person required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state’s Department of
Revenue required by § 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 115/9.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
   (D)   This section shall be published within ten days of its enactment as
provided in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4 and shall be effective from and after the first day
of the calendar month next following the expiration of the ten-day publication
period.
(Prior Code, § 33.07) (Ord. 438, passed 7-19-1967)
§ 33.08 RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of
0.75% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file,
on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state’s
Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3, approved June 28, 1933, as
amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
   (D)   This section shall be published within ten days of its enactment as
provided in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4 and shall be effective from and after the first day
of the calendar month next following the expiration of the ten-day publication
period.
(Prior Code, § 33.08) (Ord. 437, passed 7-5-1967)
§ 33.09 HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      DEPARTMENT. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that
section may be in force from time to time.
      HOTEL and MOTEL. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that
section may be in force from time to time.
      OCCUPANCY. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that section
may be in force from time to time.
      OPERATOR. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that section
may be in force from time to time.
      PERMANENT RESIDENT. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as
that section may be in force from time to time.
      PERSON. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that section
may be in force from time to time.
      RENT or RENTAL. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that
section may be in force from time to time.
      ROOM or ROOMS. The same meaning as provided in 35 ILCS 145/2, as that
section may be in force from time to time.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, an Illinois municipal corporation.
      VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois.
      VILLAGE TREASURER. The Village Treasurer of the Village of Teutopolis,
Illinois.
   (B)   Tax.
      (1)   Effective April 1, 2024, there is hereby levied and imposed a tax
of 3% of the gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing, or letting of a
hotel room within the village for each 24- hour period or any portion thereof
from which a daily room charge is made; provided, however, that a tax shall not
be levied or imposed upon any person who shall be a permanent resident.
      (2)   Persons subject to the tax hereby imposed may reimburse themselves
for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination and in single
amount with any state tax imposed under the Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax
Act, as provided in 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
      (3)   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be paid in addition to any
and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the operator to pay
the amount of the tax to the Village Clerk under procedures prescribed by the
Village Clerk or as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   Records to be kept. Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable
thereon in such form as may be required by regulation prescribed by the Village
Clerk or as otherwise provided by this section. Such records shall be available
for inspection and examination for any proper purpose at any reasonable time
upon demand by the Village Clerk or a duly authorized agent or employee of the
village and shall be preserved for a period of not less than three years unless
the Village Clerk shall prescribe a shorter period of time. It shall be
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the Village Clerk
or the duly authorized representative of the Village Clerk in the discharge of
the duties of the Village Clerk.
   (D)   Returns.
      (1)   Every operator shall file with the Village Clerk, on a monthly
basis, a return of occupancy and rents and of the taxes payable thereon on
forms prescribed by the Village Clerk and consistent with the returns required
under the Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 145/1 et. seq. The
return shall be due on or before the last day of the calendar month succeeding
the end of the month filing period. When the last day of the calendar month
falls on a weekend or holiday, the return shall be due on the first business
day following the last calendar month. A return shall be considered filed upon
its receipt by the Village Clerk or on the date on which such return is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service. A separate return shall be
filed for each place of business within the village regardless of ownership.
      (2)   The first taxing period for the purpose of this section shall
commence on April 1, 2024, and the tax return and payment for such period shall
be due on or before May 30, 2024. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax
payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. At the
time of filing such tax returns, the operator shall pay the full amount of all
tax due hereunder.
      (3)   If for any reason any return or tax is not paid when due, a penalty
of 10% of the tax due for each 30-day period or portion thereof from the date
of delinquency shall be added and collected.
   (E)   Collection. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty
due hereunder, the village shall bring or cause to be brought in the name of
the village an action to enforce payment of the tax and/or penalty in any court
of competent jurisdiction, together with the costs of such collection.
   (F)   Proceeds of taxes. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the
tax hereunder, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasurer of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate funds of the
village. All such proceeds shall be separately accounted for by the Treasurer.
   (G)   Use of funds. All taxes and penalties received by the village
hereunder shall be expended by the village solely to promote tourism,
conventions, and other special events within the village and otherwise attract
non-residents to the village. The Board of Trustees will provide by separate
means for such expenditures, which methods may change from time to time,
consistent with the terms of this section and the laws of the state.
   (H)   Certificate of registration. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this section for any person to engage in the business of renting, leasing, or
letting rooms in a hotel in the village without a certificate of registration
issued by the Department of Revenue under the provisions of 35 ILCS 145/5.
   (I)   Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section, in
addition to any and all other penalties provided herein, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $250, nor more than $750, and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day in which such
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1036, passed 3-20-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
      
52.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Groundwater as potable water supply
Connections
   
50.15   Service connection permits; charges
   
50.16   Application for water service; fees
   
50.17   Water service installations
   
50.18   Repairs to system
   
50.19   Cross-connections
   
50.20   Water service pipe
   
50.21   Compliance with plumbing requirements
   
50.22   Excavations for connections
   
50.23   Shut-off boxes
   
50.24   Water service to more than one premises
Use of Public Water Service
   
50.35   Meters required
   
50.36   Resale of water; unauthorized use
   
50.37   Requirements and restrictions relating to meters
   
50.38   Tap-on fees
   
50.39   Service failures
   
50.40   Service interruption
   
50.41   Tampering with system
   
50.42   Right of access; use inspection
   
50.43   Powers and authority of inspectors
Rates and Charges
   
50.55   Charges
   
50.56   Bills
   
50.57   Billing cycles
   
50.58   Due date
   
50.59   Late payment penalty
   
50.60   Lien; notice of delinquency
   
50.61   Foreclosure of lien
   
50.62   Revenues
   
50.63   Accounts
   
50.64   Access to records
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(“EPA”).
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The certified operator of the village’s water system.
   CURB COCK or CURB STOP. A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe
from a water main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated
by a valve key to start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
(“IEPA”).
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissible.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water constituent,
which is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
   ORDINANCE. Ord. 827 or this chapter.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
   SERVICE BOX. A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STATE ACT. The State Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30 ILCS 405/1 et
seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   STATE LOAN. The state participation in the financing of the construction of
water works as provided for by the State Act and for making such loans as filed
with the Secretary of State.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis.
   WATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the water system.
   WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge(s) levied upon all users of the water
system.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.02 GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   (1)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the
effective date of this section, the use or attempt to use of groundwater as a
potable water supply by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other
method, including at points of withdrawal by the village, is hereby prohibited
within the area described below and shown on Exhibit A, which is attached to
Ord. 860 and incorporated herein by reference.
      (2)   Prohibited area for groundwater as potable water supply parcel
identification numbers: 12-18-010-014; 12-18-010-018; 12-18-010-047; 12-18-010-
007; 12-18-001-002; 12-18-003-033; 12-18-003-030; 12-18-001-003; 12-18-010-054;
12-18-010-021; 12-18-003-089; 12-18- 003-028; 12-18-003-048; 12-18-003-041; 12-
18-003-006; 12-18-003-005; and 12-18-003-045.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 860, passed 3-2-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONNECTIONS
§ 50.15 SERVICE CONNECTION PERMITS; CHARGES.
   (A)   No connections to the water system shall be made without a permit
issued by the Village Clerk. All such connections shall be made under the
supervision of the Approving Authority, and no connection shall be covered
until the work has been inspected to the satisfaction of the Approving
Authority. Whenever any premises shall hereafter be connected with the water
system, a charge shall be made.
   (B)   The owner, occupant, party, or parties in possession of any house,
structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any other
building or structure of any other character which uses water and is located on
property within the corporate boundaries of the village shall cause such house,
structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any other
building or structure of any other character to be connected with the
waterworks system within 90 days following the date that water service becomes
available to such property.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the real estate occupied by any water user and
connected to the waterworks system becomes contiguous to the corporate
boundaries of the village, the owner shall execute a petition, when requested
by the village, to annex said real estate into the corporate boundaries of the
village. If the owner fails or refuses to execute such annexation petition
within 30 days of the request by the village, the village may disconnect and
terminate water service to the real estate.
      (2)   The expiration of 30 days after the request to execute the
annexation petition shall be deemed due and proper notice to disconnect and
terminate water service if the owner fails or refuses to execute the annexation
petition.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.16 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; FEES.
   (A)   No water from the water system shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the Approving Authority. Application to have water
turned on shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall contain an
agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this
chapter as conditions governing the use and service of the water system by the
applicant, including, but not limited to, an agreement by the applicant stating
that the applicant is responsible for payment of all bills, that the applicant
will abide by and accept all of the provisions governing the use of the village
water system, and that the applicant will sign any annexation petition
presented to the applicant by the village at the time the premises being
serviced with water become contiguous to the corporate territory of the
village, if such premises are not presently in such territory.
   (B)   A turn-on fee of $50 shall be charged for making water service
available to the premises.
   (C)   A turn-off fee of $50 shall be charged for terminating service to the
premises when the termination occurs at the customer’s request.
   (D)   A reconnection fee of $50 shall be charged for restoring water service
to the premises when service was terminated for cause and not at the customer’s
request.
(Prior Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.17 WATER SERVICE INSTALLATIONS.
   All service pipes and laterals one inch or less from the water mains to the
meter shall be installed by, and at the expense of, the village for a distance
not to exceed 100 feet. All service pipes and laterals over one inch from the
water mains to the meter shall be installed by, and at the expense of, the
owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. If such
water service must cross a public or quasi-public right-of-way that requires
boring and casing, the cost of such boring and casing shall be borne by the
applicant for the service or the owner of the property being served. All
expense for more than 100 feet shall be at the cost of, and installed by, the
owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. All such
water services shall be individually metered. In the event the water main is
not located adjacent to the premises, the owner of the property to be served or
the applicant for the service, as the case may be, shall pay the cost of
extending the same.
(Prior Code, § 50.17) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.18 REPAIRS TO SYSTEM.
   All repairs for service pipes and laterals from the water main to the meter
shall be made by, and at the expense of, the village. From the meter to the
property being served, all repairs and excavations shall be borne by, and at
the expense of, the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 50.18) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.19 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   If, in accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the Approving Authority, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Approving Authority will
give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. The water customer shall, at the customer’s own expense, install
such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the
state’s Plumbing Code and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as required by
the said Plumbing Code and all such laws, rules, and regulations.
   (B)   No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or
permit to be maintained, any connection whereby private, auxiliary, or
emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply of the
village, enters the supply or distribution system of the village, unless such
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the village and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Approving Authority to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as
often as the village shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.
   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross-connections, and the Approving Authority, or his
or her authorized agent, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the
owner, tenants, or other occupants of any property so served shall furnish to
the Approving Authority any information that the Approving Authority may
request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property.
The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of
the Board of Trustees, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this section.
   (E)   The Approving Authority of the village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as the Approving Authority may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution
mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions
of this section, and until a reconnection fee is paid to the village. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Approving Authority
is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause for such disconnection.
   (F)   The customer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
(Prior Code, § 50.19) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.20 WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   All water services used or laid on village property shall be of copper (Type
K), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene, or polybutylene construction. At no
time will any galvanized metal or synthetic pipe be used, except as specified
herein.
(Prior Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.21 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.
   No water shall be turned on for service to any premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations;
provided, that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished
buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.21) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.22 EXCAVATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   Excavations for installing service pipes and laterals or repairing the same
shall be made in compliance with the provisions relating to making excavations
in streets. The placement of any service pipe shall be in compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 50.22) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.23 SHUT-OFF BOXES.
   A water meter shall be placed on every service pipe and shall be located
between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such
meter boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be
protected from frost.
(Prior Code, § 50.23) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.24 WATER SERVICE TO MORE THAN ONE PREMISES.
   No customer shall be permitted to connect two premises to the same service
line unless such premises are separately metered, nor shall any service line be
allowed to cross property to serve premises owned by another party. Duplex
flats, double houses, and apartment houses shall be considered as one
“premises.” A PREMISES shall be construed to cover all buildings and divisions
under one common roof, owned by one party, who will be charged for all services
to such premises.
(Prior Code, § 50.24) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
USE OF PUBLIC WATER SERVICE
§ 50.35 METERS REQUIRED.
   All premises using the village water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter registering in gallons. All meters one inch or less placed
in service to any premises using the village water system will be provided and
owned by the village, which retains the right to inspect, repair, and replace
them upon reasonable notice to the owner or occupant of the premises. All
meters over one inch placed in service to any premises using the village water
system will be provided and owned by the owner of the property, who shall be
obligated to inspect, repair, and replace them as may be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 50.35) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.36 RESALE OF WATER; UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   (A)   No water supplied by the waterworks system of the village shall be
resold by any customer. No customer may supply water to other users, except for
use on the premises and for the purpose specified in such user’s approved
application.
   (B)   Not after water is introduced into any building or upon any premises
shall any person tamper with any meter, or make or employ any other person to
make any tap or connection with work upon the premises for alterations,
repairs, extensions, or attachments, without a written permit therefor.
   (C)   Resale or unauthorized use of water shall be grounds for
discontinuance of water service to the customer or the premises, or both.
(Prior Code, § 50.36) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.37 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO METERS.
   (A)   Meters shall be installed in a location that will provide easy access
thereto, in accordance with §
50.23.
   (B)   The Approving Authority shall read or cause to be read every water
meter used in the village at such times as are necessary so that the bills may
be sent out in a timely manner.
   (C)   Upon the reasonable request of a customer, a water meter shall be
tested for accuracy. If upon testing the meter is found to be over 3% off in
accuracy, the meter shall be replaced at no cost to the customer. If the meter
is found to be 3% or less in accuracy, then the customer shall pay a testing
fee of $25.
(Prior Code, § 50.37) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.38 TAP-ON FEES.
   The tap-on fees for service to each property for which an application for
water service has been made shall be as follows.
   (A)   For meters not exceeding one inch: a fee of $1,000.
   (B)   For meters exceeding one inch: a minimum fee of $1,000, plus the
actual cost of installation and materials.
   (C)   A stainless steel, full circle tapping saddle is required. The
connection must be brass and the piping must be copper (Type K) or class 900
PVC.
(Prior Code, § 50.38) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.39 SERVICE FAILURES.
   All waterworks service supplied by the waterworks system shall be upon the
express condition that the village shall not be liable nor shall any claim be
made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any
main, branches, service pipes, apparatus, or appurtenances connected with said
system or any part or portion thereof, or for any interruption of the supply by
reason of the breakage of machinery or by reason of stoppage, alterations,
extensions, or renewals.
(Prior Code, § 50.39) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.40 SERVICE INTERRUPTION.
   (A)   The village reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the
mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or
extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the
village in case of fire, and for restricting the use of water in case of
deficiency in supply, including the suspension of the use of water for
irrigation.
   (B)   No claim shall be made against the village by reason of the breaking
of any water service, pipe, or service cock, or damage arising from shutting
off of water for repairing, laying, or relaying mains, hydrants, or other
connections, or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the
water supply or by increasing the water pressure at any time, or from
concentrated or restricted use of water as above.
(Prior Code, § 50.40) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.41 TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not expressly authorized by the Board of
Trustees to tamper with, alter, or damage any part of the village waterworks or
supply system, including any meter.
(Prior Code, § 50.41) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.42 RIGHT OF ACCESS; USE INSPECTION.
   (A)   The village, its employees and authorized agents, and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency shall have access at all reasonable times to
the premises, places, or buildings where water service is supplied for the
purpose of inspecting, examining, and testing the consumption, use, and flow of
water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent, or
obstruct the village or its duly authorized agent or the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency in its duties hereunder.
   (B)   Every user of the system shall take the same upon the conditions
prescribed in this section.
(Prior Code, § 50.42) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.43 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   (1)   The Approving Authority, and other duly authorized employees and
agents of the village and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Approving Authority or authorized representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   (1)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in this section, the Approving Authority or duly authorized
employees or agents of the village and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency shall observe all reasonable safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the customer and the customer shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the village employees and agents.
      (2)   The village shall indemnify the customer against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
customer and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the customer to maintain conditions
as required by this chapter.
   (C)   The Approving Authority, and other duly authorized employees and
agents of the village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds an
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 50.43) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.55 CHARGES.
   (A)   The water service charge for the use of and for service supplied by
the water facilities of the village shall take into account the cost of
operations, maintenance, and replacement of the waterworks system, as well as
debt service requirements and capital improvements required to maintain the
capacity and performance of the system.
   (B)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less
frequently than annually, in connection with the village’s annual audit. The
water service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect changes in
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs, debt service, and capital
improvements. Annual rate increases, as outlined below, shall automatically
take effect at the beginning of each fiscal year unless the Village Board shall
determine otherwise prior to the beginning of such fiscal year.
   (C)   The volume of flow used for computing water service charges shall be
the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 1,000
gallons.
   (D)   Beginning May 1, 2021 (Fiscal Year 2021), and on May 1 of each year
thereafter, the following rates and charges shall be in effect for billings
rendered on or after the following July 1.
      (1)   Within corporate boundaries.
         (a)   Beginning Fiscal Year 2021, the basic user charge, for a volume
that does not exceed 3,000 gallons, shall be $35.50 per billing cycle.
Additionally, $8.60 shall be charged for each 1,000 gallons, or part thereof,
within the same billing cycle.
         (b)   Extending through Fiscal Year 2026, each year an automatic
increase of $1 shall be applied to the basic user charge, and an automatic
increase of $0.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons or part thereof.
      (2)   Outside corporate boundaries.
         (a)   Beginning Fiscal Year 2021, the basic user charge, for a volume
that does not exceed 3,000 gallons shall be $53.25 per billing cycle.
Additionally, $12.90 shall be charged for each 1,000 gallons, or part thereof,
within the same billing cycle.
         (b)   Extending through Fiscal Year 2026, each year an automatic
increase of $1.50 shall be applied to the basic user charge, and an automatic
increase of $0.45 for each additional 1,000 gallons or part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50.55) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013; Ord. 958, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 50.56 BILLS.
   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the water service to such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the
services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(Prior Code, § 50.56) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.57 BILLING CYCLES.
   The term BILLING CYCLE, as used herein, shall consist of two consecutive
calendar months, commencing with the first two months in each calendar year and
at two-month intervals thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 50.57) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.58 DUE DATE.
   The meters will be read by the village every two months, beginning on or
about January 1 in each calendar year. If weather conditions or other
circumstances prevent the reading of meters, then the village will estimate
each water bill. Bills will be mailed by the tenth day of the month in which
the meter is read and will be delinquent unless paid by the due date. All
payments are due by the thirtieth day of the month in which the meter is read.
Bills will be paid to the Village Treasurer or designated representative.
(Prior Code, § 50.58) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.59 LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
   (A)   There will be a 15% penalty added to each bill that is not paid by the
due date. If the bill remains unpaid for seven or more days after the due date,
the water service to the premises shall be terminated by the village after
written notice of a public hearing is given to the customer at the customer’s
last known address, and the customer is given an opportunity to show cause at
such hearing, in person or in writing, why the water service should not be
terminated.
   (B)   In the event the water service is terminated, it shall not be restored
until the delinquency and penalties are paid in full. A reconnection fee shall
be charged for restoring water service to the premises if service is terminated
for cause, as set forth in §
50.16.
(Prior Code, § 50.59) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.60 LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for service remains unpaid for 30 days after service
has been rendered, the Village Clerk shall file with the County Recorder of
Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice
that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the Village Clerk has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the premises if the owner’s address be known to the Village Clerk whenever such
bill remains unpaid for a period of 45 days after it has been rendered.
   (C)   The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in division (B)
above.
(Prior Code, § 50.60) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.61 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in equity in the name of the village. The
Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid for 45
days after it has been rendered.
(Prior Code, § 50.61) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.62 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water system
shall be deposited in the Water Account of the Water Fund. All such revenues
and moneys shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his
or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the Village
Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the President and
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the Water Fund of the village. Said Treasurer shall
administer such Fund in every respect in the manner provided by applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 50.62) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.63 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at
regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water
facilities, including a replacement cost.
   (C)   The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the
current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system; and
      (5)   Number of non-metered users.
(Prior Code, § 50.63) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
§ 50.64 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or its authorized representatives, shall have access to any
books, documents, papers, and records of the village which are applicable to
the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the
terms of any special and general conditions to any state grant or loan
agreement and rules, or any state loan.
(Prior Code, § 50.64) (Ord. 827, passed 5-1-2013)
CHAPTER 51: BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Responsibility of the Superintendent
   
51.02   Inspection
   
51.03   Definitions
Technical Requirements
   
51.15   Safety
   
51.16   Cross-connections prohibited
   
51.17   Interconnections
   
51.18   Individual water supplies
   
51.19   Connections to boilers
   
51.20   Prohibited connections
   
51.21   Refrigerating unit condensers
Protection Against Backflow and Back-siphonage
   
51.35   Water outlets
   
51.36   Minimum required air gap
   
51.37   Approval of devices
   
51.38   Installation devices
   
51.39   Tanks and vats
   
51.40   Protective devices required
   
51.41   Booster pumps
Maintenance Requirements
   
51.55   Maintenance responsibility
   
51.56   Backflow preventers
   
51.57   Notification of violation
   
51.58   Tables and images
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent of the Water Department, or his or her designated agent,
shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in this village as
frequently as, in his or her judgment, may be necessary to ensure that such
plumbing has been installed in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of
pollution of the water supply of the village by the plumbing. The
Superintendent shall notify or cause to be notified in writing the owner or
authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises to correct,
within a reasonable time set by the Superintendent, any plumbing installed or
existing contrary to, or in violation of, this chapter and which, in his or her
judgment, may therefore permit the pollution of the village water supply or
otherwise adversely affect the public health.
(Prior Code, § 51.01) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.02 INSPECTION.
   The Superintendent, or his or her designated agent, shall have the right of
entry into any building during reasonable hours for the purpose of making
inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building or premises;
provided, that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwelling,
consent to such inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable
age and discretion therein or in control thereof. Consistent refusal to allow
inspection of a specific dwelling may be cause for requiring installation of
suitable backflow protection or discontinuation of potable water service.
(Prior Code, § 51.02) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The department of the municipal government invested with the
authority and responsibility for the enactment and enforcement of this chapter.
   AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood-level rim of the receptacle.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the agency as meeting an applicable specification
stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the potable water
supply that may be available in the building or premises.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than its intended source. Back-siphonage is one type of BACKFLOW.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or means to prevent backflow.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE. Backflow resulting from negative pressures in the
distributing pipes of a potable water supply.
   CHECK VALVE. A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of
fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow.
   CONTAMINATION. See POLLUTION.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection between a potable water supply and
any unapproved source or system through which backflow can occur. Furthermore,
it is any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in
wastewater and/or any other source of contamination. See BACKFLOW and BACK-
SIPHONAGE.
   DRAIN. Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a building
drainage system.
   FIXTURE, PLUMBING. Installed receptacles, devices, or appliances supplied
with water or that receive or discharge liquids or liquid-borne wastes.
   FLOOD-LEVEL RIM. The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. Any conditions, devices, or practices in the water supply
system and its operation which create or, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water
consumer. An example of a HEALTH HAZARD is a structural defect in the water
supply system, whether of location, design, or construction that regularly or
occasionally may prevent satisfactory treatment of the water supply or cause it
to be polluted from extraneous sources.
   HAZARD, PLUMBING. Any arrangement of plumbing including piping and fixtures
whereby a cross-connection is created.
   HYDROPNEUMATIC TANK. A pressure vessel in which air pressure acts upon the
surface of the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the water
distribution piping connected to the vessel.
   OUTLET. The open end of the water supply pipe through which the water is
discharged into the plumbing fixture.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing
fixtures, and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; building drains and building
sewers, including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances
within the property lines of the premises; and water-treating or water-using
equipment.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly of differential
valves and check valves, including an automatically opened spillage port to the
atmosphere designed to prevent backflow.
   SURGE TANK. The receiving, nonpressure vessel forming part of the air gap
separation between a potable and an auxiliary supply.
   VACUUM. Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
   VACUUM BREAKER, NONPRESSURE TYPE. A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be
subjected to static line pressure.
   VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE TYPE. A vacuum breaker designed to operate under
conditions of static line pressure.
   WATER, NON-POTABLE. Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is
of questionable potability.
   WATER, POTABLE. Water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient to cause
disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical
quality shall conform to the requirements of the federal and state drinking
water regulations and to any regulations of the public health authority having
local jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.15 SAFETY.
   A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed, and maintained
in such manner as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids, or
gases from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-
connections or any other piping connections to the system.
(Prior Code, § 51.15) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.16 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   Cross-connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited, except when and where, as approved by the authority
having jurisdiction, suitable protective devices such as the reduced pressure
zone backflow preventer or equal are installed, tested, and maintained to
ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
(Prior Code, § 51.16) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.17 INTERCONNECTIONS.
   Interconnection between two or more public water supplies shall be permitted
only with the approval of the state authority having jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 51.17) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.18 INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLIES.
   Cross-connections between an individual water supply and a potable public
supply shall not be made unless specifically approved by the state authority
having jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 51.18) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.19 CONNECTIONS TO BOILERS.
   Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air gap or
provided with an approved backflow preventer.
(Prior Code, § 51.19) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.20 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Connection to the potable water supply system is prohibited unless
protected against backflow in accordance with § 51.22 or as set out herein.
   (B)   Examples of fixtures and equipment from which the potable water supply
system must be protected include:
      (1)   Bidets;
      (2)   Operating, dissection, embalming, and mortuary tables or similar
equipment. In such installation, the hose used for water supply shall terminate
at least 12 inches away from every point of the table or attachments;
      (3)   Pumps for non-potable water, chemicals, or other substances.
Priming connections may be made only through an air gap; and
      (4)   Building drainage, sewer, or vent systems.
(Prior Code, § 51.20) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.21 REFRIGERATING UNIT CONDENSERS.
   Except where potable water provided for a refrigerator condenser or cooling
jacket is entirely outside the piping or tank containing a toxic refrigerant,
the inlet connection shall be provided with an approved check valve. Also
adjacent to and at the outlet side of the check valve, an approved pressure
relief valve set to relieve at five psi above the maximum water pressure at the
point of installation shall be provided if the refrigeration units contain more
than 20 pounds of refrigerants.
(Prior Code, § 51.21) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
PROTECTION AGAINST BACKFLOW AND BACK-SIPHONAGE
§ 51.35 WATER OUTLETS.
   A potable water system shall be protected against backflow and back-
siphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet:
   (A)   An air gap, as specified in §
51.36, between the potable water outlet and the flood-level rim of the fixture
it supplies or between the outlet and any other source of contamination; or
   (B)   An approved device or means to prevent backflow.
(Prior Code, § 51.35) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.36 MINIMUM REQUIRED AIR GAP.
   (A)   How measured. The minimum required air gap shall be measured
vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or
line of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
   (B)   Size. The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective
opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than
three times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface,
in which cases the minimum required air gap shall be three times the effective
opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air gap be less
than shown in §
51.58(A).
(Prior Code, § 51.36) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.37 APPROVAL OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Before any device for the prevention of backflow or back-siphonage is
installed, it shall have first been certified by a recognized testing
laboratory acceptable to the agency Superintendent. Devices installed in a
building potable water supply distribution system for protection against
backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons
responsible for the maintenance of the system.
   (B)   The agency Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall inspect
routinely such devices, and if they are found to be defective or inoperative,
shall require the replacement thereof.
(Prior Code, § 51.37) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.38 INSTALLATION DEVICES.
   (A)   Nonpressure type vacuum breakers. Atmosphere vacuum breakers shall be
installed with the critical level at least six inches above the flood-level rim
of the fixture they serve and on the discharge side of the last control valve
to the fixture. No shutoff valve or faucet shall be installed beyond the vacuum
breaker. For closed equipment or vessels such as pressure sterilizers, the top
of the vessel shall be treated as the flood-level rim, but a check valve shall
be installed on the discharge side of the vacuum breaker.
   (B)   Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer. Reduced pressure
principle type backflow preventer may be installed subject to full static
pressure.
   (C)   Devices of all types. Backflow and back-siphonage preventing devices
shall be accessibly located, preferably in the same room with the fixture they
serve. Installation in utility or service spaces, provided they are readily
accessible, is also permitted.
(Prior Code, § 51.38) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.39 TANKS AND VATS.
   (A)   Where a potable water outlet terminates below the rim of a tank or vat
and the tank or vat has an overflow of diameter not less than that given in §
51.58(B), the overflow pipe shall be provided with an air gap as close to the
tank as possible.
   (B)   The potable water outlet to the tank or vat shall terminate a distance
not less than 1% times the height to which water can rise in the tank above the
top of the overflow. This level shall be established at the maximum flow rate
of the supply to the tank or vat and with all outlets except the air gap
overflow outlet closed. The distance from the outlet to the high water level
shall be measured from the critical point of the potable water supply outlet.
Section 51.58(C) illustrates this principle.
(Prior Code, § 51.39) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.40 PROTECTIVE DEVICES REQUIRED.
   Approved devices to protect against backflow and back-siphonage shall be
installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or back-siphonage
may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between the water
outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood-level rim.
   (A)   Connections not subject to backpressure. Where a water connection is
not subject to backpressure, a vacuum breaker shall be installed on the
discharge side of the last valve on the line serving the fixture or equipment.
A list of some conditions requiring protective devices of this kind is given in
§
51.58(D).
   (B)   Connections subject to back pressure. Where a potable water connection
is made to a line, fixture, tank, vat, pump, or other equipment with a hazard
of backflow or back-siphonage where the water connection is subject to back
pressure and an air gap cannot be installed, the Superintendent will require
adequate protection which may include the use of an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer. A partial list of such connections is shown in §
51.58(E).
(Prior Code, § 51.40) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.41 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system and the
possibility exists that a positive pressure of less than 20 psi may occur on
the suction side of the pump, there shall be installed a low pressure cutoff on
the booster pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum or negative pressure on
the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to other outlets.
(Prior Code, § 51.41) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.55 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the responsibility of building and premises owners to maintain
all backflow preventers and vacuum breakers within the building or on the
premises in good working order, and to make no piping or other arrangements for
the purpose of bypassing backflow devices.
(Prior Code, § 51.55) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.56 BACKFLOW PREVENTERS.
   Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the
Superintendent for all backflow preventers and the interval between such
testing and inspections and overhauls of each device shall be established in
accordance with the age and condition of the device. Inspection intervals shall
not exceed one year, and overhaul intervals shall not exceed five years. These
devices should be inspected frequently after the initial installations to
assure that they have been installed properly and that debris resulting from
the installation has not interfered with the functioning of the device. The
testing procedures shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
when approved by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 51.56) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.57 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   The Superintendent shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this chapter
of such violation. The Superintendent shall set a reasonable time for the owner
to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have
the defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the
Superintendent may if, in his or her judgment, an imminent health hazard
exists, causes the water service to the building or premises to be terminated,
and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as herein may
be provided.
(Prior Code, § 51.57) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
§ 51.58 TABLES AND IMAGES.
   (A)   Minimum air gaps for generally used plumbing fixtures.
Fixture Minimum Air Gap
        When not affected by near wall (1 When affected by near wall (2 inches)
        inches)
Fixture                    Minimum Air Gap
                           When not affected by near When affected by near wall
                           wall (1 inches)           (2 inches)
Drinking water fountains -
single orifice seven-
sixteenths of an inch in
diameter or multiple
orifices having total area 1.0                       1.50
of 0.150 square inches
(area of circle seven-
sixteenths of an inch in
diameter).
Effective openings greater Two times the diameter of Three times the diameter
than one inch.             effective opening.        of effective opening.
Lavatories and other
fixtures with effective    1.0                       1.50
openings not greater than
one-half inch in diameter.
Over rim bath fillers and
other fixtures with
effective openings not     2.0                       3.0
greater than one inch in
diameter.
Sink, laundry trays,
goose-neck bath faucets,
and other fixtures with    1.5                       2.25
effective openings not
greater than three-fourths
of an inch in diameter.
Notes to Table:
(1)   Side walls, ribs, or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when
spaced from inside edge of spout opening a distance greater than three times
the diameter of the effective opening for a single wall, or a distance greater
than four times the diameter of the effective opening for two intersecting
walls.
(2)   Vertical watts, ribs, or similar obstructions extending from the water
surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening require a greater
air gap when spaced closer to the nearest inside edge of spout opening than
specified in note (1) above. The effect of three or more such vertical walls or
ribs has not been determined. In such cases, the air gap shall be measured from
the top of the wall.
 
   (B)   Sizes of overflow pipes for water supply tanks.
 
Maximum Capacity of Diameter of    Maximum Capacity of  Diameter of Overflow
Water Supply Line   Overflow Pipe  Water Supply Line to Pipe (Inches ID)
to Tank             (Inches ID)    Tank
0 - 50 gpm          2              400 - 700 gpm        5
50 - 150 gpm        2.5            700 - 1,000 gpm      6
100 - 200 gpm       3              Over 1,000 gpm       8
200 - 400 gpm       4
 
   (C)    Properly protected tank with below rim supply.
   (D)    Cross-connections whe re protective devices are requ ired and
critical level (C-L) settings for vacuum breakers.
Fixture or Equipment Method of Installation
Fixture or Equipment             Method of Installation
Aspirators and ejectors          C-L at least six inches above flood
                                 level of receptacle served.
                                 On models without built-in vacuum
Dental units                     breakers - C-L at least six inches above
                                 flood-level rim of bowl.
                                 C-L at least five inches above flood
Dishwashing machines             level of machine. Install on both hot
                                 and cold water supply lines.
                                 Equip with approved ball cock. Where
                                 ball cocks touch tank water, equip with
                                 vacuum breaker at least one inch above
Flush tanks                      overflow outlets. Where ball cock does
                                 not touch tank water, install ball cock
                                 outlet at least one inch above overflow
                                 outlet or provide vacuum breaker as
                                 specified above.
Flushometers (closet and urinal) C-L at least six inches above top of
                                 fixture supplied.
                                 C-L at least six inches above flood
Garbage can cleaning machine     level of machine. Install on both hot
                                 and cold water supply lines.
Hose bibbs (where aspirators or  C-L at least six inches above flood
ejectors could be connected)     level of receptacle served.
Hose outlets                     C-L at least six inches above highest
                                 point on hose line.
                                 C-L at least six inches above flood
Laundry machines                 level of machine. Install on both hot
                                 and cold water supply lines.
Lawn sprinklers                  C-L at least 12 inches above highest
                                 sprinkler or discharge outlet.
Steam tables                     C-L at least five inches above flood
                                 level.
Tanks and vats                   C-L at least six inches above flood-
                                 level rim or line.
Trough urinals                   C-L at least 30 inches above perforated
                                 flush pipe.
Note to Table:
*Critical Level (C-L) is defined as the level to which the vacuum breaker
may be submerged before backflow will occur. Where the C-L is not shown
on the preventer, the bottom of the device shall be taken as the C-L.
 
   (E)   Partial list of cross-connections which may be subject to back
pressure.
 
Chemical lines                 Pressure tanks
Dock water outlets             Pumps
Individual water supplies      Stream lines
Industrial process water lines Swimming pools
Hose bibbs                     Tanks and vats - bottom inlets
 
(Prior Code, § 51.58) (Ord. 548, passed 12-5-1984)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Use of public sewers required
   
52.03   Private sewage disposal
Building Sewers and Connections
   
52.15   Authorization required
   
52.16   Application
   
52.17   Cost; liability
   
52.18   Independent connections
   
52.19   Old sewers
   
52.20   Materials
   
52.21   Installation standards
   
52.22   Gravity sewers
   
52.23   Additional regulations
   
52.24   Inspection
   
52.25   Safety
   
52.26   Extension of mains
Sewer Use
   
52.40   Polluting stormwater drain
   
52.41   Sanitary sewer protected
   
52.42   Prohibited wastes
   
52.43   Interceptors
   
52.44   Unusual strength or character
   
52.45   Preliminary treatment
   
52.46   Protection from damage
   
52.47   Powers and authority of inspectors
Rates and Charges
   
52.60   Rate schedule
   
52.61   Change in occupancy
   
52.62   Payment
   
52.63   Access to records
   
52.64   Annual review
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   B.O.D. or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer that
begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any
process or excess energy of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PPM. Parts per million.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. An interceptor or lateral sewer tributary to the sewage
treatment works.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastewater.
   SEWAGE. Water-carried human and related waste from any source.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying either wastewater or land runoff, or
both.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent or Manager of the village sewage system,
or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, and any reference to “within
the village” shall mean all territory within the perimeter of the village
boundaries.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any drainage structure open or
enclosed, natural or human-made, including, without limitation, any natural
outlet or watercourse within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the village, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, other polluted waters,
or effluent from a private sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (C)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated within the village
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer owned by the
village is hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities with the proper public sewer
of the village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90
days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public
sewer is within 275 feet of the property line.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer of the village is not available under
the provisions of §
52.02(C), the building’s sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency or the Illinois Department of Public Health. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than a
size suitable for installation of an effective system. If a subsurface soil
absorption facility is used, it shall be designed based on percolation tests
performed at the site under the following conditions.
      (1)   Percolation tests may be required to be conducted in the presence
of a designated County Health Official and shall be required in all areas where
septic tanks or other soil absorption systems are proposed. Where grading is to
be done, such tests shall be made in the soil after finished grade has been
constructed.
      (2)   At least two separate percolation tests shall be performed at the
site of each proposed disposal area. More than two percolation tests will be
required when the soil structure may vary or where large disposal areas are
required.
      (3)   Preliminary tests for subdividing large tracts shall be made in the
amount of one test hole per acre or as prescribed by the county’s Health
Department.
      (4)   Percolation tests shall not be made in frozen ground.
      (5)   Tests shall not be made in filled ground unless the soil has been
compacted or allowed to settle to the satisfaction of the County Health
Official.
   (C)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
52.02(C), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in accordance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (D)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the village.
   (E)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency or the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Prior Code, § 52.03) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012; Ord. 873, passed 2-15-2017)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.15 AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 52.15) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.16 APPLICATION.
   The owner, or his or her agent, shall make application on a special form
furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
specifications, plans, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $150, with the
village furnishing the saddle, for a sewer permit shall be paid to the Village
Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 52.16) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.17 COST; LIABILITY.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer and the maintenance of said sewer.
(Prior Code, § 52.17) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.18 INDEPENDENT CONNECTIONS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 52.18) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.19 OLD SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 52.19) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.20 MATERIALS.
   The underground building sewer shall be PVC, Plastic SDR 35, or greater. All
joints shall be bell and O-ring with rubber gaskets. No glue joints shall be
permitted
(Ord. 873, passed 2-15-2017)
§ 52.21 INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code and other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In the absence of code provisions, or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in the state
shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 52.21) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.22 GRAVITY SEWERS.
   (A)   No basement, half basement, or any other portion of a building having
a floor elevation beneath the ground surface over the public sewer at the point
of connection may be connected into the public sewer by gravity. In areas where
the ground line over the public sewer is to be altered, the proposed final
ground elevation shall be used. The maximum depth to the top of the building
service sewer shall be 42 inches below finished grade at the point where it
enters such building.
   (B)   In all buildings in which the building drain is too low to provide
gravity flow to the public sewer, all sewage carried by such drain shall be
lifted by mechanical means. No water-operated sewage injector shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 52.22) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012; Ord. 958, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 52.23 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the standard specifications for water and sewer main
construction in the state. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and
water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(Prior Code, § 52.24) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.24 INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent, or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 52.25) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.25 SAFETY.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village and any other
governmental agency affected.
(Prior Code, § 52.26) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.26 EXTENSION OF MAINS.
   The following requirements shall apply if a sewer extension is requested by
a Developer (hereinafter defined):
   (A)   When a public sanitary sewer is not available, the village may approve
the installation of a sanitary sewer line and connection to the village’s
public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Any person wanting to make an extension of and connection to the
village’s public sanitary sewer (“Developer”) shall present such request to the
Village Superintendent. The Village Superintendent shall make a preliminary
determination as to the feasibility of the extension project, then present his
or her determination to the Board of Trustees for consideration.
   (C)   Any extension of the public sanitary sewer shall require an State
Licensed Professional Engineer’s design; and, construction and operating
permits from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (“IEPA”).
   (D)   Upon approval of the Board of Trustees, the Developer shall be
presented with a cost analysis for the extension.
   (E)   The village shall charge the Developer a minimum fee not less than
$8,000 for up to the first 100 lineal feet of sanitary sewer line, and $60 per
lineal foot thereafter, which shall be increased (but not decreased) by the
annual change, if any, in the U.S. Consumer Price Index (U.S., all items, CPI-
U).
   (F)   The distance shall be measured from the center point of access to the
village’s public sanitary sewer, to the point of the sanitary sewer connection.
At a minimum, the point of the sanitary sewer connection shall be adjacent to
the property being served.
   (G)   In the event rights-of-way are required for an extension, the
Developer shall assist the village with the solicitation and acquisition of the
same.
   (H)   Since lead time is necessary for the approval process, the engineer’s
design, IEPA permitting, and, for construction, sanitary sewer extension
requests shall be made a minimum six months prior to the need for sewer
service.
   (I)   Upon approval and payment of required fees, and subject to the
availability of appropriated funds for such purpose, the village will proceed
with engineering and construction of the sanitary sewer extension project on
behalf of the Developer at the village’s expense.
(Ord. 873, passed 2-15-2017; Ord. 958, passed 3-17-2021)
SEWER USE
§ 52.40 POLLUTING STORMWATER DRAIN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect, or
cause to be connected, any drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink,
basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device
discharging any polluting substances to any stormwater drain in the village.
(Prior Code, § 52.40) (Ord. 397, passed 7-27-1959) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.41 SANITARY SEWER PROTECTED.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 52.41) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.42 PROHIBITED WASTES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
   (B)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million
by weight of fat, oil, or grease;
   (C)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
   (D)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
   (F)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;
   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing chloride exceeding 500 mg/l;
   (H)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant;
   (I)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
   (J)   Copper exceeding 1.0 mg/l;
   (K)   Zinc exceeding 1.0 mg/l;
   (L)   Chrome (Hexavalent) exceeding 0.3 mg/l;
   (M)   Cadmium exceeding 0.15 mg/l;
   (N)   Cyanide exceeding 0.025 mg/l;
   (O)   Fluorides exceeding 2.5 mg/l;
   (P)   Chlorides exceeding 7,000 mg/l;
   (Q)   Nickel exceeding 1.0 mg/l;
   (R)   Phenols exceeding 0.3 mg/l; and
   (S)   Mercury exceeding 0.0005 mg/l.
(Prior Code, § 52.42) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.43 INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or retainers shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of the liquid wastes containing grease, oils, or sand in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, or other harmful ingredients; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   (B)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight, and equipped with
easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas-tight and
water-tight.
   (C)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
(Prior Code, § 52.43) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.44 UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER.
   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million weight,
containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids,
containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in §
52.42, or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the 100,000 G.P.D. shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Superintendent.
   (B)   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in §
52.42, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
   (C)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Superintendent and of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing.
(Prior Code, § 52.44) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.45 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   (A)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (B)   (1)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.
      (2)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent.
      (3)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his or her expense,
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible to the
Superintendent at all times.
   (C)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes, to which reference is made in §§
52.42 and
52.44, shall be determined in accordance with standard methods for the
examination of water and sewage, or a method approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in division (B)
above, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected; provided the Superintendent
shall be permitted to take samples within the premises of the user, including
lagoons, ponds, and other places.
   (D)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 52.45) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
§ 52.46 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
(Prior Code, § 52.46) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012) Penalty, see 10.99
§ 52.47 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village shall
be permitted to enter upon all properties subject to this chapter for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 52.47) (Ord. 823, passed 9-19-2012)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.60 RATE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The adequacy of the sewer service charge shall be reviewed, not less
frequently than annually, in connection with the village’s annual audit. The
sewer service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect changes in
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs, debt service, and capital
improvements. Annual rate increases, as outlined below, shall automatically
take effect at the beginning of each fiscal year unless the Village Board shall
determine otherwise prior to the beginning of such fiscal year. Effective on
and after May 1, 2021 (Fiscal Year 2021), for bills to be rendered during the
month of July 2021, the following rates and charges shall be made for the use
of the sanitary sewerage system both within and outside the corporate
boundaries of the village.
      (1)   Within corporate boundaries.
         (a)   Beginning Fiscal Year 2021, the basic charge to a user whose
water consumption does not exceed 3,000 gallons shall be $24.50 per billing
cycle. Additionally, $3.81 shall be charged for each 1,000 gallons, or part
thereof, within the same billing cycle.
         (b)   Extending through Fiscal Year 2026, each year an automatic
increase of $0.50 shall be applied to the basic user charge, and an automatic
increase of $0.16 for each additional 1,000 gallons or part thereof.
      (2)   Outside corporate boundaries.
         (a)   Beginning Fiscal Year 2021, the basic charge to a user whose
water consumption does not exceed 3,000 gallons shall be $36.75 per billing
cycle. Additionally, $5.72 shall be charged for each 1,000 gallons, or part
thereof, within the same billing cycle.
         (b)   Extending through Fiscal Year 2026, each year an automatic
increase of $0.75 shall be applied to the basic user charge, and an automatic
increase of $0.24 for each additional 1,000 gallons or part thereof.
   (B)   The term BILLING CYCLE, as used herein, shall consist of two
consecutive calendar months, commencing with the first month in each calendar
year, and at two-month intervals thereafter.
   (C)   Sewerage rates for industrial wastes shall be determined by the
Village Engineer in accordance with the guidelines for user charge systems and
industrial cost recovery systems for state grants under the Anti-Pollution Bond
Act of 1972, 30 ILCS 405. INDUSTRIAL WASTES, as used herein, shall mean any
solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any process or excess energy of
industry, manufacturing, trade, or business.
   (D)   The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually,
in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance, and replacement.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-20-2016; Ord. 958, passed 3-17-2021)
§ 52.61 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Notice of village. Any user requesting a termination of service shall
give written notice to the village ten days prior to the time such termination
of service is desired. The meter shall be read by the village and the user will
be billed.
   (B)   Responsibility for payment of services already consumed.
Responsibility for payment for water consumed prior to the date of termination
shall be with the property owners as well as the user.
   (C)   Charges for change. There shall be no charge for transferring the
sewer service to the subsequent user.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 52.62 PAYMENT.
   Bills will be mailed by the tenth day of the month, in alternating months,
and will be delinquent unless paid by the thirtieth day of that month.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 52.63 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or its authorized
representative, shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records
of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
special and general conditions of any state grant.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 52.64 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The village shall annually review user charges; shall annually review the
costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works facilities; and shall
annually review said user charges in accordance with the actual costs so as to
generate sufficient revenue to offset the cost of all treatment works operation
and maintenance.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-20-2016)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
In General
   
70.01   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.15   Obedience to police officers
   
70.16   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.17   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.18   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
   
70.19   Compression/release engine brake prohibited
Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings
   
70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.32   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.33   Lane-control signals
   
70.34   Flashing signals
   
70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or advertising signs
   
70.36   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures
   
70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.39   Zones of quiet
   
70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.41   Stop and yield signs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-102)
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access
highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.
(70 ILCS 1205/3-9)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local
authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department; vehicles of a
HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board under § 5-1127 of
the Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/5-1127); ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile
Justice; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of the
Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives emergency
response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois State Toll
Highway Authority identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol;
and vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency,
as defined by the State Emergency Management Agency Act.
(625 ILCS 5/1-105)
   AUTOCYCLE. A three-wheel motor vehicle that has a steering wheel and seating
that does not require the operator to straddle or sit astride it.
(625 ILCS 5/1-104.2)
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
(625 ILCS 5/1-106)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than ten persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when,
within 600 feet along the highway, there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
(625 ILCS 5/1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway.
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-301.
(625 ILCS 5/1-113)
   DEPARTMENT. Except as otherwise designated, the Department of Transportation
of the state.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-116)
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two non-
tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person with an electric
propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15 mph or
less.
(625 ILCS 5/1-117.7)
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled.
(625 ILCS 5/1-120)
   FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE. Any vehicle, bicycle, or electric personal
assistive mobility device that is designated or authorized by proper local
authorities for Fire Department use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-120.7)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(625 ILCS 5/1-125)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder.
(625 ILCS 5/1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an INTERSECTION.
(625 ILCS 5/1-132)
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.
(625 ILCS 5/1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control, and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(625 ILCS 5/1-137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit; and/or
      (3)   Any nonresident’s driving privilege as defined herein.
(625 ILCS 5/1-138)
   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned first division vehicle intended to be used
for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a
meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination.
(625 ILCS 5/1-139.1)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, city, village, and other local board or
body having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution
and laws of this state and each road district Highway Commissioner having that
authority.
(625 ILCS 5/1-140)
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. The term has the same meaning ascribed to it by
§ 38 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. § 2085).
(625 ILCS 5/1-140.10)
   LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE. A two- or three-wheeled device with fully operable
pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower, whose maximum speed on
a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor while ridden by an
operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 mph.
(625 ILCS 5/1-140.15)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid.
(625 ILCS 5/1-141)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized
wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles. For this
section, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:
      (1)   First division: motor vehicles designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.
      (2)   Second division: motor vehicles designed for carrying more than ten
persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those motor vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of
the second division.
(625 ILCS 5/1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.
(625 ILCS 5/1-147)
   MOPED. A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived from
manually operated pedals, whose speed is attainable in one mile is at least 20
mph but not greater than 30 mph, and is equipped with a motor that produces two
brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the
displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power
drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.2)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled
vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable
of a speed in excess of eight mph on level ground.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.3)
   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS. A school bus manufactured for the purpose
of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver, whose purposes do not
include transporting students to and from home or school bus stops. A MFSAB is
prohibited from meeting the special requirements for school buses in 625 ILCS
5/12-801, 12-803, 12-805, and 12-802(a).
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.3a-5)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.6)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(625 ILCS 5/1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-156)
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157)
   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her public employment is
vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157.5)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates, including a
person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability.
(625 ILCS 5/1-158)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed
physician, by a licensed physician assistant, or by a licensed advanced
practice nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist:
      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane,
crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive
device;
      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her
forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;
      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person’s functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to
standards set by the American Heart Association;
      (5)   Is severely limited in the person’s ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition;
      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the
above five conditions; or
      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand
or arm.
(625 ILCS 5/1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162)
   POLICE VEHICLE. Any vehicle, recreational off-highway vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, watercraft, bicycle, or electric personal assistive mobility device
that is designated or authorized by proper local authorities for police use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162.3)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his or her
principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or her
payroll, maintains a central file of records, and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in one place, then that place where a majority of these functions are
performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally transact and
control his or her business affairs shall be considered as the PRINCIPAL PLACE
OF BUSINESS.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-163)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an official
traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws governing
same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the
approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.
(625 ILCS 5/1-167)
   RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT. All vehicles operated upon rails for the purpose
of the maintenance of railroads, including, but not limited to, all hi-rail
vehicles and on-track roadway maintenance machines, as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
214.7.
(625 ILCS 5/1-167.5)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric, or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(625 ILCS 5/1-168)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business.
(625 ILCS 5/1-169)
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration
plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate that
will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire department,
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances, and associated with some unit of
government.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.6)
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
      (1)   The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not comprising
a business district, when the property on the highway for a distance of 300
feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
      (2)   For purposes of establishing maximum speed limits, a RESIDENCE
DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with residences or
residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more than 500 feet
apart.
(625 ILCS 5/1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.
(625 ILCS 5/1-174)
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
Secretary of a person’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the Secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(625 ILCS 5/1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(625 ILCS 5/1-178)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all the roadways collectively.
(625 ILCS 5/1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(625 ILCS 5/1-181)
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition does not include the following:
         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, municipal corporation, or
common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of
passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare- paying passengers;
            2.   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with special events; or
            3.   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities.
         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division; or
         (c)   A multi-function school-activity bus.
(625 ILCS 5/1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187)
   SHOULDER. The portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
(625 ILCS 5/1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from
time to time be amended.
(625 ILCS 5/1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois State Police.
(625 ILCS 5/1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(625 ILCS 5/1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(625 ILCS 5/1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of any city, village, or incorporated town,
other than the business and residence districts.
(625 ILCS 5/1-203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar, towline, or
auxiliary axle, or to render assistance to disabled vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
(625 ILCS 5/1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(625 ILCS 5/1-212)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of one-quarter
mile or more.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214.8)
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title
under 625 ILCS 5/3-101(d), except devices moved by human power, devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the
Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act (625 ILCS 40).
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes
within the definition of a JUNK VEHICLE, as defined under this section, or a
junking certificate is issued for it.
      (3)   For this section, VEHICLES are divided into two divisions:
         (a)   First division: those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons; and
         (b)   Second division: those vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than ten persons; those designed or used for living quarters; those which
are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo; those
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as vehicles of the
second division; and those vehicles of the first division used and registered
as school buses.
(625 ILCS 5/1-217) (Prior Code, § 70.01)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, firefighter, person authorized by the village
to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with authority to
direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/11-203)
(Prior Code, § 70.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from work.
(625 ILCS 5/11-205)
(Prior Code, § 70.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(625 ILCS 5/11-206)
(Prior Code, § 70.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or
refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or
her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal
given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue
light. However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and,
if driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated any compression/
release engine brake within the village. For purposes of this section,
COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE shall be defined as any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by
converting engine power to compressed air, and shall include, but not be
limited to, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes, Jake Brakes, and any other type of
compression/release engine brake commonly used within the trucking industry.
The Village Foreman is hereby authorized and directed to place signs depicting
the prohibition of compression/release engine brakes in accordance with 625
ILCS 5/11-301, the State Manual and Specifications, and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto which are necessary to advance, promote, and enforce the
purposes of this section.
(Ord. 1012, passed 7-19-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
§ 70.30 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control
devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which
no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a
stop sign.
(625 ILCS 5/11-305)
(Prior Code, § 70.30) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. This vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
   (C)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk
that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by traffic
controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
   (D)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(3) and (D)(4) below, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (D)(3) and (D)(4) below, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to
make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection
to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and local
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division (D)(1) or (D)(2)
above. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      (4)   After stopping as required by division (D)(1) or (D)(2) above, the
driver of a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which fails to
change to a green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than 120
seconds because of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to
detect the arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to the vehicle’s size or
weight, shall have the right to proceed, after yielding the right-of-way to
oncoming traffic facing a green signal, subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign as required by §
70.41.
      (5)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall
not enter the roadway.
   (E)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the absence of
such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(625 ILCS 5/11-306) (Prior Code, § 70.31) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.32 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Don’t Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Don’t Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal or upraised palm
symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don’t Walk”
signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(625 ILCS 5/11-307) (Prior Code, § 70.32) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic-controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic-controls present. Otherwise he or
she shall obey all other traffic-controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(625 ILCS 5/11-308) (Prior Code, § 70.33) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.34 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in
conjunction with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(625 ILCS 5/11-309) (Prior Code, § 70.34) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.35 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in the village which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway signs by the village as provided in the State Adopt-A-Highway
Act, 605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
(625 ILCS 5/11-310) (Prior Code, § 70.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.36 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device, or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or
any other part thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/11-311) (Prior Code, § 70.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.37 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any public
highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage, injure, or
remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed in
connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or for
the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/11-312) (Prior Code, § 70.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The Village Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals, or markers owned by the village, is authorized to indicate the
ownership of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than three-
eighths inch, or more than three-quarters inch in height, by use of a metal
stamp, etching, or other permanent means. Except for employees of the Village
Street Department, police officers, contractors and their employees engaged in
a highway construction contract or work on the highway approved by the village,
it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign, signal, or marker so
identified.
(625 ILCS 5/11-313) (Prior Code, § 70.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.39 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device except in an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 70.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.40 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be travelled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
(Prior Code, § 70.40) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.41 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching
a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no
crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1204) (Prior Code, § 70.41) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99.
   (A)   Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic
code for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance
or by appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in 625 ILCS 5/16-101
et seq. shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $750.
   (B)   Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of any provision
of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or
restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, or parking in a
metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the required time,
may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for the illegal parking
by paying to the village $75 for each such offense if paid within five days, or
$100 if paid within 21 days. This payment may be made at the police station, a
receipt shall be issued for all money so received, and the money shall be
promptly turned over to the Village Treasurer to be credited to the General
Fund. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to refrain
from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved. This section
shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or
exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a
hospital; nor shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a
vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking
in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic
only; nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the
request of any member of the Police Department.
   (C)   Obedience to police officers. Any person convicted of violating §
70.10 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a mandatory fine of
$150.
(625 ILCS 5/11-203)
   (D)   Interference wit traffic-control devices. Every person who is
convicted of a violation of §
70.36 shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other
penalties which may be imposed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-311)
   (E)   Damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures. Every person who is
convicted of a violation of §
70.37 shall be punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-312)
(Prior Code, § 70.99)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Rules and regulations
   
71.03   Permits
   
71.04   Permit revocation
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   COUNTRY ROAD. Any highway under the jurisdiction of the county, including
the state aid road between State Street and State Route 33.
   NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle not specifically designed to be used on
a public highway, including:
      (1)   A GOLF CART, as that term is defined in § 1.123.9 of the State
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-123.9), namely, a vehicle specifically designed and
intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf
clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in playing of golf, supervising
the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course;
      (2)   A RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE, as that term is defined in § 1-
168.8 of the State Vehicle Code, namely any motorized off-highway device
designed to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on four or more
non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers (commonly known as a
“side-by-side”); and
      (3)   Anything contained in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding,
for purposes of this chapter, the term NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE shall not include
any “all-terrain vehicle” as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-101.8, including any four-
wheeler or three-wheeler or other similar type of all-terrain vehicle.
Furthermore, the term NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE shall not include an off-highway
motorcycle, as that term is defined in § 1-153.1 of the State Vehicle Code.
   STATE ROAD. Any highway under the jurisdiction of the state, including U.S.
Route 40.
   VILLAGE STREET. Any street within the corporate limits of a village, to the
exclusion of state roads and country roads.
(Ord. 980, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 71.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
drive or operate a non-highway vehicle upon any village street, state road, or
country road within the village.
   (B)   A person operating a non-highway vehicle on any village street, state
road, or country road must ensure compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Shall be subject to the mandatory insurance requirements specified
by the state’s Motor Vehicle Code for passenger vehicles;
      (2)   Must have a valid driver’s license to operate a motor vehicle,
issued by the state or any other state;
      (3)   Must display the permit hereinafter mentioned in a visible location
on the non-highway vehicle;
      (4)   Must be equipped with brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a
rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a
slow moving emblem (as required of other vehicles in 625 ILCS 5/12.709) on the
rear of the non-highway vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible
for a distance of at least 500 feet from the front, a tail lamp that emits a
red light visible from at least 100 feet from the rear, brake lights, turn
signals, horn, windshield, and approved seatbelts for the driver and all
passengers;
      (5)   Any golf cart, as defined in §
71.01, must also be equipped with a triangular orange flag displayed at the top
of a six-foot pole mounted to the rear bumper;
      (6)   When operated on a roadway, a non-highway vehicle must have its
headlights and tail lamps lighted as required by 625 ILCS 5/12-201;
      (7)   Must obey all traffic laws of the state and village;
      (8)   A golf cart, as that term is defined in §
71.01, must be operated by a person of 18 years of age or older and a
recreational off-highway vehicle, as that term is defined in §
71.01, must be operated by a person of 21 years of age or older;
      (9)   May not be operated upon U.S. Route 40, except as stated herein;
      (10)   Any modification to the side-by-side suspension may not exceed six
inches in height;
      (11)   Must not exceed 20 mph;
      (12)   Non-highway vehicles may only be operated on designated village
streets from sunrise to sunset. Notwithstanding the foregoing, non-highway
vehicles may be operated in the village on the Friday prior to Halloween
(October 31), after sunset, but not later than 9:00 p.m.
      (13)   Non-highway vehicles shall not be operated in inclement weather,
nor when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions
limiting visibility, nor at any time when there is insufficient light to
clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet;
      (14)   Non-highway vehicles may not be operated by a person who drives or
is in the actual physical control of a non-highway vehicle on a village street,
state road, or country road while under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or
intoxicating compounds subject to 625 ILCS 5/11-502, inclusive;
      (15)   Non-highway vehicles shall not be operated on sidewalks, nor in
parks or other public places within the village, other than in designated
parking areas;
      (16)   (a)   Non-highway vehicles may not be operated on state roads or
country roads, except to cross:
            1.   Main Street at its intersection with Pearl Street;
            2.   Main Street at its intersection with Columbus Street;
            3.   Main Street at its intersection with Race Street;
            4.   Main Street at its intersection with John Street;
            5.   Main Street at its intersection with Garrett Street;
            6.   Main Street at its intersection with Green Street;
            7.   Main Street at its intersection with Wall Street;
            8.   Main Street at its intersection with Washington Street; or
            9.   Main Street at its intersection with Plum Street.
         (b)   The village will ensure that proper signage is erected to
designate the authorized crossing points;
      (17)   A non-highway vehicle may transport only the number of passengers
for which the specific non-highway vehicle was designed. Every passenger shall
sit in a seat that was installed by the manufacturer of the non-highway
vehicle. It shall be unlawful for the operator/driver of the non-highway
vehicle to transport passengers unless each passenger is in a seat. The
operator/driver of the non-highway vehicle shall not transport anyone who is
sitting on the lap of a passenger, or in any other location except in a seat;
and
      (18)   It shall be unlawful to pull any trailer or any equipment or
device with a non-highway vehicle.
(Ord. 980, passed 12-15-2021; Ord. 995, passed 9-21-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a non-highway vehicle on a village street,
state road, or country road without obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk
as provided herein. The permit, if issued, shall be valid until December 31 of
the same calendar year of issuance. Thereafter, upon renewal, a permit shall be
valid for a period of one year from January 1 in the year of renewal to
December 31 of the same calendar year of issuance. Prior to the issuance and/or
renewal of a permit to operate a golf cart, as defined in §
71.01, a person applying for such a permit shall pay to the Village Clerk an
annual fee of $50. Prior to the issuance and/or renewal of a permit to operate
a recreational off-highway vehicle, as that term is defined in §
71.01, a person applying for such a permit shall pay to the Village Clerk an
annual fee of $100. The existence of the required insurance coverage shall be
verified by the Village Clerk when issuing or renewing the permit.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name of the liability insurance carrier;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model, and description of the non-highway
vehicle;
      (4)   A signed waiver of liability by the applicant releasing the village
from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of the applicant’s
non-highway vehicle within the village;
      (5)   A photostatic copy of the liability insurance coverage card issued
by the insurance carrier specifically applicable to the non-highway vehicle;
and
      (6)   Such other information as the village may reasonably require to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The non-highway vehicle must be inspected by the Village Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate
on the village streets and is in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   A physically handicapped applicant requiring a non-highway vehicle
modified with hand controls must submit a certificate signed by a physician
that the handicapped applicant is able to safely operate a motorized non-
highway vehicle in compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   With regard to recreational off-highway vehicles (commonly known as
side-by-sides) only, the applicant’s place of domicile must be located either:
         (a)   At a Teutopolis, Illinois, 62467 mailing address; or
         (b)   Within one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the
village.
(Ord. 980, passed 12-15-2021; Ord. 999, passed 12-21-2022)
§ 71.04 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The permit issued pursuant to §
71.03 may be revoked by Village Chief of Police, or his or her designee, if:
      (1)   There is any material misrepresentation made by the applicant on
the application;
      (2)   The liability insurance required by §
71.03 is no longer in full force and effect;
      (3)   There is evidence, as determined in the sole discretion of the
Village Chief of Police, or his or her designee, that the permit holder can no
longer safely operate the non-highway vehicle; or
      (4)   There has been a violation of any rules, regulations, and
ordinances of the village, or provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code by the
permit holder.
   (B)   (1)   The Village Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall issue
a notice of revocation of a permit in writing and either hand deliver the
notice to the permit holder, or send the notice by certified mail, return
receipt required, to the permit holder at the address on the application.
      (2)   The revocation of the permit shall be effective immediately after
personal service, or on the third day after the postmark of the certified mail.
In the event of revocation of a permit, the permit holder shall not be entitled
to the return of any portion of the annual fee.
(Ord. 980, passed 12-15-2021)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who aids or
abets the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of a
petty offense punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
In addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief
directing the violator(s) to cure the violation, and the village may revoke any
permit authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during
or on which a violation of any provision of this chapter occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any second or subsequent offense of any provision of this chapter
shall result in the revocation of the non-highway vehicle permit for a period
of not less than one year nor more than five years.
(Ord. 980, passed 12-15-2021)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop signs
      
II.   Speed limits
      
III.   One-way streets
      
IV.   Load limits
SCHEDULE I. STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The following intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections and stop signs shall be erected.
Street/Intersection Description
Street/Intersection                 Description
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Automotive Street and Main Street   maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop southbound traffic on Automotive
                                    Street approaching Main Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Farmweld Avenue and U.S. Route 40   maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop northbound traffic on Farmweld
                                    Avenue approaching U.S. Route 40.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at the
Garrett Street and Walnut Street    points most convenient to stop
                                    northbound and southbound traffic
                                    approaching Walnut Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Garrett Street and Water Street     maintained at this intersection at the
                                    point most convenient to stop eastbound
                                    traffic approaching Garrett Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Goldenrod Avenue and John Street    maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop westbound traffic on Goldenrod
                                    Avenue approaching John Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Goldenrod Avenue and Oak Street     maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic on Goldenrod
                                    Avenue approaching Oak Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
Green Street and Southern Row       to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic on Green Street approaching
                                    Southern Row.
                                    Four stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at
Green Street and Walnut Street      points most convenient to stop eastbound
                                    and westbound traffic approaching Green
                                    Street and northbound and southbound
                                    traffic approaching Walnut Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at the
Green Street and Water Street       point most convenient to stop eastbound
                                    and westbound traffic approaching Green
                                    Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Herin Place and Rhine Street        maintained at the point most convenient
                                   to stop southbound traffic approaching
                                    Rhine Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
John Street and Morning Glory Lane  maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop westbound traffic on Morning
                                    Glory Lane approaching John Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the point most convenient
John Street and Morning Glory Lane  to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic on John Street approaching
                                    Morning Glory Lane.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
John Street and Primrose Avenue     maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop westbound traffic on Primrose
                                    Avenue approaching John Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
John Street and State Street        maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop northbound traffic on John
                                    Street approaching State Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
John Street and Township Road 1400  maintained at the point most convenient
North                               to stop southbound traffic on John
                                    Street approaching Township Road 1400
                                    North.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
John Street and Vine Street         maintained at the point most convenient
                                   to stop northbound traffic on John
                                    Street approaching Vine Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Mainz Circle and Township Road      maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic approaching
                                    Township Road.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Morning Glory Lane and Oak Street   maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic on Morning
                                    Glory Lane approaching Oak Street.
North Green Street and North Pearl  A stop sign shall be erected and
Street; parallel with West Walnut   maintained at the point most convenient
Street                              to stop northbound traffic approaching
                                    West Walnut Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at the
Oak Street and State Street         point most convenient to stop northbound
                                    and southbound traffic on Oak Street
                                    approaching State Street.
                                    Three stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the intersection of Pearl
                                    Street and Elm Street at the points most
Pearl Street and Elm Street         convenient to stop northbound and
                                    southbound traffic approaching Elm
                                    Street and eastbound traffic approaching
                                    Pearl Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at the
Pearl Street and Walnut Street      point most convenient to stop northbound
                                    and southbound traffic approaching
                                    Walnut Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Pearl Street and Water Street       maintained at this intersection at the
                                    point most convenient to stop westbound
                                    traffic approaching Pearl Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Plum Street and Northern Row        maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic approaching Northern Row.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Primrose Avenue and Oak Street      maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic on Primrose
                                    Avenue approaching Oak Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Race Street and Elm Street          maintained at this intersection at the
                                    point most convenient to stop southbound
                                    traffic approaching Elm Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop northbound and southbound
Race Street and Northern Row        traffic approaching Northern Row and two
                                    stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    approaching Race Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Rhine Street and John Street        maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop westbound traffic approaching
                                    John Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Rhine Street and Oak Street         maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic approaching
                                    Oak Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
Southern Row and Plum Street        on Southern Row approaching Plum Street
                                    and a stop sign shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop northbound traffic on Plum
                                    Street approaching Southern Row.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    on Southern Row approaching Wall Street,
Southern Row and Wall Street        and stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic on Wall Street approaching
                                    Southern Row.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Vine Street and Oak Street          maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic on Vine Street
                                    approaching Oak Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
Vine Street and Race Street         maintained at the point most convenient
                                   to stop eastbound traffic on Vine Street
                                    approaching Race Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Walnut Street and Columbus Street   maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    approaching Columbus Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Walnut Street and Oak Street        maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    approaching Oak Street.
                                    Two stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at this intersection at the
Wall Street and Walnut Street       point most convenient to stop northbound
                                    and southbound traffic approaching
                                    Walnut Street.
                                    One stop sign shall be erected and
Walnut Street and Race Street       maintained at this intersection at the
                                    point most convenient to stop southbound
                                    traffic approaching Walnut Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
Walnut Street and Pearl Street      to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    on Walnut Street approaching Pearl
                                    Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Water Street and Columbus Street    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    approaching Columbus Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound and westbound traffic
                                    approaching Harvester Street; a stop
                                    sign shall be erected and maintained at
                                    the point most convenient to stop
                                    eastbound traffic turning south onto
Water Street and Harvester Street   Harvester Street; stop signs shall be
                                    erected and maintained at the points
                                    most convenient to stop northbound and
                                    southbound traffic approaching Water
                                    Street; and a stop sign shall be erected
                                    and maintained at the point most
                                    convenient to stop northbound traffic
                                    turning east onto Water Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Water Street and John Street        maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic approaching Water Street.
                                    Stop signs shall be erected and
Water Street and Oak Street         maintained at the points most convenient
                                    to stop northbound and southbound
                                    traffic approaching Water Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the point most convenient
                                    to stop eastbound traffic approaching
                                    Race Street, and a stop sign shall be
                                    erected and maintained at the point most
Water Street and Race Street        convenient to stop eastbound traffic
                                    turning south onto Race Street. Two stop
                                    signs shall be erected and maintained at
                                    the points most convenient to stop
                                    northbound and southbound traffic
                                    approaching Water Street.
                                    A stop sign shall be erected and
                                    maintained at the point most convenient
Wooden Shoe Road and 1400th Avenue  to stop northbound traffic and
(Deutsch Road)                      southbound traffic on Wooden Shoe Road
                                    approaching 1400th Avenue (Deutsch
                                    Road).
 
   (B)   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such stop signs
before entering said intersection, except where directed to proceed by a law
enforcement officer or other traffic-control device.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this schedule shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 72, Schedule I) (Ord. 411, passed 12-6-1961; Ord. 566,
passed 9-16-1987; Ord. 579, passed 4-18-1990; Ord. 610, passed 3-2-1994; Ord.
613, passed 6-15-1994; Ord. 643, passed 3-19- 1997; Ord. 652, passed 10-15-
1997; Ord. 656, passed 12-17-1997; Ord. 660, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 677, passed
4-19-2000; Ord. 705, passed 10-3-2001; Ord. 710, passed 3-6-2002; Ord. 722,
passed 1-15- 2003; Ord. 745, passed 10-6-2004; Ord. 748, passed 1-5-2005; Ord.
775, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 844, passed 9-3-2014; Ord. 861, passed 5-4-2016;
Ord. 906, passed 10-3-2018; Ord. 909, passed 11-7-2018; Ord. 947, passed 7-15-
2020)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   All of the area now within the corporate limits of the village, or
hereinafter annexed to the village, is designated as an “urban district.”
   (B)   The maximum speed limit on all streets located within the urban
district of the village is 30 mph and 15 mph in an alley, subject to the
limitations set forth in 625 ILCS 5/11-605 pertaining to speed limits while
passing schools or while traveling through highway construction or maintenance
zones and except for the following.
      (1)   The maximum speed limit on Main Street (U.S. Route 40) between the
west corporate boundary of the village and Bahnhoff Street is 50 mph.
      (2)   The maximum speed limit on Main Street (U.S. Route 40) between
Bahnhoff Street and Race Street is 40 mph.
      (3)   The maximum speed limit on Main Street (U.S. Route 40) between Race
Street and Wall Street is 35 mph.
      (4)   The maximum speed limit on Main Street (U.S. Route 40) between Oak
Street and the east corporate boundary of the village is 35 mph.
      (5)   The maximum speed limit on Water Street between Harvestor Street
and the Crystal Club Road is 35 mph.
      (6)   The maximum speed limit on Pearl Street between State Street and
Elm Street is 35 mph.
      (7)   The maximum speed limit on Green Street between the village
maintenance building located at 413 North Green Street and its intersection
with 1550th Avenue is 35 mph.
   (C)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to arrange for the
placement of appropriate signs at the proper places along the streets and
highways of the village.
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this schedule shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 72, Schedule II) (Ord. 719, passed 11-20-2002)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The part, portion, or section of Garrett Street lying and being
between the north boundary line of the National Road or Main Street and the
south boundary line of Walnut Street, all in this village, be and hereby is
designated as a one-way street.
   (B)   The flow or movement of traffic over, in, and upon the above
designated portion of Garrett Street shall be in a northerly direction only.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to cause the movement of any traffic over, in,
and upon the above designated portion of Garrett Street in any direction other
than in the direction above designated.
   (D)   The Police Chief is hereby designated to post suitable signs
indicating one-way traffic at the entrances to the above designated one-way
street area and at suitable intervals in, upon, and along said one-way street
area.
   (E)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this schedule shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 72, Schedule III) (Ord. 422, passed 8-5-1964)
SCHEDULE IV. LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive on any street within the village any
motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by 625
ILCS 5/15-111, as now or hereafter amended, as well as any other statute of
similar import.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its load,
exceeds 18,000 pounds on the street surface within the village, except as set
forth below.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Any vehicle on Main Street;
         (b)   Any vehicle on Pearl Street, from Vine Street to the southern
corporate boundaries of the village;
         (c)   Any vehicle on Green Street, from Main Street to the northern
corporate boundaries of the village;
         (d)   Any vehicle on Columbus Street, from Main Street to the Conrail
right-of-way;
         (e)   Any vehicle on Harvester Street;
         (f)   Any vehicle on Water Street, from Harvester Street to Race
Street;
         (g)   Any vehicle on Bahnhoff Street; and
         (h)   Any vehicle on Wooden Shoe Road.
      (2)   The provisions of this schedule shall not apply to any vehicle
making a delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be
driven only on such streets for not more than the minimum distance required to
make such delivery or such pick up.
      (3)   The provisions of this schedule shall not apply to any vehicle
operated under a special permit in the manner set forth in 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)
et seq., as now or hereafter amended, and any statute of similar import.
      (4)   The provisions of this schedule shall not apply to any vehicles
operated by any public utility within the village to the extent that it is
reasonably necessary for said vehicles to travel upon any such street in order
to serve the public needs; provided, however, in such case, such vehicles may
be driven only on such streets for not more than the minimum distance required,
and in the event damage is done to any street, nothing herein shall preclude
the village from seeking compensation for the full amount of the damage done by
the overweight vehicle.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its load,
exceeds 80,000 pounds on the following designated streets:
      (1)   Green Street, from Main Street to the northern corporate boundaries
of the village;
      (2)   Columbus Street, from Main Street to the Conrail right-of-way;
      (3)   Harvester Street;
      (4)   Water Street, from Harvester Street to Race Street; and
      (5)   Bahnhoff Street.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its load,
exceeds 30,000 pounds on the street surface within the village on the following
designated street(s): Pearl Street, from Vine Street to the southern corporate
boundaries of the village.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its load,
exceeds 10,000 pounds on the street surface within the village on the following
designated street(s): Wooden Shoe Road.
   (F)   Load limits shall be made known to the public by the posting of signs
on streets that limit any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, to less
than that permitted by applicable state law.
   (G)   The village may, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit the operation of
vehicles upon any village streets or impose restrictions as to the weight of
vehicles to be operated whenever any said street by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow, or other climate conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed
unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible weight
thereof reduced in the manner set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15-316.
   (H)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750.
(Prior Code, Chapter 72, Schedule IV) (Ord. 694, passed 4-18-2001)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to park
any motor vehicle in or upon Garrett Street, north of the intersection of Main
Street and south of the south line intersection of Walnut Street in said
village.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of
division (A)(1) above shall be subject to a penalty of no less than $100 nor
more than $750.
   (B)   (1)   The proposal of the state to widen and improve Main Street in
the village, which street runs east and west through said village, make it
necessary that parking on said street be regulated in order to secure the aid
of the state in the improvement and maintenance of said street as a state
route.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in Main Street in
the village, other than parallel with the curb or parallel with the north and
south boundaries of that portion of such street as is used for vehicular
traffic, and other than with the two right wheels of such vehicle within 12
inches of the regularly established curb or boundary of the portion of said
street devoted to vehicular traffic.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device:
         (a)   In any intersection;
         (b)   In a crosswalk;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk;
         (d)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; and
         (e)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a
driveway.
      (4)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
division (B) shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for the first
offense. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
division (B) for a second time or any time thereafter shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $750.
      (5)   Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this
division (B) shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by
statute. The police officer in command at the station may, in the absence of a
Police Magistrate or Justice, prescribe the amount of bail or bond in each
instance. Provided, that any arrested person may, at his or her request, have
the amount of such bond set by a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, as
provided by statute.
   (C)   (1)   It is the finding of this Board that the safety and welfare of
the users of that portion of U.S. Route 40, also known as State Bond Issue
Route 11, lying within the corporate limits of this village, and the safety and
welfare of pedestrians using the village sidewalks adjoining said U.S. Route 40
requires the prohibition of the parking of vehicles between the curbs and
sidewalks in the areas lying along the north and the south boundaries of said
U.S. Route 40 and within said village.
      (2)   On said portion of said U.S. Route 40, also known as Main Street,
between the east corporate limit and the west corporate limit, no vehicle shall
be parked between the curbs of the street and the sidewalk on either side of
said Main Street.
      (3)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this division (C) shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each and every
offense.
   (D)   (1)   The parking of any vehicle on the following portions or sections
of streets within the village shall be and is hereby prohibited at all times:
         (a)   On the north and south sides of Water Street, between Race
Street and Harvester Street;
         (b)   On the north side of Water Street, from Harvestor Street west
1,000 feet;
         (c)   On the east and west sides of Harvestor Street, between Water
Street and Main Street;
         (d)   On the north and south sides of Main Street, between the circle
drive entrances in front of the high school;
         (e)   On the east and west sides of Race Street, between Water Street
and Main Street;
         (f)   On the west side of Pearl Street, between Southern Row and State
Street;
         (g)   On the west side of Pearl Street, between Vine Street and Elm
Street;
         (h)   On the north and south sides of Vine Street, between Pearl
Street and John Street;
         (i)   On the east and west sides of Bahnhoff Street, between Main
Street and the railroad tracks;
         (j)   On the north and south sides of Main Street, at its intersection
with the east and west sides of Green Street;
         (k)   On the east and west sides of 105 South Garrett Street;
         (l)   On the east side of Race Street, between Water Street and
Northern Row;
         (m)   On the east and west sides of Race Street, within 1,350 feet
north and 1,350 feet south of the intersections of Race Street with Northen
Row.
         (n)   On the north and south sides of East State Street between South
Pearl and South John Street.
      (2)   The parking of any vehicle on the following portions or sections of
streets within the village shall be and is hereby prohibited only during the
following days and times:
         (a)   On the west side of Race Street, between Main Street and the
railroad tracks, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.;
         (b)   On the east side of Garrett Street, between the point of
intersection of the east side of Garrett Street and Main Street and a point on
the east side of Garrett Street, which is 36 feet north of said intersection,
on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; and
         (c)   On Main Street, between the circle drive entrances of the
Teutopolis Grade School on a school day when school children are present,
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
      (3)   Parallel parking shall be required at the following locations:
         (a)   Parking on 206-208 North Pearl Street; and
         (b)   Parking on 111 N. Plum Street.
      (4)   The following restrictions are placed on parking in front of the
village hall and the village parking lot.
         (a)   Parking is restricted to a maximum of 15 minutes in front of the
village hall, between the curb and the sidewalk.
         (b)   Parking is prohibited in those areas adjacent to the village
hall that are designated and marked as no parking areas.
      (5)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to arrange for
the placement of appropriate signs on the above described prohibited parking
areas.
      (6)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this division (D)
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
   (E)   (1)   The parking of any vehicle on the south side of Main Street, in
the following areas designated as “yellow zones,” shall be and is hereby
prohibited at all times:
         (a)   West from the centerline of Race Street a distance of 70 feet;
         (b)   East from the centerline of Race Street a distance of 57 feet;
         (c)   Between 147 feet east and 190 feet east of the centerline of
Plum Street;
         (d)   West from the centerline of Columbus Street a distance of 75
feet;
         (e)   East from the centerline of Columbus Street a distance of 75
feet;
         (f)   Between 216 feet east and 372 feet east of the centerline of
Columbus Street;
         (g)   West from the centerline of Washington Street a distance of 65
feet;
         (h)   East from the centerline of Washington Street a distance of 65
feet;
         (i)   Between 94 feet east and 244 feet east of the centerline of
Washington Street;
         (j)   Between 277 feet east and 389 feet east of the centerline of
Washington Street;
         (k)   West from the centerline of Wall Street a distance of 32 feet;
         (l)   East from the centerline of Wall Street a distance of 253 feet;
         (m)   West from the centerline of Green Street a distance of 130 feet;
         (n)   East from the centerline of Green Street a distance of 28 feet;
         (o)   West from the centerline of Oak Street a distance of 112 feet;
and
         (p)   East from the centerline of Oak Street a distance of 40 feet.
      (2)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to send a
certified copy of this division (E) to the state’s Department of
Transportation, requesting that signs which read “No Parking In Yellow Zone
This Side” be placed on the above described prohibited parking areas.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this division (E)
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Chapter 73, Schedule I) (Ord. 337, passed 5-3-1944; Ord. 393,
passed 3-4-1959; Ord. 403, passed 9-29-1960; Ord. 789, passed 6-3-2009; Ord.
826, passed 4-3-2013; Ord. 949, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 978, passed 11-17-2021;
Ord. 1068, passed 11-20-2024)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Pet Ownership
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Rabies vaccination
   
90.03   Dogs; number
   
90.04   Cats; number
   
90.05   Kennel
   
90.06   Issuance and revocation of permits
   
90.07   Owner responsibility
   
90.08   Impoundment
   
90.09   Redemption
Additional Limitations
   
90.20   Dangerous animals
   
90.21   Securing animals
   
90.22   Animals on sidewalks
   
90.23   Obstructing sidewalks
   
90.24   Animals on another’s property
   
90.25   Dead animals
PET OWNERSHIP
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Includes dogs and cats.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. The person or persons designated to enforce this
subchapter, including the County Animal Control Officer, any law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction in the village, and any village official, employee,
or agent.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Facility designated or recognized by the village for the
purpose of impounding and caring for animals.
   AT LARGE. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when off the property
of the owner and not under restraint.
   DANGEROUS DOG OR CAT. A dog or cat that, without justification, attacks a
person or domestic animal causing physical injury or death, or behaves in a
manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified imminent
threat or serious injury or death to one or more persons or domestic animals.
   DWELLING UNIT. The meaning given to it in Chapter 154 of this code, as
amended, or any ordinance of the village of similar import.
   HUMANE MANNER. Care of an animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate
heat, ventilation, and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent
with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal’s size, species,
and breed.
   KENNEL. An establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or
boarding dogs or cats, or engaged in training dogs or cats.
   LOT. The meaning given to it in Chapter 154 of this code, as amended, or any
ordinance of the village of similar import
   NUISANCE. A dog or cat shall be considered a nuisance if it damages, soils,
defiles, or defecates on private property other than the owner’s or on public
walks and recreation areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and
properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive
conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making; or
chases vehicles or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other
domestic animals on public property.
   OWNER. A person having the right of property or custody of a dog or cat or
who keeps or harbors a dog or cat, or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain
on or about any premises occupied by that person.
   PERSON. Any natural person, entity, firm, corporation, or association.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The meaning given to it in Chapter 154 of this code,
as amended, or any ordinance of the village of similar import.
   RESTRAINT. A dog or cat shall be considered under restraint if it is within
and confined to the real property limits of its owner by a pen, leash,
electronic fence, or other appropriate means; or if it is outside the real
property limits of its owner but is secured by a leash or lead, or under the
control of the owner or responsible person designated by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015)
§ 90.02 RABIES VACCINATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall own, keep, or
harbor any dog or cat over six months of age within the village unless such dog
or cat is vaccinated. The provisions of this section do not apply to animals
held in a veterinary medical facility or government operated or licensed animal
shelter.
   (B)   All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies
Prevention and Control (“Compendium”), authored by the National Association of
State Public Health Veterinarians and published in the Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association.
   (C)   A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each
animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the Compendium. Each owner shall
also receive a durable vaccination tag indicating the year in which it was
issued.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 DOGS; NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful to own, possess, keep, maintain, or harbor more than
three dogs of more than six months of age in any dwelling unit or on any lot in
a residential district within the village.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 CATS; NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful to own, possess, keep, maintain, or harbor more than
three cats of more than six months of age in any dwelling unit or on any lot in
a residential district within the village.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 KENNEL.
   A person may maintain a kennel of four or more dogs or cats for breeding
purposes in a location other than in a residential district; however, such
person must first pay an annual permit fee on a calendar year basis of $100.
Every facility regulated by this section shall be considered a separate
enterprise requiring a separate permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
permit fee shall be required of any animal shelter.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015)
§ 90.06 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The village may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the
permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this subchapter or any other
law governing the protection and keeping of animals.
   (B)   It shall be a condition of issuance of any permit for a kennel that
the animal control authority shall be permitted to inspect any and all animals
and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time during
normal business hours. Where a permit is revoked for any cause, or pending
appeal of any such action, the animal control authority shall have power of
entry on the premises and into all areas where animals are being kept. A person
denied a permit or whose permit is revoked may not reapply for a period of at
least one year.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015)
§ 90.07 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   All dogs and cats shall be kept under proper restraint, whether on or
outside the owner’s property.
   (B)   Every “dangerous” dog or cat, as determined by the village, shall be
confined by its owner within a building or secure enclosure, and shall be
securely muzzled or caged whenever off the owner’s premises.
   (C)   The owner of every dog or cat shall be held responsible for promptly
picking up any waste left by the owner’s animal on any property, public or
private, outside the property of the owner.
   (D)   No dog or cat shall be allowed to cause a nuisance. The owner of every
dog or cat shall be held responsible for every behavior of such dog or cat
under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   No person shall keep a dog within the village which is in the habit of
barking or howling, or disturbing the peace and quiet of any person within the
village.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any dog or cat found running at large shall be impounded by the
county’s Animal Control Officer.
   (B)   When a dog or cat is found running at large and its ownership is
verified by the animal control authority, the authority may exercise the option
of serving the owner with a notice of violation in lieu of impounding the
animal.
   (C)   In the event that the animal control authority finds dogs or cats to
be kept in an inhumane manner, it shall have the right forthwith to remove or
cause to have removed any such animals to an animal shelter.
   (D)   Disposal of an animal by any method specified herein does not relieve
the owner of liability for violations and any accrued charges.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015)
§ 90.09 REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Any animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner, subject to the
policies and procedures of the county’s Animal Control Officer. Any impoundment
fees are not considered to be in lieu of any fine or other penalty.
   (B)   No animal required to be vaccinated under this subchapter may be
redeemed until provisions for such vaccination have been fulfilled.
(Prior Code, § 90.09) (Ord. 854, passed 5-20-2015)
ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS
§ 90.20 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   Whoever shall purposely, heedlessly, rapidly, or immoderately ride or drive
any horse, mule, cattle, or other like animals, or any team, in such a manner
as to be dangerous to persons or property in the village may be stopped by any
person and shall be stopped by the Police Chief, and shall be, upon conviction,
fined not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense. Each day a
violation of this section is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and
declaratory relief directing the violator to cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.20) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 90.21 SECURING ANIMALS.
   Whoever shall leave any horse, mule, or any team in any street or other
unenclosed or public place without first making such animal or team fast or
secure with sufficient halter, rope, or chain, or by placing the lines in the
hands of some person to hold so as to prevent the running away of such animal
or team shall be, upon conviction, fined not less than $100, nor more than
$750, for each offense. Each day a violation of this section is allowed to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the
village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief directing the violator to
cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.21) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 90.22 ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.
   Whoever shall ride or drive any horse, mule, cattle, or like animal or any
carriage, wagon, cart, or other vehicle for pleasure or burden on or across any
sidewalk or lawn, where there is no regular approach to the same, shall be,
upon conviction, fined any sum not less than $100 nor more than $750, for each
offense. Each day a violation of this section is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the village may seek
injunctive and declaratory relief directing the violator to cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.22) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 90.23 OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   Whoever shall stop any horse, mule, cattle, or other animals or any
carriage, wagon, cart, or other vehicle used for pleasure or burden on any of
the crossings of the streets in the village so as to inconvenience persons
crossing the same, or shall in any other manner obstruct any crossing, except
so far as may be necessary in passing over or across the same, shall be, upon
conviction, fined not less than $100 nor more than $750, for each offense. Each
day a violation of this section is allowed to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and
declaratory relief directing the violator to cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.23) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 90.24 ANIMALS ON ANOTHER’S PROPERTY.
   Whoever shall fasten any horse, mule, or other animal to any fence or shade
tree or to any boxing around any shade tree upon or adjoining any street,
avenue, or thoroughfare in said village, without the consent of the owner or
the occupant of the adjacent premises, shall be, upon conviction, fined of not
less than $100 nor more than $750, for each offense. Each day a violation of
this section is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief
directing the violator to cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.24) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 90.25 DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person who shall allow any dead animal to remain unburied or who shall
cause the same to be buried within the village limits shall be, upon
conviction, fined not less than $100 nor more than $750, for each offense. Each
day a violation of this section is allowed to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and
declaratory relief directing the violator to cure the offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Declaration of policy
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Prohibited acts
§ 91.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its constitution
and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace, and health
of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is hereby declared the
policy of the village to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm, or corporation having the
right to sell, rent, or lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation
and/or real property within the village, or any agent of these, shall refuse to
sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to, or withhold from, any person or group
of persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons, or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental, or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property, or in the furnishing of facilities
and/or services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 850, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease, or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution, or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more human beings,
or any real estate so used, designed, or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, and/
or agent thereof who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange, or
rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or collects
rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure, or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 850, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 91.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing to
discriminate against any person or persons because of his, her, or their race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with
regard to the sale, exchange, rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner, other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the village:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of, or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of, any housing accommodation or real property in
the village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement, or advertisement or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application for the purchase, lease, rental, or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental, or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds
for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or
maintenance of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability;
      (5)   To distribute, or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, the
anticipated listing for sale, or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or
real property for the purpose of inducing, or attempting to induce, the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent, or
otherwise deal with such owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability; and
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 850, passed 5-6-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Definitions
   
92.002   Final disposal of refuse
   
92.003   Refuse and storage
   
92.004   Accumulation and storage of junk
   
92.005   Nuisances
   
92.006   Enforcement
   
92.007   Inspection
   
92.008   Notice to abate
Inoperable Vehicles
   
92.020   Definition
   
92.021   Inoperable motor vehicles prohibited
   
92.022   Notice
   
92.023   Removal
Open Burning
   
92.035   Definitions
   
92.036   Exceptions
   
92.037   Restrictions
Plants and Weeds
   
92.050   Nuisance weeds
   
92.051   Height
   
92.052   Notice
   
92.053   Abatement
   
92.054   Lien
   
92.055   Foreclosure of lien
Noise
   
92.070   Purpose
   
92.071   Definitions
   
92.072   General prohibition
   
92.073   Noises prohibited
   
92.074   Exemptions
 
   
92.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible
materials.
   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment or place of business, which is
maintained, operated, or used for storing, buying, or selling wrecked, junked,
scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
   DISEASED ANIMAL. An animal showing symptoms of a disease of having an
illness or being in an unhealthy state. This shall include a vicious animal.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, trapping, or by
any other recognized and legal method of pest elimination.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, hamsters, birds, or similar animals being kept
solely on private premises for non-commercial purposes.
   ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT. Statute 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., as now
in effect or as hereafter amended, including any statute of similar import.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within a dwelling or other building, on the
premises or storage site of insects, rodents, or other pests.
   JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, plastic, debris, or waste; junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles,
or parts thereof; iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material; inoperable appliances, unusable furniture, and dimensional lumber
from dismantled buildings.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is wrecked, scrapped, ruined,
partially dismantled, wholly dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded,
and/or fails to display current valid licensing.
   JUNK YARD. An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the
maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and mobile home salvage
yard.
   MANURE. The excrement of all domestic animals and fowl and stable bedding.
   MOBILE HOME SALVAGE YARD. An establishment or place of business which is
maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked,
scrapped, junked, ruined, or dismantled mobile homes or mobile home parts, and
does not include the repair of mobile homes by mobile home dealers who
refurbish and sell used but not wrecked, scrapped, junked, ruined, or
dismantled homes.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, go carts, golf carts, lawn or
garden mowers or tractors, campers, and trailers.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, club, corporation, association,
partnership, company, organization, or political subdivision.
   PREMISES. Public and/or private property, whether improved or vacant,
inhabited or uninhabited, including buildings or other structures, vehicles,
watercrafts, and/or parts thereof.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, discarded household appliances, and solid market and
industrial wastes.
   RODENTS. Rats, mice, opossums, and raccoons.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
   SCRAP PROCESSING FACILITIES. Any establishment having facilities for
processing iron, steel, nonferrous scrap, mineral wastes, or slag, and whose
principal product is scrap iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap for sale for re-
melting purposes only.
   STORAGE SITE. Public or private property, either improved or vacant,
including the buildings or structures thereon, vehicles, watercraft, or parts
thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored for collection prior to final
disposal.
   VERMIN. Roaches, bed bugs, fleas, lice, or similar noxious or disgusting
animals of small size.
   NEGLIGENCE. Property owners allowing, through neglect, trees, bushes, weeds,
shrubs, grass, and landscaping material to grow unabated, including, but not
limited to: trees growing along building foundations; shrubs and bushes growing
to an extraordinary size; unmown lawns; deteriorated roof, siding, or windows;
sagging or falling gutters; or general neglect in maintaining a building.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.002 FINAL DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   All refuse shall be disposed of at an approved site. The location,
methods, and operations for final disposal of refuse shall conform to
requirements of the State Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5. No person
shall store, deposit, or permit to remain upon the ground or in any waterway,
or permit to remain upon the ground or in any waterway, drainage ditch, and
confined waters within the village, any refuse or other offensive matter that
may attract or harbor flies, rodents, vermin, and/or mosquitoes; create
offensive odors or unsightliness; or create a health hazard or nuisance.
   (B)   All refuse must be transported to the disposal site in a suitable
vehicle. All vehicles used for transportation of refuse from the storage/pickup
site to the site of final disposal shall have leakproofed beds, and during
transportation shall have sides and tailgates of sufficient height to prevent
the spillage of refuse. Any vehicle used for the transportation of dead animals
shall also have the bed of the same covered with canvas, tarpaulin, or metal,
properly fitted to prevent the scatter or loss of refuse. Immediately after the
transportation of such dead animals, and prior to such vehicle being parked
upon any street or parking lot within the village, it shall be disinfected with
a solution of at least one part of cresol dip to four parts of water, or with
some equally effective disinfectant as required by the Illinois Animal
Mortality Act, 225 ILCS 610/1.1 et seq., as now in effect or as hereafter
amended.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.003 REFUSE AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Garbage shall be drained and stored in durable, rust-resisting,
nonabsorbent, water-tight, and easily washable containers, which shall have
close-fitting covers and adequate handles or bails to facilitate collection.
   (B)   Ashes shall be stored in fire-resistant containers with close-fitting
covers. Such containers shall be equipped with adequate handles to facilitate
collection and shall not be greater than 45 gallons in capacity for households
and 45 gallons for business establishments. Ashes containing hot embers shall
not be placed in containers for collection. The capacity for individual
containers shall not apply when approved central storage containers are
provided and collection vehicles are equipped with mechanical devices for
hoisting and emptying contents of such containers.
   (C)   Rubbish shall be stored in durable containers with close-fitting
covers, except that bulky rubbish such as large cardboard boxes may be bundled
so as not to exceed eight feet in length.
   (D)   No person shall place, leave, store, or accumulate any refuse upon a
storage site within the village except as provided in this chapter and only
between collection periods.
   (E)   All refuse stored on a storage site shall be collected once each week
except in those situations where more frequent collection shall be deemed
necessary by the authorized representative of the village. Dead animals are to
be disposed of no later than 12 hours or the period of time in which the
process of decay becomes offensive, whichever is sooner.
   (F)   Any dangerous and hazardous materials or substances such as poisons,
acids, caustics, pesticides, infested materials, explosives, and solid wastes
resulting from industrial processes shall not be missed and/or stored with and
collected with refuse as defined in this chapter. Such dangerous and hazardous
materials or substances shall be stored, collected, and disposed of in any
manner prescribed by applicable state law or regulation.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.004 ACCUMULATION AND STORAGE OF JUNK.
   (A)   No person shall accumulate or store on any premises or storage site
within the village any junk except in a junkyard, mobile home salvage yard,
automobile graveyard, or scrap processing facility.
   (B)   No person may hereafter establish a junkyard, mobile home salvage
yard, automobile graveyard, or scrap processing facility within the village.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.005 NUISANCES.
   (A)   In all cases where no provision is made defining unusual conditions
which may constitute a nuisance and how the same may be abated, removed, or
prevented, those offenses and those known to the common law and to the laws of
the state as nuisances, in addition to those declared herein, may, in case the
same exist within the jurisdiction of the village, be treated as such and
proceeded against as provided in this chapter or any other provision of law
applicable thereto.
   (B)   The following are declared to be public nuisances prejudicial to the
public health:
      (1)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal of any offal, filth,
or noisome substance to be collected, deposited, or to remain in any place, to
the prejudice of others. Carcasses of dead animals or any part of decaying
animal matter, not buried or destroyed or collected, within 24 hours after
death.
      (2)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well, or
common sewer, street, or public highway.
      (3)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond, or lake to the injury or prejudice of others.
      (4)   Accumulations of manure, refuse, junk vehicles, junk mobile homes,
human and industrial or noxious or offensive waste, except the normal storage
on a farm of manure for agricultural purposes.
      (5)   Accumulations of garbage, junk, refuse, or rubbish, except pending
storage in accordance with this chapter.
      (6)   The housing of animals or fowl other than household pets.
      (7)   Any factory, cannery, yard, building, or structure of any kind,
distillery, livery stable, cattle shed or yard, packing house, slaughterhouse,
rendering establishment, barn, or pool of water, which shall become foul,
offensive, or is deemed a health hazard by the County Health Department.
      (8)   Any open well, cistern, hole, or pit including excavation related
to construction that is permitted to remain open without suitable protection.
Any such open well, cistern, hole, or pit must be filled or securely and
tightly covered or barricaded, and it shall be the duty of the owner, occupant
or agent of any property on which such open well, cistern, hole, or pit is
located to fill or keep the same securely and tightly covered or adequately
barricaded. If the site is one normally used by pedestrians, warning lights
must be provided when natural light is inadequate.
      (9)   All abandoned refrigerators on any premises shall have the doors
removed in accordance with the State Abandoned Refrigerator Act (430 ILCS 150/
1), as now in effect or as hereafter amended, and the refrigerant shall be
removed by an authorized service representative to avoid violation of the Clean
Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 85.
      (10)   Infestation of vermin and/or rodents on any premises or storage
site within the village.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Police Department and by any
other law enforcement or other governmental body having jurisdiction thereof,
including, but not limited to, the County Sheriff’s Department and the County
Public Health Department.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.007 INSPECTION.
   An authorized representative of the Village Police Department shall have the
right to enter any property at any reasonable time to inspect any facility or
condition thereon for the purpose of determining whether this chapter is being
complied with. Refusal by said owner of right of entry shall cause the officer
to seek the permission of the court for right of entry.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 92.008 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any violation of this chapter by an officer of the Village
Police Department or other person charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
the village shall issue a notice to the owner, occupant, or agent causing,
allowing, or permitting such violation to abate the condition giving rise to
the violation within ten days. In the event the owner, occupant, or agent
causing, allowing, or permitting such violation to occur fails to abate the
condition giving rise to the violation within the said ten-day period, the
Village Police Department shall issue a citation notice describing the
violation and the part of the chapter violated and stating the date, time, and
place the violator is to appear in the Circuit Court in the county.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018)
INOPERABLE VEHICLES
§ 92.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed or on
which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations, nor
shall the term apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when
not in use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor
vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 92.15) (Ord. 569, passed 9-7-1988)
§ 92.021 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an inoperable motor vehicle,
whether on public or private property. Inoperable motor vehicles are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.16) (Ord. 569, passed 9-7-1988) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.022 NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any such premises on which an inoperable
motor vehicle is permitted to remain in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, or upon any person having control over an inoperable motor vehicle,
and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within seven days thereof.
(Prior Code, § 92.17) (Ord. 569, passed 9-7-1988)
§ 92.023 REMOVAL.
   The Village Clerk may authorize a law enforcement agency with applicable
jurisdiction to remove any inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof after
seven days from the issuance of the notice referred to in §
92.022.
(Prior Code, § 92.18) (Ord. 569, passed 9-7-1988)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BRUSH. Tree trunks, limbs, branches, and twigs.
   CEREMONIAL FIRE. An outdoor fire larger than three feet by three feet by
three feet which is used for entertainment purposes as part of a specifically
scheduled public or private event and excludes leaves, grass, or shrubbery
clippings or cuttings.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
flowers, and weeds.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials where smoke and other emissions are
released directly into the air.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire for warmth, cooking for human
consumption, or temporary non-ceremonial purposes where the fire is not larger
than three feet by three feet by three feet and excludes leaves, grass or
shrubbery clippings or cuttings.
(Ord. 898, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 92.036 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the
burning of brush for purposes of domestic fireplaces or cooking or external
fireplaces, or to self-contained outdoor wood-burning devices or fireplaces.
   (B)   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the
open burning of brush for purposes of ceremonial fires if notice of any
ceremonial fire has been given to the fire protection district or Fire
Department serving the area where the fire is to take place. Failure to notify
the applicable fire protection district or Fire Department and obtain
permission prior to conducting a ceremonial fire utilizing brush shall be
deemed a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 898, passed 2-21-2018) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.037 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All burning in the village shall be in accordance with the
restrictions enumerated as such: the open burning of landscape waste or brush
shall only occur on the property upon which the landscape waste or brush was
generated. The burning of any materials other than landscape waste and brush is
prohibited.
   (B)   The following restrictions upon the open burning of landscape waste
and brush on the property upon which it was generated shall prevail.
      (1)   Burning is permitted only on Fridays, Saturdays, and Mondays,
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., local time, on such days when skies are sunny.
      (2)   Burning is not permitted when the wind velocity is in excess of ten
mph.
      (3)   Burning is not permitted within 20 feet of any building, structure,
property line, or waterway.
      (4)   Burning is not permitted of any material other than dry landscape
waste or brush.
      (5)   Burning is not permitted on public or private roads, alleys,
sidewalks, or easements, nor in drainage ditches.
      (6)   Burning must be supervised by an adult person until the fire is
extinguished.
      (7)   A fire extinguisher, garden hose, or water source shall be
available at the burning site.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the individual conducting the burning and
the owner of the property to satisfactorily determine that all conditions upon
burning as noted in division (B) above are complied with during any burning.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any intentional
burning of landscape wastes and/or other materials in violation of the
regulations and restrictions in division (B) above.
(Ord. 898, passed 2-21-2018) Penalty, see §
92.999
PLANTS AND WEEDS
§ 92.050 NUISANCE WEEDS.
   Any such weeds as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, or other
weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the village
are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any
such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
(Prior Code, § 92.45) (Ord. 513, passed 7-19-1978) Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.051 HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit weeds, grass, or plants, other
than trees, bushes, growing crops, flowers, or other ornamental plants, to grow
to a height exceeding 12 inches within the village. Any such plants exceeding
such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.052 NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to serve, or cause to be served, a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any such premises on which weeds or plants
are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days thereof.
(Prior Code, § 92.47) (Ord. 513, passed 7-19-1978)
§ 92.053 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days after
such notice, the Village Clerk may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be charged to, and paid
by, such owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 92.48) (Ord. 513, passed 7-19-1978)
§ 92.054 LIEN.
   (A)   (1)   The reasonable cost for such weed removal or nuisance abatement
shall be a lien upon the premises. Whenever such charges remain unpaid for a
period of 30 days after such cost and expense have been incurred by the
village, the Clerk may file with the Recorder of Deeds of the county a notice
of lien. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service, and the date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred by the
village.
      (2)   A copy of such notice of lien shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his or her address is known.
      (3)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of, or persons
interested in, such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien
shall be released by the village and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
   (B)   Provided, however, that failure of the Clerk to record such lien or
claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such
notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as
provided in §
92.055.
(Prior Code, § 92.49) (Ord. 513, passed 7-19-1978)
§ 92.055 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges or unpaid
nuisance abatement charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs
as is the case with the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall
be in equity in the name of the village.
(Prior Code, § 92.50) (Ord. 513, passed 7-19-1978)
NOISE
§ 92.070 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect, preserve, and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the village
through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or
any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.
(Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-2023)
§ 92.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or
threatened by an emergency, or work or private or public utilities when
restoring utility service.
   NOISE SENSITIVE AREA. Any area, which includes a posted area where a school,
hospital, nursing home, church, public library, or similar institution is
located.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, society, association or other legal entity, any public or private
institution, the state, municipal corporation, or political subdivision of the
state, or any other business unit.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or
controlled by a government entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures on real property owned by a
government entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not
limited to, parks and other recreational areas.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any real property which contains a structure or building
in which one or more persons reside or is used for residential use.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, Illinois.
(Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-2023)
§ 92.072 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, the
following activities:
      (1)   Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise; or
      (2)   Any noise which disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity
within the jurisdictional limits of the village.
   (B)   Factors in determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud or raucous
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      (2)   The land use and nature of both the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where the sound is received or perceived;
      (3)   The time the sound occurs;
      (4)   The duration of the sound; and
      (5)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
(Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-2023) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.073 NOISES PROHIBITED.
   The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this subchapter.
This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list:
   (A)   Unreasonable noises. The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and
unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or
unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration in any, dwelling, place of
business, or other structure, or upon any public street, park, or other place
or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion, or vibration
incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with
the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably
disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences, or which will not
detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted
from this provision.
   (B)   Vehicle horns, signaling devices, and similar devices. The sounding of
any horn, signaling device, or other similar device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space of the
village for more than ten consecutive seconds. The sounding of any horn,
signaling device, or other similar device as a danger warning is exempt from
this prohibition.
   (C)   Vehicle noise. Causing or making any unnecessary loud, raucous,
excessive, or unusual noise by the racing of the motor, by lack of a muffler or
use of a muffler cutout, by tire friction upon rapid turning or weaving, by the
spinning of the wheels from standing or slow-moving positions as produced by
sudden unnecessary motor acceleration, or by the unnecessary yelling or other
loud and excessive noise made by the persons in or on a vehicle, including, but
not limited to, off-road motor vehicles.
   (D)   Nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of
any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device,
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than ten
consecutive seconds in an hourly period. The reasonable sounding of such
devices by houses of religious worship, ice cream trucks, and seasonal
contribution solicitors or by the village for traffic control purposes are
exempt from the operation of this provision.
   (E)   Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting
the sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire,
burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling
device, except in an emergency or except as provided in divisions (E)(1) and
(E)(2) below:
      (1)   Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use the minimum cycle test time. In no
case shall such test time exceed five minutes. Testing of the emergency
signaling system shall not occur more than once in each calendar month; or
      (2)   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire
alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm shall terminate within 15 minutes of
activation unless an emergency exists. If a false or accidental activation of
an alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, the owner or person
responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this subchapter.
   (F)   Radios, televisions, boom boxes, phonographs, stereos, musical
instruments, and similar devices.
      (1)   The use or operation of a radio, televisions, boom boxes,
phonographs, stereos, musical instruments, or similar devices that produces or
reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than
the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily
listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and
comfort of neighbors and passersby, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50
feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area, or public space.
      (2)   The use or operation of a radio, televisions, boom boxes,
phonographs, stereos, musical instruments, or similar devices that produces or
reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than
the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily
listening to the sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort
of neighbors in residential areas or noise-sensitive areas, including multi-
family or single-family dwellings.
   (G)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers, public address systems, and similar devices.
      (1)   The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a
loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or other device for producing or
reproducing sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the
following areas:
         (a)   Within or adjacent to residential areas or noise sensitive
areas; and
         (b)   Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the
real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates and is
reasonably loud and raucous.
      (2)   This shall not apply to any public performance, gathering, or
parade for which prior permission has been obtained from the village.
   (H)   Yelling, shouting, and similar activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing in residential areas or noise sensitive areas or in
public places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or
place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable
persons of ordinary sensitivities.
   (I)   Repairs of vehicles. Sounds associated with the repairs of vehicles or
engines, which may be heard 75 feet from the property line of the property from
which the sounds originate. Furthermore, repairs of vehicles or engines shall
be prohibited in residential areas or noise sensitive areas between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivities.
   (J)   Animals and birds. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an
animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for
an animal or bird if the person owns, controls, or otherwise cares for the
animal or bird. Sounds made by animals or birds in animal shelters, kennels,
veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels licensed under and in
compliance with licensing and permitting provisions set forth in this
subchapter are exempt from this division (J).
   (K)   Loading or unloading merchandise, materials, equipment. The creation
of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.
   (L)   Construction or repair of buildings, excavations of streets and
highways. The construction, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building
or the excavation of streets and highways other than between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday, and 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays and Sundays. In cases of emergency, construction or repair noises are
exempt from this provision. In nonemergency situations, the Village President,
or his or her designee, may grant permission, upon written request, if the
Village President, or his or her designee, determines that the public health
and safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction or
repair of buildings or excavation of streets and highways between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., will not be impaired, and if the Village President, or
his or her designee, further determine that loss or inconvenience would result
to a party of interest. The permission in nonemergency cases shall be valid for
a period of not more than seven days. The permission may be renewed weekly for
a period of seven days or less.
   (M)   Noise sensitive areas (schools, churches, hospitals, and similar
institutions). The creation of any unreasonable loud and raucous noise adjacent
to any noise-sensitive area while it is in use, which unreasonably interferes
with the workings of the institution or which disturbs the persons in these
institutions, provided that conspicuous signs delineating the boundaries of the
noise-sensitive are displayed in the streets surrounding the noise-sensitive
area.
   (N)   Grounds maintenance equipment, blowers, and similar devices. In
residential areas or noise sensitive areas between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or any
internal combustion engine, including, but not limited to, power-driven lawn or
garden maintenance equipment, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, provided that the noise is unreasonably
loud and raucous and can be heard across the property line of the property from
which it emanates.
   (O)   Commercial establishments adjacent to residential property.
Unreasonably loud and raucous noise from the premises of any commercial
establishment, including any outdoor area which is part of or under the control
of the establishment, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which is
plainly audible at a distance of five feet from any residential property.
   (P)   Amplified music, sound systems. Amplified music and sound systems of
any type or any type of live or recorded performance.
   (Q)   Sound amplifying device. It shall be unlawful to use or operate a
sound-amplifying device so that the device produces loud and raucous sounds
within a multiple-family structure from 11:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m., local time,
Sunday through Saturday.
(Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-2023) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.074 EXEMPTIONS.
   The prohibitions set out in §§
92.072 and
92.073 shall not apply to, in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth
within §
92.073, the sounds caused by the following:
   (A)   Motor vehicles on traffic ways of the village, provided that the
prohibition of §
92.073(B) and (C) continues to apply;
   (B)   Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger
to life, health, or significant loss of property;
   (C)   Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or
other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police
activity, or imminent danger, provided that the prohibition contained in §
92.073(E) continues to apply;
   (D)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of
emergency work;
   (E)   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets, or highways by or on
behalf of the village, the state, or the federal government, between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., when public welfare and convenience renders it
impractical to perform the work between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
   (F)   Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or
private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in
which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school
athletic and school entertainment events; and
   (G)   Authorized sporting events, community events, or other similar outdoor
events.
(Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-2023)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750, or required to
perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, the
picking up of litter in public parks or along public highways or the
maintenance of public facilities, or both, for each offense. Each day a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to any fine, the village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief
directing the violator to cure the offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
92.035 through
92.037 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 for a first offense and a
fine of $750 for offenses subsequent to the first offense. The burning of any
toxic material and any prior convictions under §§
92.035 through
92.037 shall be considered factors in aggravation for purposes of the
assessment of any fines.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
92.070 through
92.074 commits a civil ordinance violation and shall, upon conviction, be fined
$100 for the first offense, a fine of $750 for a second offense in a 12-month
period, and a fine of $750 for each additional offense in a 12-month period.
Each day a violation of §§
92.070 through
92.074 is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 898, passed 2-21-2018; Ord. 901, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 1013, passed 9-20-
2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOL REGULATION
      
112.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
      
113.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
      
114.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   Application of general licensing provisions
   
110.02   License permit or registration required
   
110.03   License fees
   
110.04   Issuance of licenses, permits, and registrations; collection of fees;
refunds
   
110.05   Application and issuance of licenses, permits, and registrations
   
110.06   License permit or registration term, expiration, and renewal
   
110.07   Display of license, permit, or registration
   
110.08   Nature and transferability of license, permit, or registration;
unlawful use
   
110.09   Name and place of business; change of business location
   
110.10   Inspections; admission to premises; samples
   
110.11   Revocation or suspension of license or permit
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 APPLICATION OF GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS.
   The policies, procedures, and regulations contained in this chapter shall be
known as the general licensing provisions of the village. These policies,
procedures, and regulations shall govern all situations where a more specific
licensing section is silent, except where a specific licensing section is
exempted by its terms from the general provisions or is in conflict with these
general provisions.
(Prior Code, § 110.01)
§ 110.02 LICENSE PERMIT OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any business, occupation, activity, or
establishment, either by himself, herself, or itself, or through an agent,
employee, partner, or corporate officer for which a license, permit, or
registration is required by this code or by any village ordinance, without
first having obtained the required license, permit, or registration for the
business, occupation, activity, or establishment.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   State law as to power of village relative to the issuance and revocation of
licenses, see 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1
§ 110.03 LICENSE FEES.
   Each business, occupation, activity, or establishment for which a license,
permit, or registration is required shall also be required to pay a fee as set
and determined by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 110.03)
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES, PERMITS, AND REGISTRATIONS; COLLECTION OF FEES;
REFUNDS.
   (A)   All licenses and permits shall be signed by the President and all
licenses, permits, and registrations shall be issued by the Clerk, unless
otherwise provided in this code.
   (B)   All fees shall be payable to the village and shall be collected by the
Clerk.
   (C)   Any license, permit, or registration fees paid in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be refunded unless otherwise provided in
this code.
(Prior Code, § 110.04)
§ 110.05 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSES, PERMITS, AND REGISTRATIONS.
   (A)   Application for any license or permit shall be filed with and on the
form provided by the Clerk, which form shall include the business address and
telephone number of the establishment for which the license or permit is
sought, and the business address and telephone number of the applicant unless
otherwise provided in this code. The application form shall contain the
required information as to each person applying for a license or permit, and be
signed by the applicant. Where the applicant is a corporation, group, or
association, the chief executive and chief fiscal officers shall sign,
indicating their official capacity, and verify the application. Where a
partnership is an applicant, all partners shall sign and verify the
application.
   (B)   The Clerk shall review all applications and conduct or cause to be
conducted inspections when necessary to verify information contained in any
application.
   (C)   If the provisions of this code have been complied with, the Clerk
shall recommend to the President that the application be approved. If the
provisions have not been complied with, he or she shall recommend denial.
   (D)   The President shall be responsible for approving or denying any
license or permit for which he or she is designated in this code to approve or
deny. Upon receipt of any application, the President shall approve it, provided
that the requirements of this code have been complied with. He or she shall
immediately forward the approved application to the Clerk who will notify the
applicant. The Clerk shall issue the license or permit upon receipt of proof
from the applicant that the required fees have been paid.
   (E)   If, after due consideration, the President determines that the
provisions of this code have not been satisfied, he or she shall deny the
application. He or she shall notify the applicant and the Clerk, in writing,
that the application has not been approved and the reasons therefor.
   (F)   Within ten days from service of the President’s notice of denial, the
applicant may request, in writing, to the President a hearing before the Board
of Trustees, at which the applicant may explain why the application should be
approved. A hearing under this division (F) shall take place within 30 days of
the receipt of the applicant’s request for a hearing. The applicant shall be
permitted to be represented by counsel at no expense to the village.
   (G)   If the applicant does not request a hearing within ten days, the
applicant shall have waived the opportunity for a hearing before the Board of
Trustees.
   (H)   Upon presentation of any evidence by the applicant, the Board of
Trustees shall decide whether the application should be approved or denied.
   (I)   Provided that the requirements of the code are satisfied, the Board of
Trustees shall approve the application. The approved application shall be
forwarded to the Clerk. The Clerk shall notify the applicant and issue the
license or permit upon receiving proof of payment of fees by the applicant.
   (J)   In the event the Board of Trustees denies an application, the
applicant shall be informed by the Clerk, in writing, of the reason for denial.
(Prior Code, § 110.05)
§ 110.06 LICENSE PERMIT OR REGISTRATION TERM, EXPIRATION, AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Each license, permit, or registration shall indicate its term. Such
term shall commence on January 1 of each year, unless otherwise provided in
this code. No license, permit, or registration shall be granted for a period
longer than one year. Every annual license, permit, or registration shall
expire at the end of December 31 following the date of issuance, unless
otherwise provided in this code. Any licensee or permittee shall pay the full
fees for any annual license, permit, or registration issued from the first day
of the license or permit term through the end of the last day of the first six
months of the term and pay one-half of the fees from the first day of the
second six months of the license or permit term through the last day of the
annual term, unless otherwise provided in this code.
   (B)   The Clerk shall notify all licensees and permittees, no less than 30
days before the expiration of the existing license or permit, that they need to
file an application for renewal of their license or permit. A renewal
application shall be filed and processed in the same manner as an original
application.
(Prior Code, § 110.06)
§ 110.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE, PERMIT, OR REGISTRATION.
   Unless otherwise provided in this code, every person who is issued a
license, permit, or registration shall display such license, permit, or
registration in a conspicuous place accessible to the public on the premises
where the business, occupation, activity, or establishment is operated.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 NATURE AND TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE, PERMIT, OR REGISTRATION;
UNLAWFUL USE.
   (A)   Any license, permit, or registration required and described in this
code shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed its designated term.
It shall not constitute property and shall not be transferable except as
provided in this code.
   (B)   In the case of the death of any person licensed or permitted under the
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village, before the term of
the license or permit shall have expired, his or her surviving partners in the
case of a partnership or the legal representative may continue to act under
such license or permit for the unexpired term thereof, subject, however, to the
conditions imposed on the person to whom it was originally issued.
   (C)   In the case of the sale of a licensed or permitted business by the
current licensee or permittee, the current licensee or permittee may designate
the purchasing person or entity to succeed him or her as licensee or permittee.
Upon application of the purchaser, a new license or permit may be issued by the
President, provided that the applicant meets all the criteria applicable to a
new licensee or permittee. The purchaser shall pay the required fees for the
duration of the license or permit term prior to being issued any license or
permit.
   (D)   No person shall alter, deface, forge, counterfeit, or duplicate any
license, permit, or registration issued by the village.
(Prior Code, § 110.08) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS; CHANGE OF BUSINESS LOCATION.
   (A)   No person granted a license or permit pursuant to this chapter shall
operate under any name or operate his or her business under any designation not
specified on his or her license or permit.
   (B)   Where a license, permit, or registration issued under the provisions
of this code is only valid for a particular location, the location of the
licensed or permitted business, activity, occupation, or establishment may be
changed, provided that the licensee or permittee makes application to the Clerk
not less than 14 days prior to the change of location and that the proposed
location complies with all applicable zoning, building, or similar ordinances
and that the application is approved by the President.
   (C)   Where application for change of location is denied, the denial may be
reviewed pursuant to the hearing procedures contained in §
110.05.
(Prior Code, § 110.09) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 INSPECTIONS; ADMISSION TO PREMISES; SAMPLES.
   (A)   The village shall have authority to inspect any establishment that
contains any business occupation or activity for which a license, permit, or
registration is required by this code.
   (B)   Whenever inspection of any establishment used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed or permitted business, activity, or occupation
is provided for or required by ordinance or is reasonably necessary to secure
compliance with any ordinance or to detect violations thereof, the licensee,
permittee, or person in charge of the establishment shall admit thereto at any
reasonable time any village official who is authorized or directed to make the
inspections by the President.
   (C)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or to
detect violations thereof, the licensee, or permittee or person in charge of
the establishment shall, upon request, give to any authorized village official
samples of the material or commodities sufficient for this analysis.
   (D)   Written reports of any inspection conducted pursuant to this section
shall be made available to the licensee or permittee of the inspected
establishment upon written request to the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 110.10)
§ 110.11 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any licensee or permittee found to be in violation of the provisions
of this code, as hereinafter provided, may have the license or permit suspended
for a period not to exceed 90 days by the President, or have the license or
permit revoked by the President.
   (B)   Any license or permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons or for those
reasons specified in other applicable licensing chapters:
      (1)   The licensee or permittee has knowingly made materially fraudulent
or misleading statements in his or her application for any license or permit;
      (2)   The licensee or permittee has violated ordinance provisions
relating to the license, permit, or registration, related thereto the subject
matter of the license, permit, or registration, or the establishment occupied;
      (3)   The licensee or permittee has failed to pay the license, permit, or
registration fee or any penalty owing the village; and/or
      (4)   The licensee or permittee has refused to permit the inspection or
investigation or sampling as authorized by this code.
   (C)   The Clerk is authorized to receive allegations and issue notifications
of non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of any
allegation, he or she shall cause an investigation to determine the accuracy of
the allegations. Upon completion of the investigation, the Clerk shall
recommend to the President any action to be taken.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the recommendation, the President shall take
appropriate action which may include the suspension or revocation of the
license or permit. Any notice shall be set forth in writing and be served in
person or be mailed by certified mail return receipt requested to the licensee
or permittee.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a notice, the licensee or permittee may within three
working days request in writing to the Clerk a hearing before the President. A
hearing under this division (E) shall take place within ten days of the receipt
of the licensee’s or permittee’s request for a hearing. At any hearing
conducted in accordance with this chapter, the President shall hear evidence
that is material and relevant to the allegations in the complaint and shall
render a decision as to the validity of the complaint. The licensee or
permittee shall be permitted to be represented by counsel at no expense to the
village and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine all
witnesses called.
   (F)   Where a licensee or permittee does not request a hearing within three
working days, the licensee or permittee shall have waived the opportunity for a
hearing.
   (G)   The President shall render a decision in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Any license or permit suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not
be in lieu of any penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this code
or other ordinance of the village.
(Prior Code, § 110.11)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each and every violation
thereof, and every day of the violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 110.99)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOL REGULATION
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Miscellaneous provisions
   
111.04   Adoption of state law
Licensing
   
111.15   License required
   
111.16   Classification of licenses
   
111.17   Separate license required for each location
   
111.18   Application for license; information to be shown
   
111.19   Number of licenses
   
111.20   License fees
   
111.21   Payment of license fees
   
111.22   Term
   
111.23   Disposition of fees
   
111.24   Restrictions upon issuance of licenses
   
111.25   Renewal of license
   
111.26   Privilege granted by license
   
111.27   Transfer of license
   
111.28   Change of location
   
111.29   Annexation of licensed premises
   
111.30   License to be posted
Administration
   
111.45   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.46   Commissioner powers and duties
   
111.47   Hearings
   
111.48   Duties of Village Clerk
   
111.49   Pending action
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be construed to the end that the health, safety, and
welfare of the people of this village shall be protected, and temperance in the
consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less of alcohol by
volume. Nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to flavoring extracts,
concentrates, syrups, or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary, or toilet
preparations, or food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR used in the manufacture, preparation, or compounding of such products.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to wine intended for use and
used by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.
   BREW PUB. A person who manufactures beer only at the designated premises to
make sales of such products to distributors, to make package sales of such
products, and who is also allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises
to non-licensees for use and consumption at the designated premises in
conjunction with the operation of a restaurant.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues; and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment, and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests. Provided, that the affairs and management of such
club are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar
body chosen by the members at their annual meeting; and that no member or any
officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly
receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the
distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club, the members of the club,
or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be
fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members, its board of directors,
or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
   CONSUMPTION SALE. The sale, or offering for sale, at retail of any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person, other than a manufacturer, who is engaged in the
village in purchasing, storing, possessing, or warehousing any alcoholic
liquors for resale.
   ILLINOIS LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. An act passed by the Fifty-Eighth Illinois
General Assembly entitled “An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors,” being 235
ILCS 5, approved January 31, 1934, as amended.
   ILLINOIS LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION or STATE COMMISSION. The commission
created by Art. III, § 1 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5/
3-1.
   IMPORTING DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who imports, or causes to be imported,
into this state, any alcoholic liquor for sale or resale within the village.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The premises described in the application for the license
or in the license as the place where the business is to be carried on.
   MANUFACTURER. Every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, wine maker,
blender, processor, or person who fills or refills an original package and any
other person engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, or rectifying
alcoholic liquors as above defined.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead,
or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked, or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of an alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
   OWNER or PROPRIETOR. Include all persons who are owners or are in control of
any place where the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor is carried on,
whether they be individuals, partners, corporations, joint stock companies,
fiduciaries or officers, directors, stockholders of corporations, or otherwise.
   PACKAGE SALE. The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in
the original package and not to be consumed, or in fact consumed, in whole or
in part on the premises where sold.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, club, association, or corporation.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes any public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or
public right-of- way; all property owned by the United States, the state, any
municipality, or any other governmental body or agency; and any property,
including private property, which is open to or held out for the use of the
public, other than a licensed premises, as defined herein.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place having regular menus that is kept, used,
maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are
served, and where meals are actually and regularly served; such space being
provided with adequate and separate sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT WHERE THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IS NOT THE PRINCIPAL
BUSINESS. Any establishment holding a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor
where more than 50% of its gross sales or revenues for any calendar month in
the preceding 12 months are for items or services other than alcoholic liquors.
   RETAILER. A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcohol for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL or SALE AT RETAIL. Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage that contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed
with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended, or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL. Include soliciting or receiving any order for, and to keep or
expose for sale and keep with intent to sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
content of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when
fortified by the addition of ALCOHOL or SPIRITS, as above defined.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 871, passed 12-7-
2016)
§ 111.03 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Closing hours. Except as stated below, all licensed premises shall be
closed each day of the week from 12:00 a.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m., local time,
the following morning. Alcoholic liquor may not be sold on the licensed
premises from 12:00 a.m. midnight to 6:00 a.m., local time, the following
morning.
      (1)   On each morning following Friday and Saturday in each week, all
licensed premises shall be closed from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 am., local time, and
alcoholic liquor may not be sold on the licensed premises from 1:00 a.m. to 6:
00 a.m., local time.
      (2)   On each Thanksgiving Day morning, all licensed premises shall be
closed from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., local time, and alcoholic liquor may not be
sold on the licensed premises from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., local time.
      (3)   On each New Year’s Day morning, all licensed premises shall be
closed from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., local time, and alcoholic liquor may not be
sold on the licensed premises from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., local time.
   (B)   Sales to any person under the age of 21 years, intoxicated persons,
and the like; identification cards.
      (1)   No licensee, agent, or employee shall sell, give, or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated
person or to any person known by it to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, or
insane, feeble-minded, or distracted person.
      (2)   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift or delivery
of alcoholic liquor from any licensee, or any agent or employee of a licensee,
or on any licensed premises, nor shall any such person have alcoholic liquor in
his or her possession. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another
person under the age of 21 years except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service, or under the direct supervision and approval of the
parents or parent of such person in the privacy of a home.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
represent that he or she is of the age of 21 years for the purpose of gaining
eligibility status under this chapter or for the purpose of evading its age
restriction. No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card,
obtain an identification card by means of false information, or use the
identification card of another for the purpose of violating this chapter.
   (C)   Employment of minors. No licensee, agent, or employee shall permit any
person under the age of 18 years to draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in
said premises either as an employee or gratuitously. No licensee, agent, or
employee shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to attend any bar,
to serve or dispense, or in any other way to handle alcoholic liquor, including
packaged liquor, upon its licensed premises.
   (D)   Approval of sales. Every licensee operating under the provisions of
this chapter shall so conduct its licensed premises that every sale of
alcoholic beverages is approved on behalf of the licensee by a competent adult
person so designated by the licensee.
   (E)   Employees. It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease that would, because
of the applicant’s handling or selling of alcoholic liquor and/or food, pose a
substantial risk to the health or safety of the public; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with, or a carrier of, any such
disease to work in or about any such premises, or to engage in any way in
handling, preparation, or distribution of such liquor.
   (F)   Sanitary facilities. Every holder of a Class A, B, D, or E license
shall provide separate toilets and washstands for male and female patrons and
shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (G)   Sanitary conditions. All premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such alcoholic liquor for such sale
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full
compliance with any ordinances regulating the condition of the premises used
for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
   (H)   Zoning. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the sale
of alcoholic liquors in any place where the conduct of such business is
prohibited under the terms and provisions of any zoning or similar ordinances
of the village.
   (I)   Peddling. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor within the
corporate limits of the village.
   (J)   Drinking on a public way. No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor
on any public way, public right-of-way, or public property (including, but not
limited to, public highways, streets, alleys, parking lots, or sidewalks)
within the corporate limits of the village. Nothing herein shall be construed
to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by patrons of the permittee
having a temporary permit at any banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair, or similar
private or public assembly where food or drink is sold, served, or dispensed,
so long as such consumption occurs exclusively on property that is licensed for
that particular event.
   (K)   Required warning signs.
      (1)   Every licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall cause the
following warning message, seen in division (K)(2) below, to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises at or adjacent to any cash register.
      (2)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall
read substantially as follows.
         “Warning: if you are under 21 years of age, you may be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor and you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000 if you
attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, purchase alcoholic liquor, or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor. Official government issued photo identification will be required to
prove age before purchase.
         Warning to servers and sellers of alcoholic liquor: if you sell, give,
or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person less than 21 years of age, you are
subject to a minimum fine of $200 under the village liquor control ordinance.
Official government-issued photo identification should be requested from
patrons to prove age before making a purchase.”
      (3)   Posters for displaying the warning message shall be furnished to
each licensee by the Village Clerk.
   (L)   Gambling. No gambling shall be permitted and no gambling device shall
be kept in any premises licensed or permitted pursuant to this chapter. This
prohibition, however, shall not apply to any game or gaming event for which a
license or permit has been issued by the state’s Department of Revenue or the
state’s Gaming Board pursuant to the Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, 230 ILCS 20/
1 et seq., the Bingo License and Tax Act, 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq., the State
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., the Charitable Games Act, 230 ILCS 30,
or any statute of similar import, so long as such game or gaming event is
conducted in compliance with all requirements of said acts and all rules and
regulations of the state acting through its Department of Revenue or any other
agency having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 819, passed 8-1-2012;
Ord. 871, passed 12-7-2016; Ord. 885, passed 7-19-2017) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   All of the provisions of the state’s Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5,
as now or hereafter amended, and of the rules and regulations issued by the
state’s Liquor Control Commission, which are or may hereafter be in force,
which are applicable to the village, are hereby incorporated into and declared
to be a part of this chapter the same as if they were expressly set forth
herein.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
LICENSING
§ 111.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person within the corporate limits of the village shall offer for sale at
retail, or sell at retail, alcoholic liquor without first having obtained a
license or permit to do so, as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.15) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES.
   Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall be of the following
classes.
   (A)   Class A. A Class A license shall entitle the licensee to make
consumption sales and package sales of alcoholic liquor, except that this
classification shall not be construed so as to permit package sales without
also making consumption sales.
   (B)   Class B. A Class B license shall entitle the licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor and package sales of wine; provided,
however, that package sales of wine shall only be made incidental to a wine-
tasting that must be conducted as a private event not open to the public. This
classification of license may only be issued to a licensee defined as a club.
   (C)   Class C. A Class C license shall entitle the licensee to make package
sales of alcoholic liquor not to be consumed, or in fact consumed, in whole or
in palt on the premises where sold.
   (D)   Class D. A Class D license shall entitle the licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where
sold. This classification of license may only be issued for a location defined
as a restaurant.
   (E)   Class E. A Class E license shall entitle the licensee to operate a
brew pub, and to sell only beer at retail from the licensed premises to non-
licensees by the package and for use and consumption at the designated premises
in conjunction with the operation of a restaurant.
   (F)   Temporary permit. A temporary permit shall entitle the permittee to
sell at retail only beer and wine at any banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair, or
similar private or public assembly where food or drink is sold, served, or
dispensed. Such temporary permit shall be issued only to a club, church,
society, fraternal, or benevolent organization that has been organized not for
pecuniary profit. Such temporary permit shall permit the sale of beer and wine
for a period of not more than seven days, and not more than one temporary
permit shall be granted to any such club, church, society, fraternal, or
benevolent organization in any one period of 30 days. Such temporary permit
shall permit the sale of beer and wine only for consumption upon the premises
where sold or served, and shall not permit the sale of beer and wine in the
original package or upon any premises which are not within the village.
(Ord. 871, passed 12-7-2016; Ord. 1046, passed 4-17-2024)
§ 111.17 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
   A separate license must be obtained for each location desired by the
applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.17) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.18 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license authorized by this chapter shall make
application therefor to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. A separate
application shall be made for each license desired by the applicant. Such
application shall be in writing upon forms prepared and furnished by the
Village Clerk. Each application for a license shall be signed by the applicant
and verified by the applicant by oath or affidavit, and shall be filed with the
Village Clerk. In case the applicant is a partnership, all partners must sign
and verify the application. In case the applicant is a corporation or club, all
officers and directors, and any stockholders owning more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, must sign and verify the application and indicate their
official position. In case any other person is to conduct the place of business
as manager or agent of the licensee, that person must also sign and verify the
application.
   (B)   The information requested in the application form must be furnished as
to each person signing the application. Each application shall contain the
following information and statements:
      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation
or club, the objects for which organized, and the names and addresses of the
officers and directors, and of any stockholder owning more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation; and, in any case, the name and address of the manager or
agent who is to conduct the place of business for which the license is sought.
A club shall attach to its application one copy of a list of the names and
residences of its members;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, and if a naturalized citizen, the
time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The location where the applicant proposes to engage in the business
for which the application was submitted, and whether or not the proposed
location is within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged
or indigent persons or for war veterans, their wives or children, or of any
military or naval station;
      (4)   Whether food for human consumption is to be sold in such place of
business if the application is allowed;
      (5)   Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is
sought, and if not, the name of the landlord and the term of the lease;
      (6)   Whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other
license on premises other than those described in this application and the
disposition of such other application;
      (7)   Whether or not any license issued to the applicant under this or
previous ordinances relating to alcoholic liquor has ever been suspended or
revoked;
      (8)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of being the
keeper or an inmate of a house of ill-fame, of pandering, or of any other crime
or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
      (9)   A statement that the applicant is not, at the time of making the
application, connected with a house of ill-fame;
      (10)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
and whether or not the applicant is disqualified to receive the license sought
by reason of any manner or thing contained in the laws of this state or this
chapter;
      (11)   A statement that the applicant agrees not to violate any provision
of this chapter or ordinances of this village, or any law of the United States
or of this state in the conduct of the business, and that in the event such
promise is broken or if any statement contained in the application is not true,
that the license applied for may be immediately suspended or revoked;
      (12)   Whether or not the applicant, if an individual, or whether each
partner, in the case of a partnership, is a bona fide resident of the village;
      (13)   A statement that the applicant will testify under oath to all
relevant and material questions propounded to him or her in any hearing
conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, either before or after the
issuance of a license to the applicant, and that the applicant’s failure to so
testify shall be sufficient reason for the refusal to issue any such license to
the applicant, or the renewal thereof, or for the suspension or revocation of
any license which has been issued to the applicant; and, a statement that the
applicant, if requested by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, will permit a
record of the applicant’s fingerprints to be made by the Police Department of
the village for the purpose of additional investigation to determine whether
the application should be granted;
      (14)   A statement that the applicant has not accepted, received, or
borrowed money, or anything else of value, or accepted or received credit
(other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a
period not to exceed 30 days) directly or indirectly from any manufacturer,
importing distributor, or wholesaler of alcoholic liquor, or from any
stockholder or officer of any corporation engaged in, or any other person
connected with, any such business; and
      (15)   Whether or not the applicant, his or her spouse, or any member of
the applicant’s household is a member or employee of the Police Department of
the village and whether or not any member or employee of the Police Department
of the village is interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the
license applied for, the premises, or the profits or proceeds from the sale of
alcoholic liquor under the license applied for.
(Prior Code, § 111.18) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.19 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The number of issued liquor licenses of each class shall be as
follows.
 
Classification Licenses
Class A        4
Class B        2
Class C        4
Class D        2
Class E        1
 
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person holding a valid license on
the effective date hereof may renew his or her license in accordance with the
provisions of §
111.25.
(Prior Code, § 111.19) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 871, passed 12-7-
2016; Ord. 1075, passed 2-5-2025)
§ 111.20 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The following annual license fee shall be paid by each licensee for
the following license classifications.
 
Classification Annual Fee
Class A        $1,000
Class B        $750
Class C        $750
Class D        $750
Class E        $1,000
 
   (B)   No license fee for a temporary permit shall be charged.
   (C)   (1)   The fees provided for in this section shall be collected from
all initial applicants after the effective date hereof, and from all other
licensees commencing on May 1, 2017.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to alter the fee of any
licensee during the term for which such license was issued, until time for
renewal of such license.
(Prior Code, § 111.20) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 871, passed 12-7-
2016)
§ 111.21 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES.
   All fees for all classes of licenses provided in this chapter shall be paid
in full in advance of the issuance of said license.
(Prior Code, § 111.21) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.22 TERM.
   Each license, other than a temporary permit, shall terminate on April 30 of
the next following its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Prior Code, § 111.22) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.23 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time
application is made and shall be forthwith turned over to the Village
Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be
deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have
been designated by the Board of Trustees after proper action of that body.
(Prior Code, § 111.23) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.24 RESTRICTIONS UPON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   No license authorized by this chapter shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person, or in the case of a partnership, a partner who is not a
resident of the village prior to the date of the application;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of any
state or of the United States;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill-fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter, or any prior
ordinance, has been revoked for any cause;
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village, and unless
such corporation is incorporated in the state, unless it is a foreign
corporation which is qualified to transact business in the state;
   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for
any such violation;
   (L)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a written lease thereon for the full period
for which the license is to be issued;
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, any President of the village, or
any other public official prohibited by the state’s Liquor Control Act, being
235 ILCS 5 from possessing a license; and no such official shall be interested
in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (N)   Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor license;
   (O)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
who would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder; and
   (P)   A person who fails to furnish the information or to make the
statements required in the application for license as set forth in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.24) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 871, passed 12-7-
2016)
§ 111.25 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee may renew its license at the expiration thereof; provided, that
it is then qualified to receive a license, and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought is suitable for the purpose; provided further, that
the renewal privilege herein contained shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the Board of Trustees from limiting or
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village. The
requirements for, and the procedure for, obtaining the renewal of a license
shall be the same as that provided for in the case of an original application
for a license.
(Prior Code, § 111.25) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.26 PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance or until the following April 30, whichever time is
shorter, unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter. It shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or
execution, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated.
   (B)   Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall terminate upon the death of the licensee; provided,
that the executor of the will, administrator of the estate of any deceased
licensee, or guardian of any disabled licensee, and the trustee or debtor in
possession of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor under order of any court and may exercise the privileges of
the deceased, disabled, insolvent, or bankrupt licensee until the expiration of
such license or until six months after the death, disability, insolvency, or
bankruptcy of such licensee, whichever is the shorter period of time.
(Prior Code, § 111.26) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be considered personal, and no
license may be transferred to any person.
(Prior Code, § 111.27) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.28 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter shall be for a single and
particular location. Upon application being filed with the Village Clerk for a
change of location, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may allow the
location authorized by the particular license to be changed. The form of
application shall be substantially similar to that required of an original
applicant for license. After investigation, the change of location may be
approved or rejected, as in the case of original license applications. If
approved, the authorized change of location shall be shown by endorsement upon
the face of the existing license.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit any licensee to
change the locations of its business to, or operate its business or a portion
thereof as, a sub-tenant or otherwise at a location which under this chapter
would be prohibited or denied to an original applicant.
(Prior Code, § 111.28) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.29 ANNEXATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   Whenever the village annexes land upon which a licensed premises is
situated, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may issue a license of
substantially the same classification as the license that the licensee of the
annexed premises had prior to annexation; provided, that the licensee and the
licensed premises meet the requirements of all laws and ordinances applicable
to the regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors, except that no annual
license fee shall be charged for that period of time for which said licensee
has previously paid any other local governmental jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 111.29) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.30 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   Every licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall cause its license
to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.30) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 111.45 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The President of the village shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
and shall be charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of
the state’s Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5, of this chapter, and of such
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations relating to alcoholic liquor as
hereinafter may be adopted. Whenever in this chapter the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include such other persons as may
be appointed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to assist him or her in
the performance of the duties herein provided for him or her.
(Prior Code, § 111.45) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.46 COMMISSIONER POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The President of the village shall serve as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the village’s
liquor control ordinance and of such other ordinances relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be, from time to time, enacted by the Village Board.
   (B)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers
and duties with respect to local liquor licenses:
      (1)   To grant, to suspend for not more than 30 days, or to revoke for
cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within the
village;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer or other village
employee designated by the Village Clerk to enter, at any time, upon the
premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the
state law, village ordinance, or any rules or regulations adopted by the
village or by the state’s Liquor Control Commission have been, or are being,
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith;
      (3)   To receive complaints from any citizen within the village that any
provision of the state law or of this chapter has been, or is being, violated
and to act upon any such complaints in the manner provided by law;
      (4)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for
a local license or for a renewal thereof, any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation has been served, or any licensee against whom a citation proceeding
has been instituted by the state’s Liquor Control Commission; to examine, or
cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee,
and to hear testimony and take evidence for use in the performance of the
Commissioner’s duties, and for the information of the Commissioner to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state. Other persons may
be designated by the Commissioner to take action for the purpose of obtaining
any of the information desired by the Commissioner under this section;
      (5)   To appoint any other member of the Village Board to serve as Deputy
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, which person shall have full authority to
exercise, in the absence of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, any of the
powers and duties enumerated herein, except as the Commissioner may
specifically exclude by such appointment; and
      (6)   To report to the Village Board from time to time actions which have
been taken to grant or deny liquor licenses or to penalize licensees.
   (C)   (1)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any
license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of state law pertaining to the sale of alcohol
or of any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the Village Board, or any
applicable rule or regulations established by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or the State Commission which is not inconsistent with law.
      (2)    However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no
fine shall be imposed, except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner with at least three days’ prior written notice to the
licensee, as provided in the state’s Liquor Control Act, as now or hereafter
amended, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. If the
licensee fails to appear for such public hearing after receiving notice as
provided in the state’s Liquor Control Act, a default judgment may be entered
and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend the license
and/or impose a fine.
   (D)   If the Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, the Commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating
the reason for such conclusion, and without notice or hearing, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period. Provided, if such licensee shall
also be engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises,
such order shall not be applicable to such other business.
   (E)   (1)   In determining the appropriate penalty for violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or any state law pertaining to the sale of alcohol,
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may consider such matters and information
as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner deems are relevant, including, but not
limited to, the nature and circumstances surrounding the violation, the past
record of the licensee, and the penalties previously imposed by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner for similar violation.
      (2)   The past record shall include the record of the current licensee as
well as the record of any other existing or prior licensee where there is or
was substantial common identity between the owners of the current licensee and
the owners of such other licensee. Where the licensee under consideration, or
such other prior or existing licensee, is a business entity such as a
corporation or partnership, the ownership interest includes the equity holdings
of the stockholder or partner. The consideration of the past record of such
other or prior licensee shall only include that time period when such common
identity is found.
   (F)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, as promptly as
practicable and in any event within five days after such hearing, if the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner determines after such hearing that the license
should be revoked or suspended and/or a fine should be imposed, state the
reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension
and/or a fine should be imposed and shall serve a copy of such order upon the
licensee.
(Prior Code, § 111.46) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.47 HEARINGS.
   For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, in his or her discretion,
hold public hearings at any time within the village concerning any matters
embraced within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.47) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.48 DUTIES OF VILLAGE CLERK.
   The Village Clerk shall receive all license applications and issue all
licenses, when directed to do so by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and
perform such other duties and functions as are assigned by this chapter. The
Village Clerk shall also furnish routine stenographic services to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner upon request.
(Prior Code, § 111.48) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.49 PENDING ACTION.
   The repeal of the ordinances or parts of ordinances effectuated by the
enactment of this chapter shall not be construed as abating any actions now
pending under, or by virtue of, such ordinances or as discontinuance, abating,
modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or to accrue or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
municipality under any section or provision existing at the time of the passage
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.49) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity, other than a licensee, violating any provision
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for
each offense, except as otherwise stated herein. Each day a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any
fine, the village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief directing the
violator to cure the violation.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty, a licensee convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter may be subject to having his or hers, or its,
license revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (C)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by him or
her personally.
   (D)   In addition or as an alternative to the suspension authorized by §
111.46(C)(1), the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the
licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000 for a
first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500 for a second violation within
a 12-month period, and $2,500 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-
month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than $15,000 in fines under this division (D) may
be imposed against any licensee during the period of his or her license.
Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 111.99) (Ord. 810, passed 10-19-2011; Ord. 871, passed 12-7-
2016)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License requirement
   
112.03   Application procedure
   
112.04   Standards for issuance
   
112.05   Revocation procedure
   
112.06   Standards for revocation
   
112.07   Appeal procedure
   
112.08   Exhibition of identification
   
112.09   Village policy on soliciting
   
112.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.11   Duty of solicitors
   
112.12   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
112.13   Time limit on soliciting
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of village to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit peddlers,
itinerant merchants, or transient vendors, see 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the village and who, in
the furtherance of that business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the village.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the village.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
(Prior Code, § 112.01)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in this activity within the village.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk. This application shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a
corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning
the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the village;
         (b)   The local address of the individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of the individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which the individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
the applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value, and whether they are to be sold
by sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom the goods are manufactured or grown,
and where the goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above has
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the village, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as the representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
(Prior Code, § 112.03) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless the investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has committed the following
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
(Prior Code, § 112.04)
§ 112.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
112.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. This notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 112.05)
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
(Prior Code, § 112.06)
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
112.04 or
112.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Board of Trustees, within 14 days after
notice of the decision has been mailed to the person’s last known address, a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Board of Trustees
shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for the hearing shall be
given to the person in the same manner as provided in §
112.05.
   (B)   The order of the Board of Trustees after the hearing shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 112.07)
§ 112.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the village shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed Peddler” or
“Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during the time that he or
she is engaged in the business licensed.
(Prior Code, § 112.08) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the occupants of
the residences in the village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
(Prior Code, § 112.09)
§ 112.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
         “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Prior Code, § 112.10)
§ 112.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
112.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 112.11) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
112.10.
(Prior Code, § 112.12) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.13 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday
or Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 112.13) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each and every violation
thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 112.99)
CHAPTER 113: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
113.01   Purpose and scope
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
113.04   Dispute resolution
   
113.05   Indemnification
   
113.06   Insurance
   
113.07   Small wireless facilities permit application
§ 113.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards, and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the village’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way
on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with § VI.D.l.a.i through § VI.D.l.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office, or where
such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
the public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
      (2)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between the user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. WIRELESS
FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.03 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (C)(9) below regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated:
      (1)   In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or
      (2)   Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the
village, together with the village’s small cell facilities permit application,
as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities
on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or the location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
      (2)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (3)   The village shall process applications as follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   The village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
            1.   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances,
or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an
application.
            2.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure
to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the village’s review period.
            3.   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
            4.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the village
for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a
municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a
license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (4)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the village’s permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the village. Processing
deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      (5)   The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
         (b)   A local, state, or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (6)   (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the village may remove a small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately a small wireless facility collocations for
which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (7)   (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less
than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations
unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the
new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or
any provision, condition, or requirement contained in this chapter.
         (b)   If the Act is repealed as provided in § 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      (8)   Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information, and
notices to the village by personal delivery at the village’s designated place
of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due, or by any other
commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village’s
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition
and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents, or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR §§ 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR §§ 90.672 through
47 CFR 90.675.
         (e)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division (C)(3)(d) above. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   Collocation.
         (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate a small wireless
facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole
or the electric supply zone of the pole.
         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         (c)   For purposes of this division (C)(4), the terms COMMUNICATIONS
SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   Applicable codes. The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      (6)   Designs. The wireless provider shall comply with written design
standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a village ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive
plan, or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and
conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to a collocation
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility
poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if he or she has the right to use
the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village,
the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits, or material cost reasons the alternate location does
not satisfy the criteria in this division (C)(7).
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which the small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher
of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   Forty-five feet aboveground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms, and
conditions set forth in the Town Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 154, §
154.170, et seq.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-
of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses
the wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval, or permit,
or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (B)(1)(d) above; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the State Highway Code; or
      (3)   (a)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the State Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail, or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of § 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division (E)(3), PUBLIC UTILITY has the
meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement:
            1.   To obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service; or
            2.   To obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain,
or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility
poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the village’s utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village
on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees, and terms that the
village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying
the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees, and terms. The existing
agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for
the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the
village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village
before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option
under this division (F).
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals
         (a)   Two hundred dollars per year; or
         (b)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the village utility pole.
      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (3)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if
it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.04 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court for the Fourth Judicial District of the county shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act, 50 ILCS 840. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal
utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating
person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year
per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.05 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against
any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.06 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 113.07 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES PERMIT APPLICATION.
Village of Teutopolis
106 West Main Street
Teutopolis, Illinois 62467
Phone: 217-857-3543
Fax: 217-857-3814
Email: village@teutopolis.com
   SMALL WIRELESS PERMIT APPLICATION
 
   APPLICANT INFORMATION
 
Applicant Name:                  Date:
Applicant is a: ___Carrier/Wireless Provider _____ Representative _____Other:
Company Name:         
Address:         
City:                  State:         ZIP Code:
Phone:                           Email:
 
   PROPOSED SITE LOCATION
         
Property Address:         
City:                  State:                  ZIP Code:
Closest Intersection (Distance and Direction from):
 
 
   EXISTING POLE/STRUCTURE INFORMATION
 
New Pole/Structure Construction? Yes _____ No ______
Pole/Structure ID Number:      Height of Pole/Structure (feet):      Pole Color:
Existing Attachment(s) on Pole/Structure? (e.g., banners, light fixtures) Yes ____ No
____
Existing Structure Owner:         
Name of Structure Owner Representative:         
Address:         
City:                  State:            ZIP Code:
Phone:            E-mail:             Fax:
 
   PROPERTY OWNER INFORMATION
 
In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an
existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless provider shall
provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the
proposed collocation. Permission has been granted by property owner? Yes _____ No
______
Name:         
Address:         
City:                  State:            ZIP Code:
Phone:                        Email:
 
Village of Teutopolis
106 West Main Street
Teutopolis, Illinois 62467
Phone: 217-857-3543
Fax: 217-857-3814
Email: village@teutopolis.com
 
   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
 
The following documents must be attached or included for the Application to be
complete:
 
___ Application fee(s)
 
___ Site specific structural integrity, AND for a municipal utility pole
 
___ Make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer
 
___ The location where each proposed site location and its immediate surroundings
 
___ Photographs of the proposed site location and its immediate surroundings
 
___   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer for each proposed
small wireless facility
 
___   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility
 
___ A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless
facility, if approved
 
___ Proof of permission granted by property owner, if existing pole not owned by the
City
 
   ATTESTATION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT & SIGNATURE
 
I attest to the best of my knowledge and belief, that the Information stated in this
application and in all supporting plans and documents is true and accurate. To the
best of my knowledge, I certify that the proposed collocation complies with the terms
of the “Collocation Requirements and Conditions” Section of Village of Teutopolis’
Small Wireless Facility Deployment Ordinance.
 
Signature of Applicant:                  Date:
Printed Name of Applicant:               Title:
 
   ***FOR ADMINISTRATIVE USE ONLY***
 
Date Application was submitted:
 
Application is: ____ Complete ____ Incomplete
If incomplete, date the Applicant was notified:
 
Missing documents or information:
 
 
(Ord. 903, passed 6-20-2018)
CHAPTER 114: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
114.03   Public nuisance declared
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization,
or transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to cultivate,
dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Pub. Acts
101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Pub.
Acts 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers,
per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Pub. Acts 101-0027), as
it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Pub. Acts 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 (Pub. Acts 101-0027), as it may be amended from time
to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705
(Pub. Acts 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, or
agent.
(Ord. 923, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 114.02 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   Adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in the village. No
person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated, or aide, abet,
or assist in the operation within the village of any of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; or
   (F)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 923, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
village in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 923, passed 8-21-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Other village nuisances, see
Chapter 92
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions
of §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 923, passed 8-21-2019)
CHAPTER 115: MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Permit required
   
115.03   Operation requirements for mobile food service establishments
   
115.04   Mobile food service vendor permit suspension or revocation
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A self-contained food service operation,
located in a readily movable, motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle, or other
unit used to store, prepare, display, or serve food intended for individual
portion service. MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT shall also mean a tent area
used to prepare, display, or serve food intended for individual portion
service.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, club, company,
association, syndicate, society, business trust, organization, institution,
agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district, or other
political subdivision, corporation, limited liability company, proprietorship,
contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, or other legal entity. It shall
also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, or other
representative appointed according to law. Whenever PERSON appears in any
section of this chapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners of members thereof, and as to
corporations or limited liability company, shall include the officers, agents,
or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1067, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 115.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Requirement. No person shall operate, conduct, or maintain a mobile
food service establishment within the corporate limits of the village, unless
such person, shall have first obtained a duly issued and authorized permit
issued by the village, authorizing such mobile food service establishment
(hereinafter referred to as the “mobile food service vendor permit”).
   (B)   Application for permit. Any person desiring to secure a mobile food
service vendor permit from the village shall complete and file with the Village
Clerk an application for a mobile food service vendor permit on such forms as
prescribed by the Village Clerk (hereinafter referred to as the “mobile food
service vendor permit application”). The mobile food service vendor permit
application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk during regular business
hours no less than seven business days prior to the first scheduled date the
mobile food service establishment intends to operate. A mobile food service
vendor permit application shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   Name, business name, permanent business address (which must include
a street address), residence address of the principal of the applicant and, if
the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the
name and residence address of each officer, shareholder, member, partner, and
the like;
      (2)   Copy of current state photo identification or driver’s license;
      (3)   Description of the food and beverages to be sold in or through the
mobile food service establishment;
      (4)   The location or locations where the mobile food service
establishment will operate;
      (5)   The date or dates when the mobile food service establishment will
operate;
      (6)   Whether the applicant seeks an annual permit or a one-day permit;
      (7)   The date, or approximate date, of the applicant’s latest previous
application for a permit under this chapter, if any;
      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, and whether the applicant’s permit has ever
been revoked. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company, whether any officer, shareholder, member, partner of said
partnership, corporation, or limited liability company has ever been convicted
of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or had a permit
revoked;
      (9)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of
a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the
United States or is a registered sex offender. If the applicant is a
partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, whether any officer,
shareholder, member, partner of said partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under
the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States or
is a registered sex offender;
      (10)   The applicant’s registration number under the Retailer’s
Occupation Tax Act; and
      (11)   In addition to information required above, an application for a
permit to operate a mobile food service establishment on village property or a
right-of-way shall include:
         (a)   A signed statement that the applicant shall hold harmless the
village, its officers, and employees and shall indemnify the village, its
officers, and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to
persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of
the permit. Applicant shall furnish and maintain public liability and property
damage insurance as will protect applicant, property owner, and the village
from all claims from damage to property or bodily injury, including death,
which may arise from operations under the permit or in connection therewith.
The insurance shall provide coverage of not less than $100,000 for bodily
injury for each person, $500,000 for each occurrence, and not less than $50,000
for property damage per occurrence. The insurance shall be without prejudice to
coverage otherwise existing, and shall have as additional insured the village,
its officers, and employees, on a primary, non-contributory basis, and shall
further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the
expiration of the permit without 30 days’ written notice to the Village Clerk;
         (b)   A certificate of insurance as provided in this section;
         (c)   Proof of registration with the County Health Department and/or
proof of a certified food protection management certificate, as applicable; and
         (d)   The tax ID number of the applicant.
   (C)   Inspection. Prior to the issuance and/or renewal of a mobile food
service vendor permit, an applicant shall also present the mobile food service
establishment to the Clerk, or his or her designee, for an inspection, upon the
request of the village, to determine whether the mobile food service
establishment complies with the provisions of this chapter and may be operated
within the corporate limits of the village.
   (D)   Issuance of permit. The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized and directed to issue such mobile food service vendor permit
in accordance with this chapter if the Village Clerk, or his or her designee,
determines that the applicant and the mobile food service establishment comply
with the provisions of this chapter, and to further collect the required mobile
food truck permit fee imposed under division (E) below. No mobile food service
vendor permit shall be issued to any person:
      (1)   Who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or
any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the
date of the application;
      (2)   Who is a registered sex offender;
      (3)   Who has been twice convicted in the previous five years of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Whose license pursuant to this subchapter has been revoked in the
previous five years;
      (5)   Who is lacking a County Health Department certificate and/or a
certified food protection management certificate, as applicable; or
      (6)   Who is lacking a State Department of Revenue tax identification
number (unless not selling food for profit).
   (E)   Permit fee. A mobile food service vendor permit application shall be
accompanied by the following applicable fee:
      (1)   Twenty dollars for a permit good for up to one 24-hour period; or
      (2)   One hundred dollars for an annual license good for up to one year;
provided that each annual license shall terminate on December 31 following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked. The annual fee to be paid shall not be
prorated in any manner; (hereinafter referred to as the “mobile food service
permit fee”). Should a mobile food service vendor permit application be denied,
the mobile food service permit fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
   (F)   Continuing obligation to supply information. The requirement to supply
all information required in mobile food service vendor permit application as
provided for in division (B) above is a continuing one. If any supplied
information or statements become invalid, it is the duty of the permittee of a
mobile food service vendor permit to provide updated information to the
village.
   (G)   Renewal.
      (1)   Any permittee may renew a mobile food service vendor permit at the
expiration thereof provided that the permittee is then qualified to receive a
mobile food service vendor permit. The requirements for and the procedures for
obtaining a renewal of a mobile food service vendor permit shall be the same as
that provided for in case of an original application for a mobile food service
vendor permit, however, any application for renewal of an annual mobile food
service vendor permit shall be filed with the Village Clerk not less than 30
days prior to the expiration of the annual mobile food service vendor permit.
      (2)   The failure to renew a mobile food service vendor permit as
prescribed or to pay the required mobile food service vendor permit fee before
the expiration date shown on the mobile food service vendor permit being
renewed shall result in the lapse of the mobile food service vendor permit.
   (H)   Privilege granted by mobile food service vendor permit. A mobile food
service vendor permit issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for a period of time listed in the mobile food service vendor
permit; provided, in no event shall it exceed one year after issuance, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such mobile food service vendor permit shall not
descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon
the death of the permittee of a mobile food service vendor permit; provided
that the executor of the will or administrator of the estate of any deceased
permittee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt permittee, when such
estate consists in part of a mobile food service establishment, may continue
the business of the mobile food service establishment under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, insolvent,
or bankrupt permittee until the expiration of such mobile food service vendor
permit or until six months after the death, insolvency or bankruptcy of such
permittee, whichever is the shorter period of time.
   (I)   Transfer. All mobile food service vendor permits issued under this
chapter shall be considered personal and may not be transferred to any person.
   (J)   License to be posted. Every permittee or holder of a mobile food
service vendor permit under the provisions of this chapter shall cause the
mobile food service vendor permit to be hung in plain view in a conspicuous
place at or near where the mobile food service establishment is operated.
   (K)   Exemption. Any obligation to obtain a mobile food service vendor
permit under this section, shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any farmers or gardeners selling the produce, including vegetables,
fruit, or perishable farm products, of their farms and gardens;
      (2)   Any public or private school, which is located within the corporate
boundaries of the village;
      (3)   Any church organization or veteran’s organization, which have their
principal business location within the corporate boundaries of the village;
      (4)   Any bona-fide, religious, charitable, or not-for-profit
organization; provided that such organization has received federal tax
exemption pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c), which has
their principal business location within the corporate boundaries of the
village; or
      (5)   A restaurant that operates out of a permanently affixed structure,
which has their principal business location within the corporate boundaries of
the village.
(Ord. 1067, passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 OPERATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No person shall operate a mobile food service establishment except in
accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   Mobile food service establishments are allowed to operate only upon
property;
   (B)   Mobile food service establishments are allowed to operate within
designated vending areas daily between 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., except where
indicated otherwise;
   (C)   Mobile food service establishments are allowed to operate at a
designated vending area on a “first come, first served” basis;
   (D)   The mobile food service establishment, as well as the service area for
the operation of the mobile food service establishment, shall not block,
obstruct, or interfere with vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian flow;
   (E)   The mobile food service establishment, as well as the service area for
the operation of the mobile food service establishment, shall not block,
obstruct, or interfere with the access of any public or private fire hydrant,
or any building’s fire department connection (FDC);
   (F)   The mobile food service establishment, as well as the service area for
the operation of the mobile food service establishment, shall not block,
obstruct, or interfere with any ingress or egress from any public or private
establishment;
   (G)   The mobile food service establishment shall be operated in a manner in
which to allow access for emergency vehicles and shall be readily moveable in a
timely manner should access to the area be required for such emergency
vehicles;
   (H)   There shall be no tents, tables, chairs, or other displays placed
within the designated vending areas. One portable sign board no greater than
six square feet in area may be placed within the designated service area near
the mobile food service establishment;
   (I)   Noise from mobile food service establishments, including, but limited
to, generators and music, shall not exceed 75 decibels as measured from ten
feet away;
   (J)   Mobile food service establishments shall collect all trash and debris
resulting from the mobile food service establishment within 100 feet of the
designated vending area;
   (K)   All decorations utilized by mobile food service establishments shall
be flame resistant;
   (L)   Any hot surfaces from cooking and heating devices contained on or
within the mobile food service establishment shall be guarded so that the
public is protected from physical contact;
   (M)   Fire extinguishers:
      (1)   All mobile food service establishments shall maintain a 4A:60-B:C,
(ten pounds ABC red extinguisher) portable fire extinguisher, which shall be
located in a conspicuous location where it will be readily accessible and
immediately available for use near the point of egress;
      (2)   If the mobile food service establishment cooking methods create
grease laden vapors, the mobile food service establishment shall maintain a 6L
Class “K” type portable extinguisher, which shall be located in a conspicuous
location where it will be readily accessible and immediately available for use
near the point of egress;
      (3)   All required fire extinguishers shall bear a current inspection tag
validated within the past 12 months or a receipt of purchase within the last 12
months shall be available for inspection. Annual inspection shall be performed
by a licensed service provider; and
      (4)   All employees working in the mobile food service establishment
shall be trained in the proper use of the fire extinguishers.
   (N)   All mobile food service establishments shall reimburse the village for
any and all electrical and/or water service utilized by the mobile food service
establishment from village electrical service and/or water service connections.
The amount of such reimbursement shall be calculated by the village based on an
estimated usage, as determined by the village at its sole discretion;
   (O)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be so construed to permit the
operation of a mobile food service establishment in any place where the conduct
of such business is prohibited under the terms and provisions of the village’s
zoning regulations, as contained in Chapter 154; and
   (P)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be so construed to permit the
operation of a mobile food service establishment on any property utilized for
residential purposes or developed with a residential structure.
(Ord. 1067, passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 MOBILE FOOD SERVICE VENDOR PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Village Clerk and/or designee may revoke or suspend any mobile
food service vendor permit issued by the village if the Village Clerk and/or
designee determines that the permittee has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter. No such mobile food service vendor permit shall be so revoked or
suspended except after a public hearing by the Village Clerk and/or designee
and written notice to the permittee affording such permittee an opportunity to
appear and defend. All such proceedings shall be instituted by a written
citation. Said citation shall state the particular provision, rule, or
regulation alleged to have been violated and shall be signed by the Village
Clerk and/or designee. Said citation and a notice of hearing shall be served on
the permittee named therein, not less than three calendar days prior to the
date specified in the notice of hearing. Service of the citation and notice of
hearing on the agent or employee of the permittee shall constitute service on
said permittee. If the permittee’s whereabouts are unknown or reasonable
attempts to serve the permittee have failed, service shall be by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation within the village. Said permittee named in
the citation and notice of hearing shall appear at the time and place designed
in said citation and notice of hearing.
   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted under the rules issued by the Village
Clerk and/or designee. Such rules shall be consistent with the nature of the
proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-
examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. All such hearings shall
be open to the public and the Village Clerk and/or designee shall reduce all
evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings.
   (C)   The Village Clerk and/or designee, within five calendar days after
such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the mobile food
service vendor permit should be suspended or revoked, shall state the reason or
reasons for such determination in a written order, and either the period of
suspension for a mobile food service vendor permit, or that the mobile food
service vendor permit has been revoked. The period of the suspension or the
declaration of revocation, and all costs shall be clearly set forth in said
written order. All costs of the public hearing incurred by the village shall be
charged to the permittee or upon a determination of a violation and the
issuance of an order setting forth a suspension or revocation. A copy of the
written order shall be served on the permittee within the five calendar days
after the hearing. Service of the written order on the agent or employee of the
permittee shall constitute service on the permittee. If the permittee’s
whereabouts are unknown or reasonable attempts to serve the permittee have
failed, service shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
within the village.
   (D)   Any review of decisions of the Village Clerk and/or designee shall be
as provided for in the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et
seq.
   (E)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, at
any time, for the purposes of preserving the peace, protecting the safety of
the public, or abating any imminent, continuing public nuisance, the Village
Clerk and/or designee may then issue a temporary emergency suspension of that
mobile food service vendor permit, but in no case shall such temporary
emergency suspension exceed 24 hours from the time of its issuance, except as
allowed by law or local ordinance.
(Ord. 1067, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, any person violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or
opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a civil ordinance violation and shall
be fined not less than $250, nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any provision of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any holder of a mobile food service vendor permit or any
person subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed and held to
be the act of such employer or holder of a mobile food service vendor permit,
and the employer or holder of a mobile food service vendor permit shall be
punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or
omitted by him or her personally.
   (C)   For violations of this chapter, the penalty provided in division (A)
above is in addition to, not in lieu of, any administrative action taken by the
Village Clerk and/or designee as contained within §
115.04.
(Ord. 1067, passed 11-20-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
137.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.
(720 ILCS 5/2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(720 ILCS 5/2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of this village or state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-12)
(Prior Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   (A)   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish
a result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense.
   (B)   A person acts with intent when, as described in division (A) above,
his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or
engage in that conduct.
(720 ILCS 5/4-4) (Prior Code, § 130.02)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that those circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists.
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that the result is practically
certain to be caused by his or her conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the term “willfully,” unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element of an offense, that element also is established if a person acts
intentionally.
(720 ILCS 5/4-5) (Prior Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   A person is reckless or acts recklessly when that person consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense, and
that disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly
is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the term
“wantonly,” unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.
(720 ILCS 5/4-6) (Prior Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when that person fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a
result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense, and that
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(720 ILCS 5/4-7) (Prior Code, § 130.05)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits the offense of attempt when,
with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act that
constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (B)   Impossibility. It is not a defense to a charge of attempt that because
of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible for the
accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   Statutory fine. A person convicted of attempt may be fined or
imprisoned or both, not to exceed the maximum provided for the offense
attempted. If the fine exceeds that set forth in §
130.99 below, however, the village shall enforce the offense under the
provisions of state law.
(720 ILCS 5/8-4) (Prior Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each and every
violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed for a violation of this
section, if a person is convicted of or placed on supervision for knowingly
damaging or destroying crops of another, including crops intended for personal,
commercial, research, or developmental purposes, the person is liable in a
civil action to the owner of any crops damaged or destroyed for money damages
up to twice the market value of the crops damaged or destroyed.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1) (Prior Code, § 130.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants, or equipment
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging village property
   
131.04   Jackrocks
§ 131.01 DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS, OR EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with,
destroy, or deface any fire hydrant, fire hose, fire engine, or other public or
private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to such
equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1) (Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(3) below, whoever commits any
of the following commits a Class B misdemeanor:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving prior to the
entry notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart; or
         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represents his or her
identity orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to
obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building
or on the land. This division (A)(1)(d) does not apply to a peace officer or
other official of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the
performance of his or her official duties.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (A), this section shall not apply to
being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to
the public during its normal hours of operation, nor shall this section apply
to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the
building is still open to the public.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (A), whoever enters
upon any of the following areas in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to that entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the
entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart, commits a Class A misdemeanor:
         (a)   A field that is used for growing crops or that is capable of
being used for growing crops;
         (b)   An enclosed area containing livestock;
         (c)   An orchard; or
         (d)   A barn or other agricultural building containing livestock.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of division (A) above if the person has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by 725
ILCS 5/112A-3(7) granting remedy “(2)” of 725 ILCS 5/112A-14(b), or if a
printed or written notice forbidding entry has been conspicuously posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of the owner’s
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on the land at the request of or by occupancy, leasing, or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or the owner’s agent, nor to anyone
invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit
him or her at the place that person is so living upon the land.
   (D)   (1)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if
the person beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within any municipality.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate:
         (a)   In which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least
two years; and
         (b)   Which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at
least one year.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (D), BEAUTIFIES means to
landscape, to clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on or to
board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) above.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (G)   (1)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to
the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(3) above. A person may also be liable to the owner for court
costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.
         (a)   The measure of damages shall be:
            1.   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in 525 ILCS 30/3.11
and 3.14;
            2.   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously notified
the person to cease trespassing; or
            3.   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50.
         (b)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the
owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly
and severally liable.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (G), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different
meaning:
         LAND. Includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop land, fallow
land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil nature
preserves, and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or private
roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
         OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator, or tenant.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as provided under 625 ILCS 5/1-217.
(720 ILCS 5/21-3) (Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly damage any village property;
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage village property;
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on village land; or
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on village land or in a village building any
stink bomb or any offensive-smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere
with the use by the village of its land or buildings.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(3), or (A)(4) above that the village consented to the damage.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including, but not limited to, real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1) (Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional prohibitions; felonies, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1
§ 131.04 JACKROCKS.
   (A)   A person who knowingly sells, gives away, manufactures, purchases, or
possesses a jackrock or who knowingly places, tosses, or throws a jackrock on
public or private property commits a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   As used in this section, JACKROCK means a caltrop or other object
manufactured with one or more rounded or sharpened points which, when placed or
thrown, present at least one point at such an angle that it is peculiar to and
designed for use in puncturing or damaging vehicle tires. It does not include a
device designed to puncture or damage the tires of a vehicle driven over it in
a particular direction, if a conspicuous and clearly visible warning is posted
at the device’s location, alerting persons to its presence.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the possession, transfer, or use of
jackrocks by any law enforcement officer in the course of his or her official
duties.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1.4) (Prior Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   Curfew
   
132.03   Loitering
   
132.04   Distribution to minors
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
      (3)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act, 205 ILCS 740, or as an employee of such collection agency, and
while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the
alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy, or intimidate the alleged
debtor;
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Illinois Department of Public Health under 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq. or the MR/
DD Community Care Act, 210 ILCS 47/1- 101 et seq.;
      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under Article
II of “An Act in relation to victims of violence and abuse,” approved September
16, 1984, as amended;
      (6)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the public;
      (7)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or
      (8)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a threat of destruction of a
school building or school property, or a threat of violence, death, or bodily
harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or school event,
whether or not school is in session.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed as set forth in §
130.99, any person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be ordered by the
court to perform community service, as set forth under the provisions of 720
ILCS 5/26-1.
(720 ILCS 5/26-1) (Prior Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN.
         (a)   To linger or stay; or
         (b)   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that
the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married, or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act, 720 ILCS 30.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in division (C) above is present.
(720 ILCS 5/12c-60) (Prior Code, § 132.02)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose curfew, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5
§ 132.03 LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect’s escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi- public sidewalk,
street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall, or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(Prior Code, § 132.03) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 DISTRIBUTION TO MINORS.
   Any person who shall either sell, give, or allow his or her clerk, agent, or
other representative or person to sell or give to any minor under 21 years of
age any intoxicating beverage, liquor, beer, or any other stimulant of the like
nature, or shall give or sell to any such minor any cigar, cigarette, or other
tobacco, either in the sack, package, or bulk, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 132.04) (Ord. 3, passed 12-2-1899)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of §
132.02 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $10
nor more than $500, except that neither a person who has been made a ward of
the court under 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq., nor that person’s legal guardian,
shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or instead of the fine imposed by
this section, the court may order a parent, legal guardian, or other person
convicted of a violation of §
132.02(B) to perform community service as determined by the court, except that
the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court under 705
ILCS 405/1-1 et seq. may not be ordered to perform community service. The dates
and times established for the performance of community service by the parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of §
132.02(B) shall not conflict with the dates and times that the person is
employed in his or her regular occupation.
(Prior Code, § 132.02)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER, OR CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by
one known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee of any authorized act within his or her official capacity.
      (2)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court
shall order any person convicted of resisting or obstructing a peace officer,
firefighter, or correctional institution employee to be sentenced to a minimum
of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or ordered to perform community service
for not less than 100 hours as may be determined by the court. The person shall
not be eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence of imprisonment
or community service.
      (3)   A person convicted for a violation of this section whose violation
was the proximate cause of injury to a peace officer, firefighter, or
correctional institution employee is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
EMPLOYEE shall mean any person employed to supervise and control inmates
incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison, jail, house of
correction, police detention area, half-way house, or other institution or
place for the incarceration or custody of persons under sentence for offenses
or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest for an offense, a
violation of probation, a violation of parole, or a violation of mandatory
supervised release, or awaiting a bail setting hearing or preliminary hearing,
or who are sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually violent persons.
      (2)   FIREFIGHTER means any individual, either as an employee or
volunteer, of a regularly constituted fire department of a municipality or fire
protection district who performs firefighting duties, including, but not
limited to, the fire chief, assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver,
ladder person, hose person, pipe person, and any other member of a regularly
constituted fire department. FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the
office of the State Fire Marshal to conduct arson investigations.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a
person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to be a
firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence, building, or
other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.
(720 ILCS 5/31-1) (Prior Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly fail reasonably to aid a
person known by him or her to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(720 ILCS 5/31-8) (Prior Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy,
deface, remove, or conceal any public notice posted according to law, during
the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(720 ILCS 5/32-9) (Prior Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
   
134.03   Harmful material
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-0.1; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed by others.
(720 ILCS 5/11-9) (Prior Code, § 134.01) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Public indecency by person 18 year of age or older, or within 500 feet of
elementary or secondary school grounds when children are present, Class 4
felony, see 720 ILCS 5/11-30
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance, or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, the evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of those people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material; and/or
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement, or
possession of a mold, engraved plate, or other embodiment of obscenity
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age; or
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
   (F)   Forfeiture of property. A person who has been convicted previously of
the offense of obscenity and who is convicted of a second or subsequent offense
of obscenity is subject to the property forfeiture provisions set forth in
Article 124B of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963, being 720 ILCS 5 Title
VIII Article 124B.
(720 ILCS 5/11-20) (Prior Code, § 134.02) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse when, taken as a whole, it does the following:
         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value
for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL.
         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask, or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if the person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she does either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to, depicts to, or
gives away to a minor any of the following, knowing that the minor is under the
age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s
true age:
         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show, or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct, or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation.
      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person’s true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   That the minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth
certificate, or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by
the accused;
      (2)   That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship
with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum, or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of the organization;
      (4)   That the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific
or educational purposes; or
      (5)   That an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of the harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees, or agents, as where the order or
request for the harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, internet,
or similar means of communication, and delivery of the harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, internet, or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18: “NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to purchase the matter advertised. Any person under the age
of 18 that falsely states that he or she is not under the age of 18 for the
purpose of obtaining the material advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
under the laws of the state.”
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom the material was sold, lent, distributed, or given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service providers, and
providers of information services, including, but not limited to, internet
service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable under this
section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of the
transmission, storage, or caching of electronic communications or messages of
others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services, or information services used by others in violation
of this section.
(720 ILCS 5/11-21) (Prior Code, § 134.03) Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Distribution of harmful material, second or subsequent offense, a Class 4
felony, see 720 ILCS 5/11-21
   Use of a computer web camera, cellular telephone, or any other type of
device to manufacture the harmful material, a Class 4 felony, see 720 ILCS 5/
11-21
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of §
134.03 is a Class A misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person under the age of 18 who falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
      (3)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable care
in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or sends, or
causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or exhibits any
harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 134.03)
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions shall be the same as set
forth in the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 135.01)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
village, he or she:
      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value,
unless excepted in division (B) below;
      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any
political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any gambling
device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or herself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as
described in 720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell, or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell, or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document, or
other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticket or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document, or similar device, except for
such activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of the state or any other state or
foreign government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of the state or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of the information; except that nothing in this division (A)(11)
prohibits transmission or receipt of the information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to activities referenced in
division (B)(6) below.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance, including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and
life, health, or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in the contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when the
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law, or the
manufacture, distribution, or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined
in the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.), by manufacturers,
distributors, and terminal operators licensed to do so under the Video Gaming
Act;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.;
      (6)   (a)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with 20
ILCS 1605/1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity conducted by the
Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions of the
State Lottery Law and its rules.
         (b)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the internet for a
lottery conducted by the state under the program established in 20 ILCS 1605/
7.12.
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B)(7), an ANTIQUE
SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.;
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 30/1 et
seq.;
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under 230 ILCS 20/1 et
seq.;
      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized under 230
ILCS 10/1 et seq.;
      (12)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed
veterans establishment when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.;
and
      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) above,
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.
(720 ILCS 5/28-1) (Prior Code, § 135.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Second and subsequent offenses of §
135.02(A)(3) through (A)(11), felonies, see 720 ILCS 5/28-1
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling other than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the
Riverboat Gambling Act (230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.) or the Video Gaming Act (230
ILCS 40/1 et seq.). No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property
owned or occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be used as a
gambling place.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the Circuit Court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(720 ILCS 5/28-3) (Prior Code, § 135.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by village
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right to
receive money or property. With the exception of any device designed for
gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be
forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property interest in the
device knows of the unlawful use thereof.
(720 ILCS 5/28-5(a))
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(720 ILCS 5/28-5(b))
(Prior Code, § 135.04)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor
vehicle
   
136.06   Receptacles required in public areas
   
136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter
 
   
136.99   Penalty
LITTER
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   LITTER.
      (1)   Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste.
      (2)   LITTER may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn or garden waste;
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other
packaging construction material; abandoned vehicle as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-
100 et seq., motor vehicle parts; furniture; oil; carcass of a dead animal; any
nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard; potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.360; or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary
nature, which has been discarded, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of
improperly.
(415 ILCS 105/3)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in Chapter 70 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 136.01)
§ 136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of litter
upon any public or private property in this village, or upon or into any river,
lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in this village unless:
   (A)   The property has been designated by the village or any of its agencies
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the State Pollution
Control Board;
   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant
and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a
fire hazard;
   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; and/or
   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of any
litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.360, when the emergency situation no longer exists.
(415 ILCS 105/4) (Prior Code, § 136.02)
§ 136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property, or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream, or
body of water in this village except as permitted under §
136.02(A) through (E).
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each offense.
      (2)   Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or refuse
from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm, or other site to and
deposit the material in, around, or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(415 ILCS 105/5) (Prior Code, § 136.03) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of
which the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as
to constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be
blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not
less than $100, nor more than $750 for each offense.
(415 ILCS 105/6) (Prior Code, § 136.04) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
136.03, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(415 ILCS 105/9) (Prior Code, § 136.05) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation, or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to, commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies, and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION, OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to, any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
(B) for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
   (C)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in this
section, the owner or person in control of the property shall be fined $100 for
violating this section. If the owner or person in control of the property has
placed litter receptacles on his or her property but the number or size of the
receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people
coming on or using his or her property as indicated by the condition and
appearance of that property, and the owner or person in control has failed to
provide sufficient or adequate receptacles within ten days after being made
aware of that fact by written notice from the police, he or she shall be fined
$50 for each receptacle not so provided and maintained.
(415 ILCS 105/10) (Prior Code, § 136.06)
§ 136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
   The penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu
of any penalties, rights, remedies, duties, or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.
(415 ILCS 105/8(c)) (Prior Code, § 136.07)
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.02 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this Act, the court may order
that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose of
the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal and disposal,
and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the person so
convicted.
      (3)   An individual convicted of violating §
136.02 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, at the site where
the offense occurred, as provided in 605 ILCS 120/50.
(415 ILCS 105/8(a), (b), (d)) (Prior Code, § 136.02)
   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.03 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this Act, the court may order
that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose of
the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal and disposal,
and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the person so
convicted.
      (3)   An individual convicted of violating §
136.03 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, at the site where
the offense occurred, as provided in 605 ILCS 120/50.
(415 ILCS 105/8(a), (b), (d)) (Prior Code, § 136.03)
   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.04 shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this Act, the court may order
that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose of
the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal and disposal,
and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the person so
convicted.
(415 ILCS 105/8(a), (b)) (Prior Code, § 136.04)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful use of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
Air Rifles
   
137.15   Definitions
   
137.16   Selling, renting, or transferring to children; prohibition
   
137.17   Carrying or discharging on public streets
   
137.18   Permitted possession
   
137.19   Permitted sales
   
137.20   Seizure and removal
Statutory reference:
   Firearms and ammunition registration, see 430 ILCS 65/0.01 through 16-3
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, slung- shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon
regardless of composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred to as
a switch-blade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the
knife; or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knife-like blade
as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material, or compressed gas,
but which shall not be deemed to include crossbows, common or compound bows,
and/or underwater spearguns in accordance with 720 ILCS 5/24-1(e);
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(1))
      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another: a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(2))
      (3)   Carry on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non- lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(3))
      (4)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or her
person, except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal
dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling
of another person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol,
revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm, except that this division (A)(4)
does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(4))
      (5)   Set a spring gun;
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(5))
      (6)   (a)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun, or taser, or other
deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or
at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental
body or any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a
place where a showing, demonstration, or lecture involving the exhibition of
unloaded firearms is conducted.
         (b)   This division (A)(6) does not apply to any auction or raffle of
a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a governmental body,
nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety training courses.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(8))
      (7)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person, upon any public
street, alley, or other public lands within the corporate limits of a city,
village, or incorporated town, except when an invitee thereon or therein, for
the purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or
except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal dwelling, or
fixed place of business, or on the land of in the legal dwelling of another
person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol, revolver, stun
gun, or taser, or other firearm, except that this division (A)(7) does not
apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(10))
      (8)   Sell, manufacture, or purchase any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE
BULLET shall mean the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which
contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact with
the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having
a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end
thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between the projectile and
the cap; or
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(11))
      (9)    Carries or possesses on or about his or her person while in a
building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like
character, or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon.
For the purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club
commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic or constructed
of a solid piece of wood or other human-made material.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(13))
   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A) above, means:
      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable
of normal functioning; or
      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in
such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(10))
(Prior Code, § 137.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Provisions concerning silencers on guns; machine guns; bombs; possession of
weapon while hooded, robed and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school or
university grounds (all of which are felonies), see 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6), (7),
(8), and (9) and 24-1(c), respectively
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section 137.01, divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(7), and (A)(9) do not
apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer to assist
in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting
the officer;
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and places of employment;
      (3)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the State National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty;
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions and guards of armored car companies, while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while actually engaged
in the performance of the duties of their employment;
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives, or private alarm contractors or employed by an agency certified by
the Department of Professional Regulation, if their duties include the carrying
of a weapon under the provisions of the Private Detective, Private Alarm,
Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004, 225 ILCS 447/
5-5 et seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their
employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment, provided
that the commuting is accomplished within one hour from departure from home or
place of employment, as the case may be. Persons exempted under this division
(A)(5) shall be required to have completed a course of study in firearms
handling and training approved and supervised by the Department of Professional
Regulation as prescribed by 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq., prior to becoming
eligible for this exemption. The Department of Professional Regulation shall
provide suitable documentation demonstrating the successful completion of the
prescribed firearms training. This documentation shall be carried at all times
when the persons are in possession of a concealable weapon;
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to that commercial or industrial operation while
actually engaged in the performance of their duty or traveling between sites or
properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is a member
of a security force of at least five persons registered with the Department of
Professional Regulation; provided, that the security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the Department of
Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 40 hours of training which
shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling
of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this exemption if
he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security
officer and 20 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued a
firearm control card by the Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions
for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this
section shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of 225
ILCS 447/5-5 et seq. This firearm control card shall be carried by the security
guard at all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon;
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the State Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
137.01(A)(3) and (A)(4) while on duty in the course of any investigation for
the Commission;
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution for the protection of
other employees and property related to that financial institution, while
actually engaged in the performance of their duties, commuting between their
homes and places of employment, or traveling between sites or properties owned
or operated by the financial institution, provided that any person so employed
has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the
Department of Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 40 hours of
training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the
handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 20 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued
a firearm control card by the Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions
for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this
section shall be the same as for those issued under the provisions of 225 ILCS
447/5-5 et seq. This firearm control card shall be carried by the person so
trained at all times when the person is in possession of a concealable weapon.
For purposes of this division (A)(8), FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union, or company providing armored car
services;
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties;
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to 20
ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.;
      (11)   Investigators of the office of the state’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the office of the state’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to 725 ILCS 210/1 et
seq.;
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a state’s Attorney under 55
ILCS 5/3-9005;
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment, or specific
locations that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the Chief
Judge of the Circuit for which they are employed;
      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff;
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons, or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; or
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(15) above to possess those
weapons.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(a))
   (B)   Section 137.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession, or
carrying of a black- jack or slung-shot by a police officer.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(d))
   (C)   Section 137.01(A)(6) does not apply to any owner, manager, or
authorized employee of any place specified in that division or to any law
enforcement officer.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(e))
   (D)   Section 137.01, divisions (A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect
any of the following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, while using their firearms on those target ranges;
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(f))
      (2)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges;
      (3)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the Governor;
      (4)   Hunters, trappers, or fishers with a license or permit while
engaged in hunting, trapping, or fishing;
      (5)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a non-functioning
state or are not immediately accessible;
      (6)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun, or taser, or
other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an
invitee with that person’s permission; and
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(b))
      (7)   Any parole agent or parole supervisor who meets the qualifications
and conditions prescribed in § 3-14-1.5 of the Unified Code of Corrections.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(g-1))
   (E)   Section
137.01(A)(8) does not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the State National Guard while in the performance of their official
duty;
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordnance;
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance; or
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (E)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside this state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(g))
   (F)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision
of this subchapter need not negate any exemptions contained in this subchapter.
The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(h))
   (G)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the
transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
with the state or the federal government where such transportation, carrying,
or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common
carrier is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or
affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by 720 ILCS
5/24-1(a)(7), which is unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by the possessor of a valid firearm owner’s
identification card.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(i))
(Prior Code, § 137.02)
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or
firearm ammunition when:
      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her possession
any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a
misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has any
firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (3)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession;
      (4)   He or she has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past
five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (5)   He or she is mentally retarded and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession; or
      (6)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive bullet. For
the purposes of this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of
an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which
will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE
means a tubular metal case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a
cap or primer at the rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube
between the projectile and the cap.
   (B)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns, and firearm
ammunition is punishable under §
130.99. Unlawful possession of handguns is a felony punishable under
appropriate state law. The possession of each firearm or firearm ammunition in
violation of this section constitutes a single and separate violation.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18 years of
age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such
as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing in accordance with 520
ILCS 5 or 515 ILCS 5.
(720 ILCS 5/24-3.1) (Prior Code, § 137.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.04 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further
disposition consistent with state law.
(720 ILCS 5/24-6) (Prior Code, § 137.04)
AIR RIFLES
§ 137.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AIR RIFLE. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B.B. gun,
pellet gun, or any implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or other hard materials with a force
that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
   DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association, or corporation engaged in
the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in
the definition of AIR RIFLE.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-0.1) (Prior Code, § 137.15)
§ 137.16 SELLING, RENTING, OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise
transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of 13 years where the dealer
knows or has cause to believe the person to be under 13 years of age or where
the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the
person and the person is under 13 years of age.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend, or otherwise
transfer any air rifle to any person under 13 years of age except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian, and ward, or adult instructor and
pupil exists between the person and the person under 13 years of age, or where
the person stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-1) (Prior Code, § 137.16) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.17 CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 13 years of age to carry any air
rifle on the public streets, roads, highways, or public lands within this
village, unless the person under 13 years of age carries the rifle unloaded.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or
across any street, sidewalk, road, highway, or public land or any public place
except on a safely constructed target range.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of this section commits a petty
offense.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-2) (Prior Code, § 137.17) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.18 PERMITTED POSSESSION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, it is lawful for any person
under 13 years of age to have in his or her possession any air rifle if it is:
   (A)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other private enclosure;
   (B)   Used by the person under 13 years of age and he or she is a duly
enrolled member of any club, team, or society organized for educational
purposes and maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission
to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and
instruction of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually
being used in connection with the activities of the club, team, or society
under the supervision of a responsible adult; or
   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when the air rifle is fired, discharged, or operated in a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in a manner as to
prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the
limits of such grounds or residence.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-3) (Prior Code, § 137.18)
§ 137.19 PERMITTED SALES.
   The provisions of §§
137.15 through
137.19 do not prohibit sales of air rifles:
   (A)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
   (B)   To be shipped out of the state; or
   (C)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with 720 ILCS 5/
24.8-3 or by members of the armed services of the United States or veterans’
organizations.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-4) (Prior Code, § 137.19)
§ 137.20 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.
   Any police officer shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of
this subchapter.
(720 ILCS 5/24.8-5) (Prior Code, § 137.20)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILER COACHES
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   ZONING
      
155.   UTILITY FACILITIES
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Addresses
   
150.01   Numbering system
   
150.02   Owner responsibility
   
150.03   Chart
ADDRESSES
§ 150.01 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   All lots, buildings, and structures in the village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan.
   (A)   The base line for streets running north and south shall be Main
Street, and numbers lying north or south thereof shall be designated north or
south, as the case may be; the base line for streets running east and west
shall be Pearl Street, and numbers lying east or west of this line shall be
designated east or west, as the case may be.
   (B)   Numbering shall begin with the base lines with the number 100, and one
unit shall be allowed for each 25-foot frontage in the business district and
50-foot frontage in residential districts. Provided that the numbers of each
block shall begin with 100 or a multiple thereof, and provided further, in the
absence of definable blocks in any area, a lineal measurement of 450 feet east
and west from Pearl Street and 533 feet north and south from Main Street shall
be deemed to be a block for the purposes of this subchapter.
   (C)   Odd numbers shall be on the south and west sides of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 150.15) (Ord. 404, passed 4-5-1961)
§ 150.02 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of each building in the village to
have placed thereon in a place visible from the street, figures at least three
inches high showing the number of the building, said figures to be furnished by
the owner and of a type approved by the Village Board.
   (B)   It shall further be the duty of the owner to report the building
number to the Village Clerk within 90 days of the effective date of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 150.16) (Ord. 404, passed 4-5-1961)
§ 150.03 CHART.
   The Village Clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of
every lot in the village, which chart shall be open to inspection by anyone
interested.
(Prior Code, § 150.17) (Ord. 404, passed 4-5-1961)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Base flood elevation
   
151.04   Duties of the responsible official
   
151.05   Development permit
   
151.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
151.07   Protecting buildings
   
151.08   Subdivision requirements
   
151.09   Public health and other standards
   
151.10   Carrying capacity and notification
   
151.11   Variances
   
151.12   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village
by the Illinois Municipal Code including, but not limited to, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1,
5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is
to maintain this village’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program;
to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life,
loss of property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the
quality of surface waters, conserve economic, and natural values, and provide
for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is
adopted in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18(g) Rivers, Lakes, and
Streams Act;
   (B)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (E)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (F)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities, and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (G)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (H)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59-79, as amended;
   (I)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available by fulfilling
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
   (J)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable building, used only for parking of
vehicles or storage, that is on the same parcel of property as the principal
building and which is incidental to the use of the principal building.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed structure used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or uses in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock,
including aquatic organisms. Structures that house tools or equipment used in
connection with these purposes or uses are also considered to have agricultural
purposes or uses.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is often referred to as the 100-year flood.
The BASE FLOOD elevation at any location is as defined in §
151.03.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The height in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of the crest of
the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any portion of the building, including any sunken room or sunken
portion of a room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground including manufactured homes and
prefabricated buildings. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 days per year.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter providing FEMA’s
comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing floodway, the effective BFEs, or the SFHA.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments, or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. DAMS may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts, or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts, or similar projects;
         (e)   Redevelopment of a site, clearing of land as an adjunct of
construction;
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
         (g)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface; or
         (h)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include resurfacing of pavement when there is
no increase in elevation; construction of farm fencing; or gardening, plowing,
and similar practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of
levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been constructed.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 .C.F.R.
parts 59-79, as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters, or from the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD also includes the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the FEMA that depicts the
floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show
BFEs.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or that may
be annexed into the village, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The FLOODPLAINS of the village are generally identified as such on panel number
(s) 17049CIND1A, 17049C0069D, 17049C0088D 17049C0089D, 17049C0201D, and
17049C0202D of the county-wide FIRM of the county prepared by the FEMA and
dated January 17, 2025. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding
as identified by the community.
      (2)   The FLOODPLAINS of those parts of unincorporated county that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed
into the village are generally identified as such on the FIRM prepared for the
county by the FEMA and dated January 17, 2025.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property, and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the FEMA that is used to
certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The FLOODWAY for the floodplains of Salt Creek shall be as
delineated on the county-wide FIRM prepared by FEMA and dated January 17, 2025.
The FLOODWAYS for each of the remaining floodplains of the village shall be
according to the best data available from the federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the BFE to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions, and unpredictable effects such as those
caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR /OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. IDNR/OWR has jurisdiction over any stream
serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the
floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a
rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from the IDNR/OWR.
(Ill. Admin. Code Title 17, part 3700.30). The IDNR/O WR may grant approval for
specific types of activities by issuance of a state-wide permit which meets the
standards defined in §
151.06.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific building, defined area of land, or a parcel of land, where there has
not been any alteration of the topography since the date of the first NFIP map
showing the property within the floodplain, was inadvertently included within
the floodplain and that the building, defined area of land, or a parcel of land
is removed from the floodplain.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises BFEs, floodplains, or
floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
151.07.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A building, transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   NAVD 88. North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size, when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a human-made change to the land constructed on or
below the ground, including a building, as defined in this section, any
addition to a building; installing utilities, construction of roads, or similar
projects; construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, bridges, or
culverts. See also BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the percentage of damage during a ten-year period equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual
repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes “repetitive loss buildings”.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure taking place during a ten-year period in which the percentage of
improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the improvement or repair is started or increases the floor area by more than
20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
done.
      (3)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The BFE for the floodplains of Salt Creek shall be as delineated on
the base flood profiles in the county-wide flood insurance study prepared by
the FEMA and dated January 17, 2025.
   (B)   The BFE for each floodplain delineated as an AH Zone or AO Zone shall
be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county-wide FIRM.
   (C)   The BFE for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an A Zone
on the county- wide FIRM shall be according to the best data available from
federal, state, or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering
study must be financed by the applicant to determine BFEs.
   (D)   The BFE for the floodplains of those parts of the unincorporated
county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or
that may be annexed into the village, shall be as delineated on the base flood
profiles in the flood insurance study of the county prepared by the FEMA and
dated January 17, 2025.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.04 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the Building Official shall:
   (A)   Check all new development sites to determine if they are in the
floodplain using the criteria listed in §
151.03, base flood elevation or for critical facilities, using the 0.2% annual
chance flood elevation, if defined;
   (B)   Process development permits and any permit extensions in accordance
with §
151.05 and ensure all development activities happen in a timely manner;
   (C)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
151.06;
   (D)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
151.07 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement), elevation certificate, or floodproofing
certificate;
   (E)   Review elevation certificates for accuracy and require incomplete or
deficient certificates to be corrected;
   (F)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§ 151.8 and notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been
modified by annexation;
   (G)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
151.09;
   (H)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
151.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (I)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
151.99 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (J)   Ensure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits, including permits pertaining to
IDNR/OWR floodway and dam safety rules, Clean Water Act, Public Water Supply,
Endangered Species Act, and Illinois Endangered and Species Protection Act;
   (K)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (L)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (M)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (N)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and any other documentation of compliance
for development activities subject to this chapter;
   (O)   Notify FEMA and IDNR/OWR of any proposed amendments to this chapter;
   (P)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
   (Q)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the BFE or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
   (R)   Schedule an annual inspection of the floodplain and document the
results of the inspection; and
   (S)   Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations,
as outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial damage:
      (1)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify property owner of all determinations and responsibilities
for permitting and mitigation.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Development permits.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
law, shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Official.
      (2)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence
any development of a critical facility on land below the 0.2% annual chance
flood elevation without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Official.
      (3)   The Building Official shall only issue a permit for development
activities, including new construction and substantial improvements, which meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Application. The application for development permit shall be
accompanied by:
      (1)   A site plan or drawings, drawn to scale using NAVD 88, showing:
         (a)   Property lines and dimensions;
         (b)   Existing grade elevations;
         (c)   All changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
         (d)   Description of the benchmark or source of survey elevation
control;
         (e)   Sewage disposal facilities;
         (f)   Water supply facilities;
         (g)   Floodplain limits based on elevation or depth, as applicable;
         (h)   Floodway limits, as applicable;
         (i)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
         (j)   The location and dimensions of all structures, including but not
limited to, fences, culverts, decks, gazebos, agricultural structures, and
accessory structures; and
         (k)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
151.07.
      (2)   Cost of project or improvements, including all materials and labor,
as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a
contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (C)   Comparing elevation site. Upon receipt of an application for a
development permit, the Building Official shall compare the elevation of the
site to the BFE.
      (1)   Any development located on land that is shown by survey elevation
to be below the current BFE is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any development located on land shown to be below the BFE and
hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as floodplain on
the current FIRM, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current BFE and which has not been filled after the date of
the site’s first flood map showing the site in the floodplain, is not located
in a mapped floodway, or located in a Zone A, is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the provisions of this chapter. A LOMR-floodway is
required before developing land inadvertently included in a mapped floodway.
Unless a LOMR is obtained, all ordinance provisions apply if the land is
located in a Zone A.
      (4)   Any development located on land that is above the current BFE but
will be graded to an elevation below the BFE, is subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
      (5)   The Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first FIRM identification.
      (6)   The Building Official shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Official shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and
local permits have been obtained.
   (D)   Critical facilities. Upon receipt of an application for a critical
facility, the Building Official shall compare the elevation of the site to the
0.2% annual chance flood elevation, if available. Refer to §
151.09(A)(5) for critical facility site requirements.
   (E)   Actual start of construction. A development permit or approval shall
become invalid unless the actual start of construction, as defined, for work
authorized by such permit, is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after
the work commences. All permitted work shall be completed within a local permit
expiration period after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire. Time extensions, of not more than 180 days each, may be granted, in
writing, by the Building Official. Time extensions shall be granted only if the
original permit is compliant with this chapter and the FIRM and FIS in effect
at the time the extension is granted.
   (F)   Certification and as-built documentation.
      (1)   The applicant is required to submit certification by a licensed
professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and
building elevations were accomplished in compliance with §
151.07. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or registered architect as being compliant with applicable
floodproofing standards. Accessory structures designed in accordance with §
151.07 are exempt from certification; provided sufficient compliance with the
development permit are documented. FEMA elevation certificate and floodproofing
certificate forms are required as documentation of compliance.
      (2)   An as-built grading plan, prepared by a registered professional
engineer is required to certify that any development in floodplain, such as
grading or the construction of bridges or culverts, are in substantial
conformance with the development permit.
      (3)   No building, land, or structure may be occupied or used in any
manner until a letter or certificate has been issued by the Building Official,
stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
      (3)   The Building Official must maintain records in perpetuity
documenting compliance with this chapter, including the elevation to which
structures and alterations to structures are constructed or floodproofed.
   (G)   Application fees and engineering review fee. A non-refundable
application fee of $100 shall be paid to the Village Clerk. An additional fee
may be charged if the Building Official requires the assistance of a
professional engineer or other expert. The applicant will be contacted in
writing before any outside review begins with the estimated engineering or
expert review fee. The applicant must consent in writing before the outside
review begins. The engineering review fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within 30 days after the applicant receives the bill.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the county-wide FIRM, and within all other
floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards
shall apply.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public
health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities, such as underground utility
lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet, and raising
buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any other
activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13; and
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work in an IDNR/OWR jurisdictional
streams by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR
permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and BFE.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Generally. In addition to the state permit and damage prevention
requirements of §
151.06, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPE. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building;
      (2)   Value of improvements equals or exceeds the market value by 50%. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section;
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred;
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage;
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year; and
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
151.02;
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings. Residential or non-
residential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of
the following methods.
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill with the
lowest floor including basement at or above the FPE in accordance with the
following conditions.
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
FPE.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least 20 feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the FPE in lieu of a geotechnical report.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material.
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques, such as swales or basins, shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following.
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   All components located below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage.
         (c)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment shall be located at or above the FPE.
         (d)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the FPE shall
provide for equalization of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. At least two walls must have a minimum of one
permanent opening that is below the BFE and no more than one foot above
finished grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the BFE, or the design must be certified by a registered P.E, as
providing the equivalent performance in accordance with accepted standards of
practice. Refer to FEMA TB 1, openings in foundation walls and walls of
enclosures, for additional guidance.
         (e)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            1.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the FPE
provided they are waterproofed.
            2.   The area below the FPE shall be used solely for parking or
building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
            3.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
FPE; provided that the following conditions and requirements of FEMA TB 11,
crawlspace construction for buildings located in special flood hazard areas,
which ever are more restrictive, are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for equalization
of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. A minimum of one permanent opening shall be provided on at least
two walls that is below the BFE and no more than one foot above finished grade.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE,
or the design must be certified by a registered P.E. as providing the
equivalent performance in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Refer
to FEMA TB 1, openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures, for
additional guidance;
         (c)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
         (d)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (e)   Portions of the building below the FPE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (f)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
FPE.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings. Non-residential buildings may be
structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided a licensed
professional engineer or architect certifies that:
      (1)   Below the FPE, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood;
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice;
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers. Manufactured homes or travel
trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the FPE in accordance with division (B) above;
and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles. Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles on site for more than 180 days per year shall meet the
elevation requirements of division (D) above unless the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicles having a total area not exceeding 400 square feet
measured when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain;
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model, and must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground, and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Detached accessory structures. Detached accessory structures may be
permitted; provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The structure must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The structure must be used only for the parking and storage and
cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The structure must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permit;
      (4)   The exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, and the
like) below the BFE, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance
this section;
      (5)   All utilities, mechanical, and electrical must be elevated above
the FPE;
      (6)   The structure must have at least one permanent opening on at least
two walls not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area;
      (7)   The structure must be no more than one story in height and no more
than 600 square feet in size;
      (8)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse,
lateral movement, and overturning;
      (9)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, and the like) shall be stored above the FPE; and
      (10)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The Plan Commission and Board of Trustees shall take into account hazards,
to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land
management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
151.06 and
151.07.
   (B)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks, and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains should be included
within parks, open space parcels, or other public grounds.
   (C)   Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The BFE and the boundary of the floodplain, where the BFE is not
available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for
calculating the BFE;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway, when applicable; and
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
151.06 and
151.07, the following standards apply.
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless such materials are
stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a
professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the
requirements of §
151.07.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the FPE shall be watertight.
      (5)   (a)   Critical facilities, which are buildings, constructed or
substantially improved within the floodplain or the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation when defined, shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation or three feet above the BFE, whichever is greater. Adequate parking
shall be provided for staffing of the critical facilities at or above the BFE
or 0.2% chance flood, when defined. Access routes to all critical facilities
should be reviewed and considered when permitting. Access routes should be
elevated to or above the level of the BFE .
         (b)   Floodproofing and sealing measures may also be used to provide
protection, as described in §
151.07, and must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced
by or released into floodwaters.
         (c)   Critical facilities include emergency services facilities (such
as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes, and senior
care facilities, sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, specific
roads, and bridges required for evacuation, and critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers).
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (C)   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential
in the event of failure. Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/OWR.
Contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required. If a permit is required,
a permit application must be made to IDNR/OWR prior to the construction or
major modification of jurisdictional dams.
   (D)   (1)   The Building Official shall require a CLOMR prior to issuance of
a development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that will cause an increase in
the BFE; and
         (b)   Proposed development which will increase the BFE by more than
0.1 feet in riverine area where FEMA has provided a BFE but no floodway.
      (2)   Once a CLOMR has been issued, the development permit may be issued
for site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change to
achieve the final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. Review division (E) below for the
construction of buildings in any floodplain issued a LOMR based on fill.
   (E)   When construction of a building following a LOMR based on fill is
requested, the condition where a site in the floodplain is removed due to the
use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, the applicant may not apply for
a permit from the village to construct the lowest floor of a building below the
BFE in the floodplain.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.11 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted within a floodway if any increases in
the base flood elevation would result.
   (B)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Board of Appeals
for a variance. The Board of Appeals shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. The
Board of Trustees shall base the determination on:
      (1)   Technical justifications submitted by the applicant;
      (2)   The staff report, comments, and recommendations submitted by the
Building Official; and
      (3)   The limitations, considerations, and conditions set forth in this
section.
   (C)   The findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the Board of
Appeals according to division (A) above, the notifications required by division
(B) above, and a record of hearings and evidence considered as justification
for the issuance of all variances from this chapter shall be maintained by the
village in perpetuity.
   (D)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates and the
Board of Appeals finds that all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable;
      (3)   The variance granted is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, public safety,
destruction of beneficial stream uses, and functions including, aquatic
habitat, causation of fraud on or victimization of the public, conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances, or creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, lost environmental stream uses and
functions, repairs to streambeds and banks, or repairs to roads, utilities, or
other public facilities;
      (6)   The circumstances of the property are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      (7)   Good and sufficient cause has been shown that the unique
characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site renders
the requirements of this chapter inappropriate; and
      (8)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (E)   The Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of §
151.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property; or
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (F)   In reviewing applications for variances, all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, all other portions of these regulations, and the
following shall be considered:
      (1)   The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands
resulting in further injury or damage;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents,
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed development
to the community;
      (5)   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed
development that are not subject to flooding or erosion;
      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and
anticipated development;
      (7)   The relationship of the proposed development to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program for that area;
      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (9)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and debris
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; or
      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets, and
bridges.
   (G)   Variances issued for the reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a
historic site or historic structure as defined in “historic structures”, may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of §§
151.06 and
151.07 subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
   (H)   Variances issued for the construction or substantial improvement of
agricultural structures which do not meet the non-residential building
requirements of §
151.07(B) and (C); provided the requirements of divisions (A) through (G) above
and the following are satisfied:
      (1)   A determination that the proposed agricultural structure:
         (a)   Is used exclusively in connection with the production,
harvesting, storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities, or storage
of tools or equipment used in connection with these purposes or uses, and will
be restricted to such exclusive uses;
         (b)   Has low damage potential (amount of physical damage, contents
damage, and loss of function);
         (c)   Does not increase risks and pose a danger to public health,
safety, and welfare if flooded and contents are released, including, but not
limited to, the effects of flooding on liquified natural gas terminals, and
production and storage of highly volatile, toxic, or water-reactive materials;
and
         (d)   Complies with the wet floodproofing construction requirements of
division (H)(2)below.
      (2)   Wet floodproofed structures shall:
         (a)   The exterior and interior building components and elements
(i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, and
the like) below the BFE, must be built with flood-resistant materials in
accordance with §
151.07;
         (b)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (c)   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for equalization
of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. A minimum of one permanent opening shall be provided on at least
two walls that is below the BFE and no more than one foot above finished grade.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE,
or the design must be certified by a registered P.E. as providing the
equivalent performance in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Refer
to FEMA TB 1, openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures, for
additional guidance;
         (d)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the BFE or floodproofed so that they are contained within a
watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during
flood conditions in accordance with §
151.07;
         (e)   If located in a floodway, must be issued a state floodway
permit, and comply with §
151.06; and
         (f)   The building may not be used for manure storage or livestock
confinement operations.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from proper
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Village Attorney may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
Village Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days from the date the written notice is
issued, to correct the violation:
      (1)   The village shall make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter;
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each offense;
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      (4)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   (1)   The Village Attorney shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (2)   The Village Attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state the grounds for the
complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and the time and place of the
hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board
of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 1066, passed 11-6-2024)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILER COACHES
Section
Mobile Homes
   
152.01   Zoning
   
152.02   Exception
Trailer Coaches
   
152.15   Definition
   
152.16   Application
   
152.17   Consent required
   
152.18   Permit requirements
   
152.19   Permit fee
   
152.20   Sanitation
   
152.21   Location
   
152.22   Storage
   
152.23   Skirting
MOBILE HOMES
§ 152.01 ZONING.
   No mobile homes shall hereafter be located or established within the village
outside of established mobile home parks operating after the grant of a special
use permit within
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 473, passed 9-4-1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.02 EXCEPTION.
   This subchapter shall not apply to mobile homes in existence within the
corporate limits on the effective date of this subchapter, nor to replacement
mobile homes on existing sites so long as the number of mobile homes does not
increase nor location of the mobile home change.
(Prior Code, § 152.02) (Ord. 473, passed 9-4-1974)
TRAILER COACHES
§ 152.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   TRAILER COACH. Includes any trailer or similar portable structure
constructed so as to permit it being used as a conveyance on a public street
and so as to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
(Prior Code, § 152.15) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970)
§ 152.16 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to any new or used trailers which are
located or maintained in the village after the effective date of this
subchapter, regardless of whether they are located on pre-existing trailer
sites or new trailer sites.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to trailers which already are located
and being maintained within the village.
(Prior Code, § 152.16) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970)
§ 152.17 CONSENT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to locate or
maintain any trailer coach within the village in any block without first
securing the written consent of the majority of the property owners within a
300-foot radius.
(Prior Code, § 152.17) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.18 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or operate a trailer coach in
the village without first obtaining a permit therefor. Application for such
permit shall be made in writing to the Board of Trustees and shall contain the
name of the applicant, the description and exterior and interior condition of
the trailer, a plat or sketch showing the number and size of the lot and the
proposed location of the trailer coach thereon, and the written consent of the
property owners, as provided in §
152.17.
(Prior Code, § 152.18) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.19 PERMIT FEE.
   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or maintain a trailer coach in
the village without having obtained a permit therefor. The fee for said permit
shall be $100.
(Prior Code, § 152.19) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.20 SANITATION.
   All trailer coaches which are located within the corporate limits of the
village must be connected to the village water mains and to the village
sewerage mains, as required in existing village ordinances. No tap or
connections shall be made to the village water main or water line until a
permit has been secured, as provided in §
152.18.
(Prior Code, § 152.20) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970)
§ 152.21 LOCATION.
   No trailer coach shall be located on a site of not less than 6,000 square
feet, and no trailer coach shall be parked closer than 15 feet to the side
lines of the abutting property nor closer than 30 feet to a public street or
alley.
(Prior Code, § 152.21) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.22 STORAGE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any
trailer coach for any length of time within the corporate limits when said
trailer coach is not used for sleeping or living purposes.
(Prior Code, § 152.22) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970)
§ 152.23 SKIRTING.
   The base of all trailers located in the village shall be enclosed with
skirting customarily used in the industry.
(Prior Code, § 152.23) (Ord. 455, passed 4-14-1970)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Definitions
   
153.002   Jurisdiction and procedure
   
153.003   General exceptions
Subdivision Design Standards
   
153.015   Application
   
153.016   Relation to adjoining street system
   
153.017   Street and alley width
   
153.018   Private streets
   
153.019   Easements
   
153.020   Blocks
   
153.021   Lots
   
153.022   Maintenance of improvements outside corporate limits
   
153.023   Easements along streams
   
153.024   Stormwater
Preliminary Plat
   
153.035   Where filed; exemption
   
153.036   Requirements
   
153.037   Approval of preliminary plat
Minimum Improvements
   
153.050   Authority to proceed
   
153.051   Improvements before approval
   
153.052   Installation of part of improvements
   
153.053   Survey monuments
   
153.054   Streets and sidewalks
   
153.055   Water lines
   
153.056   Sanitary sewers
   
153.057   Drainage
Final Plat
   
153.070   Drawing
   
153.071   Information required
   
153.072   Approved plat filed with Recorder of Deeds
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily designated to serve as access to
the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other
street.
      ARTERIAL STREET. A street designated as a highway, major arterial, or
minor arterial on the adopted Major Street Plan of the village.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by a street or by a combination of
streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or
boundary lines of the corporate limits of the village.
      BUILDING LINE. A line within a lot, so designated on a plat of
subdivision, between which line and the street line of any abutting street no
building or structure may be erected.
      COLLECTOR STREET. A street designated as a collector on the adopted Major
Street Plan of the village or a street in a proposed subdivision which is
intended to collect traffic to arterial thoroughfares, in addition to providing
access to properties abutting thereon.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having but one end open for vehicular traffic
and with the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround or backaround for
vehicles.
      DRIVEWAY. Private access way leading from a public street to a dwelling
unit or building.
      EASEMENT. An access way over, under, or across land for which the owner
of the servient tenement grants a right of use to the owner of a dominant
tenement for one or more designated purposes, which purposes are consistent
with the property rights of the servient owner.
      IMPROVEMENT; PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Street work and utilities, including
water, sewer, electric, gas, and stormwater, to be installed by the subdivider
on land to be used for public streets or easements, as are necessary for the
general use of lot owners in the subdivision and the public at large, and as a
condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final plat thereof.
      LAND USE. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the village for the
coordinated physical development of the village and its environs.
      LOCAL STREET. A street other than an arterial or collector street and
intended primarily for providing low volume traffic access to abutting
properties of limited number.
      LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
transfer of ownership or for building development, whether immediate or future.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
      PLAN COMMISSION. Plan Commission of the village.
      PLANS. All drawings, including general plans, cross-sections, profiles,
working details and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has
prepared to show the character, extent, and details of the public improvements
required in this chapter.
      PLAT. A map or drawing showing the lot, easement, street arrangement, and
other features or details of the area being subdivided, as required in this
chapter for preliminary and final approval and recording.
      STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access
to abutting properties, whether designated as a freeway, expressway,
thoroughfare, highway, road, parkway, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle,
or however otherwise designated.
      SUBDIVIDE. The process of dealing with land so as to establish a
SUBDIVISION as defined herein.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or
proposing to divide land so as to constitute a SUBDIVISION as defined herein,
and including any agent of the subdivider.
      SUBDIVISION. Either:
         (a)   The division of land into two or more tracts, sites, or parcels
resulting in any such tract being less than five acres in area; or
         (b)   The establishment or dedication of a road, highway, street, or
alley through a tract of land regardless of area; provided, however, that the
following shall not be considered a subdivision of land:
            1.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of
five acres or more in size that does not involve any new streets or means of
access;
            2.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining and contiguous land unless such action creates a lot or lots that
violate the terms of the village zoning ordinance, as amended;
            3.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use
as right-of-way for railroads or public utility facilities (for example,
pipelines) that does not involve any new streets or means of access;
            4.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public
utility that does not involve any new streets or means of access;
            5.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes,
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use, or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use; or
            6.   Conveyances made solely to correct descriptions in prior
conveyances.
      VILLAGE BOARD. Board of Trustees of the village.
   (B)   Unless the context requires otherwise, terms not defined herein but
defined in Chapter 154 of this code shall have the meaning therein indicated.
(Prior Code, § 153.001) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.002 JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Plat when required. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person
having control of any land, within either the corporate limits of the village
or within one and one-half miles of its corporate limits, to subdivide or lay
out such land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, or public ways
unless by a subdivision plat in accordance with the laws of the state and the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. The subdivider shall meet with the
Building Official prior to submitting the preliminary plat. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss the applicability of this chapter and the subdivision
process and procedure, the criteria and standards contained therein, and to
familiarize the developer with the village’s land use plan and those portions
of the plan affecting the area in which the proposed subdivision lies.
   (C)   Preliminary plat. Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit
to the Plan Commission, for its consideration, a preliminary plat prepared in
accordance with this chapter. The design and layout of the subdivision shall
conform to the requirements of §§
153.015 through
153.024. Following consideration of the plat, the Plan Commission shall report
its findings and recommendations in writing to the Village Board for its
consideration and its approval or disapproval.
   (D)   Requisites for final plat approval. Following approval of the
preliminary plat by the Village Board, the subdivider shall install the
required improvements or furnish a bond for such installation, all in
accordance with the requirements of §§
153.050 through
153.057. Upon approval of the improvements or arrangements therefor, the final
plat shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions and requirements of
§§
153.070 through
153.072. No plat shall be filed for record in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county unless and until the approval of the Village Board endorsed
thereon by the President and Village Clerk.
   (E)   Transfer of land; building permits. No parcel of land in a subdivision
created after the effective date of this chapter shall be transferred, sold, or
offered for sale, nor shall a building permit be issued for any structure
thereon, until a plat of subdivision shall have been filed for record in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county in accordance with these
regulations. Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 153.002) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.003 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS.
   Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such an unusual size or shape or
is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in real
difficulties, substantial hardship, or injustice, the Board of Appeals, upon
petition and after a public hearing as in zoning variance cases provided for,
may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider may develop the
property in a reasonable manner; provided, however, that the public welfare and
interests of the village and surrounding area are protected and the general
intent and spirit of this chapter preserved.
(Prior Code, § 153.003) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 153.015 APPLICATION.
   The arrangement of streets and lots shall be designed with due regard to the
topography and other physical features of the property and shall meet the
following requirements and standards.
(Prior Code, § 153.015) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.016 RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM.
   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas (or their proper
projection where adjoining land is not subdivided) insofar as they may be
deemed necessary for public requirements. The street and alley arrangements
shall not be such to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
developing their own land and providing convenient access to it. Offset streets
shall be avoided. The angle of intersection between minor streets and major
streets shall not vary by more than five degrees from a right angle. Streets in
alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets.
Proposed street names that are inconsistent or conflicting with existing street
names shall not be approved.
(Prior Code, § 153.016) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.017 STREET AND ALLEY WIDTH.
   (A)   Rights-of-way (“ROW”) and pavement widths for streets shall be based
on the major streets plan and recommended street cross-sections adopted by the
village and as outlined below.
 
          Minimum ROW Minimum Pavement Width
Arterial  70          32 feet
Collector 60          30 feet
Local     60          26 feet
 
   (B)   Alleys shall not be provided in a residential block. Provisions shall
be made for service and deliveries for all business lots.
   (C)   At street intersections, the lots shall be day lighted to provide an
additional 20 feet by 20 feet triangle dedicated to right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 153.017) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.018 PRIVATE STREETS.
   There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision within the
village and every subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated
street.
(Prior Code, § 153.018) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.019 EASEMENTS.
   Easements of at least 15 feet in width shall be dedicated on each side of
all rear lot lines and five feet along side lot lines, where necessary, for
poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, or other
utilities. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots
where necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities, or where
both water and sewer lines are located in the same easements.
(Prior Code, § 153.019) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.020 BLOCKS.
   (A)   No block shall be longer than 1,200 feet, and where blocks are over
750 feet in length, a crosswalk with a right-of-way of at least ten feet in
width may be required near the center of the block.
   (B)   Courts, dead end streets, or other street space may be provided if
proper access is given to all lots from a dedicated street or court. All dead
end streets shall terminate in a dedicated street space having a minimum radius
of 60 feet or other satisfactory arrangement for turning of vehicles. Dead end
streets shall not exceed 750 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 153.020) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.021 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and to the character of surrounding development.
   (B)   All sidelines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines, except where a variation of this
standard will result in a better street and lot layout. Lots with double
frontage shall be avoided.
   (C)   No lot shall have a depth of less than 100 feet nor shall its depth be
in excess of three times its width, and no lot shall have an area or dimensions
of less than that required by any zoning ordinance or resolution in effect
within the area.
   (D)   Corner lots shall have a width sufficient to permit the establishment
of front building lines of both of the adjoining streets.
(Prior Code, § 153.021) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.022 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Where a subdivision outside the corporate limits contains sewage disposal or
treatment systems, water supply systems, park areas, or other facilities
necessary or desirable for the welfare of the subdivision area, which neither
the village nor any other governmental body having jurisdiction can or elects
to maintain, adequate provision shall be made by a trust agreement or other
means made a part of the deed restrictions acceptable to the village for the
proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities by, or for
the benefit of, the parties served by such facilities.
(Prior Code, § 153.022) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.023 EASEMENTS ALONG STREAMS.
   Whenever any stream or other area surface drainage course is located in an
area being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement along
each side of the waterway for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping,
improving, or protecting the waterway, and such easement shall be dedicated to
the village or other appropriate governmental body.
(Prior Code, § 153.023) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.024 STORMWATER.
   (A)   Downstream property owners, watercourses, channels, or conduits shall
not receive stormwater runoff from any proposed upstream developments at a
higher peak flow rate than would have resulted from the same storm event
occurring over the site of the proposed development with the land in its
natural, undeveloped conditions, nor shall stormwater runoff exceed the
capacity of the natural drainage system.
   (B)   Accordingly, the village does hereby regulate stormwater runoff as
follows:
      (1)   Stormwater runoff resulting from a proposed development shall be
detained on-site:
         (a)   By wet or dry bottom reservoirs;
         (b)   By underground reservoirs;
         (c)   On flat roofs, parking lots; or
         (d)   By other detention methods approved by the Village Engineer.
      (2)   Stormwater detention facilities shall have sufficient capacity to
store flows up to the 100-year, 24-hour rainstorm.
      (3)   For purposes of designing adequate on-site detention facilities,
the state’s water survey rainfall data for this region shall be used.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the following
areas:
         (a)   Any residential development having a gross aggregate area of ten
acres or more;
         (b)   Any residential development of less than ten acres with a 50%
impervious surface, including roads, buildings, utility rights-of-way, and
other improvements; or
         (c)   Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or utility
development.
      (5)   Any development subject to the regulations herein imposed must be
certified by the Village Engineer as being in compliance herewith, at the
developer’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 153.024) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 153.035 WHERE FILED; EXEMPTION.
   Nine copies of the preliminary plat, drawn to a scale of not more than 100
feet to an inch, shall be submitted to the Plan Commission. The plat shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $50 or the sum of $5 for each lot within the
proposed subdivision, whichever is greater. The preliminary plat shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission with due regard to applicable zoning. Plats
containing three lots or fewer, and not involving new streets, may be exempted
from the provision of this subchapter upon application to the Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 153.035) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.036 REQUIREMENTS.
   The preliminary plat shall show:
   (A)   The location of the present property lines, section lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, and other existing features within the area to be
subdivided and similar information regarding land immediately adjacent thereto;
the complete right-of-way and improvements of all existing streets including
sidewalks adjacent to the subdivision;
   (B)   The proposed location and width of streets, sidewalks, lots, building
lines, and easements;
   (C)   Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other
underground structures within the tract immediately abutting thereto; the
location and size of the nearest water main and sewer outlet;
   (D)   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and
the name of the professional engineer, the registered land surveyor, and the
subdivider developing the tract;
   (E)   Contours referred to the village datum with intervals of two feet or
less;
   (F)   The north point, scale, date, and location map; existing zoning;
   (G)   Floodplain boundaries as shown on the village’s flood hazard map;
   (H)   Plans or written statements describing the grades or profiles of the
streets, the proposed grades and facilities for all required improvements, and
the subdivider’s proposal to the village for accomplishing their installation
in accordance herewith; and
   (I)   Listing of all proposed deviation from existing subdivision or zoning
ordinances or ordinances of similar import.
(Prior Code, § 153.036) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.037 APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   If the Plan Commission finds that the preliminary plat satisfies the
requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the plat and recommend approval
of the plat to the Village Board. If the Plan Commission finds otherwise, it
shall specify in writing the objections found to such plat and may either
recommend disapproval or recommend approval conditioned upon specific changes
in the plat. One copy of the proposed plat, together with a copy of the
findings of the Plan Commission, shall be filed by the Plan Commission with the
Village Clerk for submission to the Village Board. One copy of the proposed
plat and findings shall be retained by the Plan Commission and one copy and
findings shall be given the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 153.037) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.050 AUTHORITY TO PROCEED.
   Receipt by the subdivider of the approval of the Village Board shall
constitute authority for the subdivider to proceed with final plans and
specifications for the installation of the required improvements and
preparation of the final plat. Prior to the construction of any of the required
improvements, the subdivider shall submit such final plans and specifications
to the Village Engineer. If said Village Engineer shall find such plans and
specifications to be in accordance with applicable policies and standards of
the village, he or she shall authorize construction and recommend the amount of
bond, if required. Following the approval of the plans and specifications by
the Village Engineer and the bond by the Village Board, construction may be
started.
(Prior Code, § 153.050) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.051 IMPROVEMENTS BEFORE APPROVAL.
   No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless:
   (A)   The improvements listed hereinafter have been installed prior to such
approval;
   (B)   The subdivider shall have filed with the Village Board bond with
satisfactory surety (for example, cash, commercial bank certificate of deposit,
or a reputable commercial surety) to ensure the construction of the required
improvements to the standard and within the period specified by the Village
Board, such period not to exceed two years. No bond shall be accepted unless it
is enforceable by or payable to the village in a sum at least equal to the cost
of constructing the improvements as estimated by the Village Engineer and
approved by the Village Board. All improvements to be made under the provision
of this subchapter shall be inspected during the course of the construction by
the Village Engineer, as designated by the Village Board, and no subdivision
shall be finally accepted as to any of such improvements until its approval by
the Village Board; or
   (C)   A fee equal to the fee paid by the village to its Village Engineer for
like services shall be paid to the village to defray the village’s cost of
reviewing and approving plans and specifications for public improvements, and
the on-site inspection of construction of said public improvements by the
Village Engineer. These fees shall be borne by the subdivider. All engineering
plans, specifications, and construction contracts shall be subject to the
approval of the Village Engineer. When the village has ascertained that all
improvements have been completed by the subdivider and that said improvements
conform to the required standards of the village, the village shall accept the
improvements by resolution and shall return the bond to the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 153.051) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.052 INSTALLATION OF PART OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The owner of a tract may prepare and secure approval of a preliminary plat
for the entire tract and may install the required improvements only in a
portion of such tract, but the improvements must be installed or provision made
for their installation in any portion of the area for which a final plat is
approved for recording; provided, however, that any water mains, storm sewers,
trunk sewers, and any sewage treatment facilities shall be designated and built
to serve all the area owned by the subdivider, or designated and built in such
a manner that they can economically be expanded or extended to serve the entire
area.
(Prior Code, § 153.052) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.053 SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   All subdivision boundary corners shall be marked with permanent survey
monuments set flush with the ground. A permanent monument shall be deemed to be
an iron rod at least 30 inches long with a minimum size of three-quarter inch
diameter. Should conditions prohibit the placing of monument on the line, off-
set marking will be permitted, provided, however, that exact off-set courses
and distances are shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes or steel rods of a
minimum of one-half inch diameter shall be set at all lot corners. If survey
monuments are removed during construction, they shall be replaced before the
final plat is approved.
(Prior Code, § 153.053) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.054 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   All streets and public ways shall be graded to their full width
(as specified herein) including side slopes, and to the appropriate grade, and
shall be surfaced according to village specifications with one of the following
alternates:
         (a)   Seven and one-half inches of compacted crushed stone or gravel
and prime coat seal with an A-3 seal treatment;
         (b)   Six inches of compacted gravel or crushed stone base course with
two inches of hot plant mix bituminous surface; or
         (c)   Six inches of portland cement concrete pavement without mesh.
      (2)   The village may specify a higher construction standard for arterial
and collector streets; however, in such instances the village shall assume the
difference in cost.
   (B)   Curbs, gutters, or combination curb and gutters shall be constructed
along the outside pavement line in accordance with village standards and
specifications.
   (C)   Except as provided herein, the subdivider shall construct concrete
sidewalks within the public right-of-way adjacent to and along the exterior lot
lines adjacent to streets. All sidewalks in residential areas shall be a
minimum of four feet in width. All sidewalks in commercial areas shall be a
minimum of five feet in width, unless the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb
where traffic is allowed to park in the street, in which case, the sidewalk
shall be a minimum of six feet in width. All sidewalks shall be located in
general conformity to the standard street cross-section and shall be installed
in accordance with village standards and specifications and conforming to all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of every governmental body
having jurisdiction thereof, including, but not limited to, the Americans with
Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. and any act of similar
import. Sidewalks shall be separated from the back of the curb or gutter by a
minimum four feet wide earthen area in residential areas. A subdivision in a
residential district consisting of no more than three lots shall be exempt from
the sidewalk construction requirement. Whenever the stage of development or the
character of the surrounding area of the subdivision justify an exception to
the sidewalk construction requirement, the Village Board may waive the sidewalk
construction requirement when the final plat is approved.
   (D)   Where lots are 20,000 square feet or more in area, a 24-foot wide
surface may be installed without curb or gutter, provided that four-foot wide
shoulders and adequate drainage facilities approved by the Village Engineer are
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 153.054) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 876, passed 4-19-
2017)
§ 153.055 WATER LINES.
   (A)   Where a subdivision is located within the village limits, each lot
therein shall be provided with access to the village water system across the
entire lot width. Fire hydrants shall also be installed in all subdivisions
within the corporate limits, and the location of the same shall be approved by
the village. The water supply system shall be constructed under the direction
and control of, and all construction shall be subject to, the approval of the
village. Dead end water mains shall be avoided. When running parallel with
sidewalk or curbing, no water main or sewer main shall be installed so as to be
directly under or within two feet of either side of sidewalk or curbing as to
inhibit access to said water main or sewer main.
   (B)   In subdivisions outside the village limits, pending availability of a
public water supply, the subdivider shall construct wells or a private water
supply system in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be
available to every lot in the subdivision at the time improvements are erected
thereon. The installation shall conform to standards and requirements and be
subject to the approval of any governmental bodies having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 153.055) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.056 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   Where the subdivision is located within the village limits, each lot
therein shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer, said sewer
connection to terminate not less than two feet inside the curb line or easement
line. All connections to the village sewer system and the subdivision sewer
system shall comply with applicable ordinances of the village pertaining to
sewers, and all construction of the system shall be subject to direction and
approval of the village. In subdivisions beyond the village limits in which the
lots are less than 20,000 square feet and where plans for the installation of
sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision have been prepared by the
village, the subdivider may be required to install sewers in conformity with
such plans. In such cases, until a connection can be made with the public sewer
system, the use of an alternate central treatment facility will be permitted,
provided such facilities are approved by the village and any other governmental
bodies having jurisdiction thereof. When running parallel with sidewalk or
curbing, no water mains or sewer mains shall be installed as to be directly
under or within two feet of either side of sidewalk or curbing as to inhibit
access to said water main or sewer main.
   (B)   In subdivisions beyond the village limits where the lots are 20,000
square feet or more and have a minimum width of 100 feet, the subdivider may
install individual disposal devices for each lot at the time improvements are
erected thereon. All such individual sewage disposal systems shall be approved
by, and constructed in accordance with, regulations and requirements of the
village and any other governmental body having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 153.056) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.057 DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The subdivision plat shall be laid out so as to provide drainage of
the area being subdivided, including facilities such as curb and gutter, catch
basins, culverts, bridges, and natural drainage ways.
   (B)   The design of the storm drainage system shall be based on a two and
one-half inches per hour maximum rainfall intensity and the system designed
according to accepted engineering practices, village specifications, and the
following general standards.
      (1)   The minimum street grade shall be 0.3%; provided, that whenever
possible, the village shall encourage a minimum street grade of 0.5%.
      (2)   Curb and gutter shall be provided as outlined above.
      (3)   No transport of runoff across a street by use of a swale shall be
permitted.
      (4)   Runoff may be transported from lots to the public stormwater
drainage system by swales.
      (5)   Inlets shall be provided as required by §§ 6-410.06 and 6-401.07 of
the state’s Department of Transportation Design Manual (current edition) for a
ten-year flood frequency.
      (6)   Runoff collected at inlets shall be piped to, or discharged to, a
natural watercourse.
   (C)   Drain tiles shall be installed under sidewalks at locations to be
designated on the preliminary plat or as approved by the Building Official at
the most appropriate locations to facilitate the flow of stormwater, whether
following a natural watercourse or stormwater collected through a system of
gutters or drains, and taking into account the likely future development of the
land.
(Prior Code, § 153.057) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 876, passed 4-19-
2017)
FINAL PLAT
§ 153.070 DRAWING.
   The final plat shall be drawn on reproducible Mylar or similar durable
material at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch from an accurate
survey and appear on one or more sheets whose maximum dimensions shall not
exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. If more than two sheets are required, an index
sheet of the same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire subdivision on
one sheet and the component areas shown on other sheets. The original and nine
prints of the final plat shall be submitted to the Plan Commission. If the
final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of §§
153.050 through
153.057 and
153.070 through
153.072 have been accomplished, certification to this effect shall be endorsed
on the final plat by the Chairperson of the Plan Commission, and the plat shall
thereupon be submitted to the Village Board with its recommendation for
approval. If the final plat fails to conform to the approved preliminary plat,
the Plan Commission shall submit its recommendations to the Village Board for
disapproval of the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 153.070) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.071 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   The final plat and accompanying documents shall show:
   (A)   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate
distances and angles;
   (B)   The correct legal description of the property being subdivided shall
be shown on the plat, or on an accompanying certificate;
   (C)   The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths and the
names of all streets;
   (D)   An accurate outline and designation of any portions of the property
intended to be dedicated or granted for public use;
   (E)   Floodplain boundaries as determined by the flood hazard map;
   (F)   The lines of all adjoining properties and the lines of adjoining
streets and alleys with their widths and the names of all streets;
   (G)   All lot lines, together with an identification of all lots and blocks;
   (H)   The location of all easements provided for public use, service, or
utilities;
   (I)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other
areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the
nearest one-hundredth of a foot. The radii, arcs, or chords, points of
tangency, and central angles for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded
corners;
   (J)   The location of all survey monuments and their descriptions;
   (K)   The name of the subdivision, the scale of the plat, points of the
compass, and the name of the owner, owners, or subdivider;
   (L)   The certificate of a registered state land surveyor attesting the
accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all monuments shown;
   (M)   Private restrictions, covenants, and trusteeships, if any, and their
periods of existence. Should these restrictions, covenants, or trusteeships be
of such length as to make their inclusion on the plat impracticable and thus
necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such
instrument shall be made on the plat;
   (N)   Calculations showing the error of linear closure, which error shall in
no case be greater than one in 5,000;
   (O)   Acknowledgment of the owner or owners of the plat and restrictions,
including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open
spaces shown thereon, and the granting of easements required;
   (P)   A receipt or certificate showing that there are no unpaid taxes or
assessments upon any part of the area within the subdivision;
   (Q)   Statement certifying that the subdivision is, or is not, within 500
feet of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres
or more;
   (R)   Other information as required by any applicable law, rule, regulation,
ordinance, or similar requirement; and
   (S)   Village approval endorsement.
(Prior Code, § 153.071) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 153.072 APPROVED PLAT FILED WITH RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   After the approval of the final plat by the Village Board, said plat shall
be recorded in the County Recorder’s office within the time provided by law or
within 60 days, whichever is the shorter period of time. If not so filed, such
plat shall have no validity and shall not be later recorded without the
approval of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 153.072) (Ord. 771, passed 2-20-2008)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Scope
   
154.003   Rules of Construction
   
154.004   Definitions
   
154.005   Establishment of districts
   
154.006   Official zoning map
   
154.007   Amendments to zoning maps
   
154.008   Rules for boundaries
   
154.009   Annexed territory
District Regulations and Standards
   
154.020   Application
   
154.021   Construction and use
   
154.022   Open spaces
   
154.023   Height
   
154.024   Setback lines
   
154.025   Yards
   
154.026   Lots
   
154.027   Garbage receptacles
   
154.028   Storage shed
   
154.029   Exemptions
   
154.030   Accessory buildings
   
154.031   Solar energy systems
   
154.032   Wind energy conversion systems
   
154.033   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
   
154.034   Short term rental
Residential Districts
   
154.045   Description
   
154.046   R-1, Single-Family Residence Districts
   
154.047   R-2, Two-Family Residence Districts
   
154.048   R-3, Multi-Family Residence Districts
   
154.049   R-4, Attached Single-Family Residence Districts
   
154.050   Universal standards
   
154.051   Height limitations
   
154.052   Setback lines
   
154.053   Yards
Commercial Districts
   
154.065   Description
   
154.066   B-1, Light Commercial Districts
   
154.067   B-2, General Commercial Districts
   
154.068   Performance standards
   
154.069   Signs
   
154.070   Off-street parking
   
154.071   Off-street loading berths
   
154.072   Buffer strip
   
154.073   Floor area ratio
   
154.074   Height
   
154.075   Yards
   
154.076   Portable buildings; incidental use only
Industrial Districts
   
154.090   Description
   
154.091   Permitted uses
   
154.092   Signs
   
154.093   Buffer strip
   
154.094   Off-street parking
   
154.095   Off-street loading berths
   
154.096   Yards
   
154.097   Adult oriented businesses
Non-Urban Districts
   
154.110   Purpose
   
154.111   Permitted uses
   
154.112   Height and area
   
154.113   Parking
Non-Conformities
   
154.125   Description
   
154.126   Intent
   
154.127   Rules
   
154.128   Non-conforming lots of record
   
154.129   Non-conforming uses of land
   
154.130   Non-conforming structures
   
154.131   Non-conforming trailer coaches
   
154.132   Non-conforming uses of structures
   
154.133   Non-conforming signs
   
154.134   Repairs and maintenance
Special Uses
   
154.145   Description
   
154.146   Purpose
   
154.147   Authorizing special use permits
   
154.148   Schedule of special uses
   
154.149   Applicability
   
154.150   Special regulations for commercial establishments
   
154.151   Application
   
154.152   Hearing date and notice of public hearing
   
154.153   Hearing by Plan Commission on special use
   
154.154   Action of the Village Board
   
154.155   Implementation
Variances
   
154.170   Description
   
154.171   Purpose
   
154.172   Rules and standards
   
154.173   Limitation in granting variances
   
154.174   Application
   
154.175   Hearing date and notice of public hearing
   
154.176   Hearing by Board of Appeals on variance
   
154.177   Vote of the Board of Appeals
Administration
   
154.190   Building Official
   
154.191   Board of Appeals
   
154.192   Building permits
Amendment of Regulations and Districts
   
154.205   Proposing amendments
   
154.206   Petition before hearing
   
154.207   Hearing date and notice of public hearing
   
154.208   Hearing by Plan Commission on amendment
   
154.209   Vote of the Village Board
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   The zoning districts established and the zoning regulations and standards
adopted herein have been made for the purpose of:
   (A)   Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other
dangers;
   (B)   Conserving the value of land, buildings, and structures throughout the
village;
   (C)   Lessening and avoiding congestion in the public streets;
   (D)   Lessening and avoiding hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation of runoff of storm or floodwaters;
   (E)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and general
welfare;
   (F)   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and
structures hereafter to be erected;
   (G)   Establishing, regulating, and limiting the building or setback lines
on or along any street, traffic way, drive, parkway, or storm or floodwater
runoff channel or basin;
   (H)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding
buildings and structures;
   (I)   Classifying, regulating, and restricting the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings, structures, and land designed for
specified industrial, commercial, residential, and other uses;
   (J)   Dividing the entire village into districts of such number, shape,
area, and such different classes according to the use of land, buildings, and
structures, intensity of the use of lot area, area of open spaces, and other
classifications as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this
chapter;
   (K)   Fixing regulations and standards to which buildings, structures, or
uses therein shall conform;
   (L)   Prohibiting uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts; and
   (M)   Preventing additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings, structures, or uses in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.001) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.002 SCOPE.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances, or
resolutions, except those specifically repealed by this chapter or amendments
hereto, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, or
other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to
which the village is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon land, buildings, or structures than is imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law, ordinance, resolution, contract, or deed, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 153.002) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.003 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules shall apply in the construction and interpretation of
this chapter and of the terms used herein.
   (A)   The present tense includes the future tense.
   (B)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter, and vice
versa, as the context may require.
   (C)   The singular number includes the plural, and vice versa, as the
context may require.
   (D)   The word “shall” is always mandatory; the word “may” is always
permissive.
   (E)   The word “person” includes a partnership, association, firm, trust,
club, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
   (F)   The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land, building, use,
structure, or premises shall be construed to include the words “intended,
arranged, or designed to be used, occupied, or located.”
   (G)   The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “tract,” and “parcel.”
(Prior Code, § 154.003) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCESS. Egress or ingress.
   ACCESSORY. As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental, and subordinate to the main or principal structure
or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use. Residential occupancy of an
accessory building as a dwelling unit is not permitted in any district. The
term “accessory building” as used herein, shall not include any structure
designed and erected for the principal purpose of a child’s recreation, which
would include, by way of illustration: play houses, tree houses whether or not
utilizing ground support, swinging and climbing apparatus, and sand boxes.
   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or adult
entertainment facility (as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5).
   AGRICULTURE. The growing, harvesting, and storing of crops, including
legume, hay, grain, fruit and vegetable crops, floriculture, horticulture,
mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, and greenhouses; the keeping,
raising, and feeding of livestock or poultry, including dairying, poultry,
swine, sheep, beef cattle, pony and horse production, fur farms and fish and
wildlife farms; farm buildings used for growing, harvesting, and preparing crop
products for market, or for use on the farm; roadside stands, farm buildings
for storing and protecting farm machinery and equipment from the elements, for
housing livestock or poultry and for preparing livestock or poultry products
for market; farm dwellings occupied by farm owners, operators, tenants, or
seasonal or year-round hired farm workers. It is intended by this definition to
include all types of agricultural operations, but to exclude therefrom
operations such as a grain elevator, canning, or slaughterhouses, wherein the
agricultural products produced primarily by others are stored or processed.
   ALLEY. A permanent service right-of-way which affords only a secondary means
of access to property abutting such right-of-way and is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
   ALTER; ALTERATION. Any change in the bearing walls, columns, beams, girders,
or supporting members of a structure; any change or rearrangement in the floor
area of a building, any enlargement of a structure whether by extending
horizontally or by increasing in height, or any movement of a structure from
one location or position to another.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. An establishment for the treatment or boarding of small
animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds by a veterinarian.
   AREA; BUILDING. The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest
floor level of the main or principal building and all accessory buildings on
the same lot, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps or awnings,
marquees, and nonpermanent canopies and planters.
   AREA FLOOR, HABITABLE. The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms in a
building, exclusive of a basement or cellar, used for habitation, such as
living room, dining room, kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, or closet, but not
including hallways, stairways, service rooms, or utility rooms, nor unheated
rooms such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or
skylight opening onto a yard or court, measured between the interior faces of
walls.
   AREA, LOT. The total area within the lot lines.
   AUTOMOBILE. A self-propelled, free-moving motor vehicle for the conveyance
of persons on a street and having a seating capacity for not more than ten
persons.
   AWNING. A retractable or removable roof-like structure which, when opened or
extended, projects from the wall of a building or structure and overhangs the
public way or adjacent yard or court.
   BASEMENT. A story having part but not more than one-half its height below
grade.
   BERTH, LOADING. A stall of dimensions herein specified, adjacent to a
loading dock for the maneuvering and parking of a vehicle for loading and
unloading purposes.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which a sign or
advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything
known to the general public is affixed. The definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to display official public notices or church bulletins.
   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway,
unsubdivided area, or other definite boundary.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the village.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing at least three dwelling units or
lodging units in whatever combination. Meals are provided within such boarding
house to the residents of the lodging units.
   BUFFER STRIP. An area, property, lot, or tract of land or portion thereof,
either vacant or landscaped with screen planting as herein specified, which
shall serve as a separating space between dissimilar land uses or districts.
   BUILDING. An enclosed structure having a room supported by columns, walls,
arches, or other devices and used for the housing, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, and chattels.
   BUILDING, ATTACHED. A building having one or more walls in common with other
buildings.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no walls in common with other
buildings.
   BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. The building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer designated by the Village Board to enforce
this chapter.
   BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE. A line usually parallel to the front, side, or
rear lot line set so as to provide the required yards for a building or
structure.
   BUSINESS. A nonresidential property utilized for commercial and/or
industrial purposes that is zoned and located in B-1, Light Commercial
District, B-2, General Commercial District, or M, Industrial District.
   CAMP. A tract of land on which may be located buildings, structures, or
camping vehicles, which land, together with appurtenances thereon, is used for
seasonal, recreational, or other similar purposes. A camping vehicle shall not
be located in such camp for more than 30 consecutive days. A CAMP shall not be
deemed to include a hospital, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, asylum,
school, penal or correctional institution, nor a trailer camp.
   CANOPY. A nonretractable roof-like structure of either a permanent or
nonpermanent nature which projects from the wall of a structure, is supported
above the surface of the ground by poles, posts, columns, beams, girders, or
other similar framework attached to the ground, and overhangs or covers the
public way or adjacent yard or court.
   CELLAR. A story having less than one-half of its height above grade.
   CLINIC. An establishment without facilities for inpatient nursing care,
where one or more physicians or other medical professionals diagnose and treat
human physical or mental ailments.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The complete plan or any of its parts for the
development of the village as prepared by the Plan Commission or other planning
agency and adopted by the Village Board as the official plan.
   CONSTRUCTION. The excavation of earth to provide for a foundation, basement,
or cellar; or, the addition to or removal from a lot or tract of land of earth
or water so as to prepare said lot or tract of land for the construction of a
structure; or, the act of placing or affixing a component of a structure upon
the ground or upon another such component; or, the placing of construction
materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; or, the
demolition, elimination, or removal of an existing structure in connection with
such construction.
   COURT. An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building
which is bounded on two or more sides by, but is not enclosed by, the walls of
such building.
   COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
   CURB LEVEL. The average elevation of the established curb of a street taken
along the curb line between the points of intersection of the curb line and the
lot lines. Where no curb has been established, the CURB LEVEL shall be the
average elevation of the land surface taken along the street right-of-way line
between the points of intersection of the right-of-way line and the lot lines.
   DISTRICT. A section of the village in which zoning regulations and standards
are uniform.
   DOCK, LOADING. A platform-like structure adjacent to a loading berth from
which goods are loaded on, and on which goods are unloaded from, a vehicle
parked in such loading berth.
   DWELLING. A building designed for residential living purposes and containing
one or more dwelling units or lodging units.
   DWELLING, GROUP. A group of two or more single-family or multi-family
dwellings, whether attached, semi-detached, or detached, in whatever
combination, occupying a lot or lots in one ownership.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling containing two dwelling units with one
dwelling unit arranged on the same story or on a story above the other dwelling
unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than
two roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink, and other kitchen
facilities.
   EGRESS. The way over which traffic moves to a street or alley from the
property abutting such street or alley and the way over which traffic moves to
a major street from a minor street or alley.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A business, retail, office, or commercial use. When used in
the singular, this term shall be construed to mean a single use, building,
structure, or premises of one of the types here noted.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   An individual;
      (2)   Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
      (3)   Maximum of three persons not so related; together with his, her, or
their domestic servants and gratuitous guests maintaining a common household in
a dwelling unit or lodging unit.
   FLAT ROOF. Two percent or less pitch.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The ratio of the floor area of a building to its lot area.
For example, when a floor area ratio of four-tenths is specified, the floor
area of a building constructed on a lot of 10,000 square feet in area is
limited to a maximum of 4,000 square feet. The number of stories being
optional; for example, the building area may be 4,000 square feet for one
story, 2,000 square feet for each of two stories, and so forth. The purpose of
this RATIO is to control the bulk of buildings.
   FLUSH MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. System in which the solar collector
surface does not extend beyond six inches from the roof surface.
   FUEL STORAGE TANK. The term FUEL STORAGE TANK, “petroleum underground
storage tank,” and terms of similar import shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in 415 ILCS 5/57.2, as now or hereafter amended.
   FUNCTIONAL DEFINITION. A description of a category of land, structure, or
uses, which outlines the general function of such uses as opposed to a detailed
listing of such uses. For example, the FUNCTIONAL DEFINITION of the agriculture
district is “designed to accommodate agricultural uses of all types.”
   GRADE. The average of the elevations of the surface of ground measured at
all corners of a building.
   GROUND MOUNTING. Ground-mounted solar panels are usually for large scale
utility stations. The solar arrays are attached to the racking system with its
foundation directly into the ground. In rare cases, these ground-mounted solar
arrays can be installed for residential use given the proper space allocation,
lack of shading obstructions, and local/state regulations allow it.
   GROUP HOME. A dwelling, as defined herein, occupied by groups of unrelated
individuals, particularly individuals with disabilities (for example, mental or
physical impairments which substantially limit one or more major life
activities).
   HEIGHT.
      (1)   As applied to a story: the vertical measurement between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no
floor above, then the vertical measurement between the surface of the floor and
the ceiling next above it.
      (2)   As applied to a building: the vertical measurement from grade to a
point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof.
      (3)   As applied to a structure:
         (a)   Detached structure: the vertical measurement from the average
level of the ground immediately surrounding such structure to the uppermost
portion of such structure.
         (b)   Attached structure: where such structure is attached to another
structure and is in direct contact with the surface of the ground, the vertical
measurement from the average level of the surface of the ground immediately
adjoining such structure to the uppermost portion of such structure shall be
the HEIGHT. Where such structure is attached to another structure and is not in
direct contact with the surface of the ground, the vertical measurement from
the lowest portion of such structure to the uppermost portion shall be the
HEIGHT.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A gainful occupation or profession conducted entirely
within a dwelling or in a structure accessory thereto, or conducted in
connection with a dwelling and carried on by the residents therein, provided
such occupation or profession is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for residential living purposes.
   HOSPITAL. A building having facilities for inpatient nursing care, where
physicians and other medical professionals diagnose and treat human physical
ailments.
   HOTEL. A building containing separate accommodations for use by primarily
transient persons. A HOTEL may contain restaurants, barber shops, and other
accessory services for serving its residents and the public.
   INGRESS. The way over which traffic moves from a street or alley to the
property abutting such street or alley and the way over which traffic moves
from a major street to a minor street or alley.
   JUNK YARD. A lot, land, building, or structure, or part thereof used
primarily for the collecting, storage, or sale of waste papers, rags, scrap
metal, or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of
parts therefrom.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. A structure for sheltering or keeping dogs, bitches, and
puppies which either: is registered or listed as a kennel by a commercial
organization; keeps or boards animals not belonging to a family dwelling on the
premises; or keeps more than three such animals that are more than six months
old.
   LARGE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SOLAR FARM). A professionally manufactured system
as the principal use of the land that utilizes solar collectors to convert
solar energy into thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy and is sold to an
electric utility service provider.
   LODGING HOUSE. A dwelling containing at least three dwelling units or
lodging units in whatever combination. Meals are not provided within such
lodging house to the residents of the lodging units.
   LODGING UNIT. One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling which
are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and do not contain
cooking facilities.
   LOT. When used alone, a zoning lot unless the context of this chapter
clearly indicates otherwise.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located:
      (1)   At the junction of, and abutting two or more, intersecting streets;
      (2)   At the junction of, and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline
or high-water line of, a storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin;
      (3)   At the junction of, and abutting two or more, storm or floodwater
runoff channels or basins; or
      (4)   At the abutting point of abrupt change of a single street where the
interior angle is less than 135 degrees and the radius of the street is less
than 100 feet.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   MARQUEE. A nonretractable roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a structure and overhangs the public way or adjacent
yard or court.
   MOTEL. A building or a group of buildings, whether detached or attached,
containing accommodations for primarily transient vehicle travelers. The term
MOTEL includes such buildings designated as tourist courts, tourist cabins,
motor lodges, and other similar terms.
   MOTOR BUS. A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle for the conveyance of
persons on a street and having a seating capacity for 11 or more persons.
   MOTOR TRUCK, HEAVY. A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle for the conveyance
of goods on a street and having a load capacity of not less than one and one-
half tons.
   MOTOR TRUCK, LIGHT. A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle for the conveyance
of goods on a street and having a load capacity of less than one and one-half
tons.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle for the conveyance of
goods or persons on a street.
   NON-CONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE, OR USE. A lot, sign, structure, or use which
does not conform to the regulations and standards of the district in which it
is located.
   NON-CONFORMING PREMISES. A non-conforming lot with a non-conforming
structure located
on it.
   NON-FLUSH MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. System in which the solar collector
surface extends beyond six inches from the roof surface.
   NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A building containing sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and nursing care for
hire.
   OPEN SPACE. The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a
structure.
   OWNER, OWNERSHIP. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, company, organization, trust, or any other legal entity having a
proprietary interest in a use, structure, premises, lot, or tract of land.
   PARKING LOT. A lot, court, yard, or portion thereof used for the parking of
vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. A space accessory to a use or structure for the parking of
one vehicle, the size of which shall be determined as herein specified. A
PARKING SPACE may be located within a building or structure or in the open.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criteria established to control the use of land,
structures, and premises by the amount of noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious
matter, radioactive fire, and explosive hazards, and the glare of heat or light
generated by, or inherent to, the use of land, structures, and premises.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the village.
   PLAT. A map, plan, or layout showing the subdivision of land and indicating
the location and boundaries of individual lots.
   PORTABLE BUILDING. Any small, compact structure mounted on skids or
otherwise constructed so that it can be readily moved from one location to
another without change in structure or design, without being secured to the
ground on a permanent foundation and not served by electrical, mechanical, and
telecommunications utilities services.
   PROPERTY. The general term denoting, either singularly or in combination, an
area, lot, parcel, tract, plot, unit, or otherwise designated portion of land.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used
by the public for circulation and service.
   ROOF MOUNTING. When a solar array is mounted on a rooftop, it is installed
parallel to the roof with a few inches gap. If the rooftop is flat, then the
racking system is installed so the solar array is aligned at an angle. In
either case, the solar mounting system can be a part of initial construction of
the building or be retrofitted to an existing roof.
   SAFETY COVER. A structure, fabric, or assembly, along with attendant
appurtenances and anchoring mechanisms, that is temporarily placed or installed
over an entire swimming pool, spa, or hot tub and secured in place when not
occupied.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A method of disposing of garbage, trash, refuse, or any
combustible material of an organic nature by the spreading and daily covering
of such materials with earth, meeting the standards established by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and
any other regulating authority.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL. A dwelling unit or portion thereof offered for rent for a
period less than 30 consecutive days to any person other than a member of the
owner’s family, as family is defined in this section. SHORT TERM RENTAL shall
not include hotel, motel, boarding house, or lodging house as they are defined
in this section.
   SOLAR ARRAY.
      (1)   Combining several solar panels creates an array, which is part of
the solar system. The size of the solar array depends on where you live, the
position of the roof and the energy needs of the owner’s family.
      (2)   A SOLAR ARRAY starts with solar cells (or photovoltaic cells) which
are then grouped together to make solar panels. This group of solar panels is
called an array. The solar consultant may use this term when he or she
discusses the owner’s energy needs and how many solar panels (the size of the
owner’s array) the owner needs to power his or her home.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE. Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the collector’s energy transformation process. COLLECTOR
SURFACE does not include frames, supports, and mounting hardware.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system that converts solar energy into electricity or
heat through the use of photovoltaic panels or film, solar thermal panels, and
associated control or conversion electronics.
   STORAGE SHED. Storage building, storage structure, or a storage shed. Any
building placed or erected in the back yard of a home, or the back lot of a
commercial or industrial business, where the owner can store items of his or
her choosing away from the main structure. Items stored in these buildings must
not violate any federal, state, or village safety regulations.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, development, or resubdivision of any part, lot,
area, or tract of land by the owner or agent, either by lots or by metes and
bounds, into lots two or more in number, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement or sale, with the appurtenant
streets, alleys, and easements, dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public
use or for the use of the purchasers or owners within the tract subdivided. The
division of land for agricultural purposes not involving any new street, alley,
or other means of access, shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION for the purposes of
the regulations and standards of this chapter.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any artificial structure designed for filling of water for
the purpose of swimming, wading, and other leisure activities that is deeper
than 18 inches and is designed and intended to hold water for an extended
period such that the structure is equipped with filtration and/or circulation
equipment.
   THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN. An open lot or part thereof with its appurtenant
facilities devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical
productions on a commercial basis to patrons seated in automobiles or on
outdoor seats.
   TOURIST HOME. A dwelling containing the dwelling unit of the owner or
operator and containing separate accommodations primarily for transient
automobile travelers.
   TRAILER CAMP. A tract of land meeting the standards established by the
county health authorities, by the Illinois Department of Public Health, and any
other regulating authority:
      (1)   Where two or more inhabited trailer coaches are parked; or
      (2)   Which is used by the public as parking spaces for two or more
inhabited trailer coaches.
   TRAILER COACH. Any portable or mobile vehicle or mobile home used for
residential living purposes by a family. For the purpose of this chapter, such
vehicle shall be classified as a TRAILER COACH whether or not its wheels,
rollers, skids, or other roller equipment have been removed, or whether or not
any addition thereto has been on the ground.
   USE. The specific purpose for which land, a structure, or premises is
designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term “permitted use” or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any non-conforming use.
   VARIANCE. A deviation from the regulations or standards adopted by this
chapter which the Board of Appeals is permitted to grant when strict
enforcement would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the
individual property, lot, structure, or premises for which the variance is
sought.
   VEHICLE. A conveyance, either self-propelled or otherwise, in or on which
persons and goods, or either of them, are transported on the surface of the
ground, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motor buses, motor trucks,
tractors, sleighs, wagons, earth-moving equipment, and other such conveyances.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, County of Effingham, State of Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The governing body of the village.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). A machine that converts kinetic energy
in the wind into a usable form (commonly known as a wind turbine or windmill).
   WINDOW. An opening in an exterior wall of a building, other than a door,
which provides all or part of the natural light or ventilation, or both, to an
interior space.
   YARD. An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a structure,
lying between the structure and the nearest lot line, and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward except as may be
specifically provided by the regulations and standards herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
Where a lot is located such that its rear and front lot lines each abut a
street right-of-way line or the nearest shore line or high-water line of a
storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin, both such yards shall be
classified as FRONT YARDS. Each yard of a corner lot facing a street right-of-
way line or the shoreline or high-water line of a storm or floodwater runoff
channel or basin shall be classified as a FRONT YARD.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard situated between the side lot line and the nearest line
of a structure located on said lot and extending from the rear line of the
required rear yard to the front line of the required front yard.
   ZONE. See DISTRICT.
   ZONING LOT. A single property, parcel, unit, tract, plot, or otherwise
designated portion of land having metes and bounds, which is designated to be
used as a unit under single ownership or control and which may be occupied by
one or more structures and the accessory structures or uses customarily
incidental to it, including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be
used in connection with such structure. A ZONING LOT may or may not coincide
with a lot of record.
(Prior Code, § 154.004) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 878, passed 5-17-
2017; Ord. 916, passed 5-1-2019; Ord. 945, passed 6-17-2020; Ord. 1001, passed
4-5-2023; Ord. 1009, passed 6-21-2023; Ord. 1010, passed 6-21-2023; Ord. 1020,
passed 10-18-2023; Ord. 1037, passed 3-20-2024)
§ 154.005 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare, the village is hereby divided into the following types of districts:
   (A)   NU, Non-Urban District;
   (B)   R-1, Single-Family Residence District;
   (C)   R-2, Two-Family Residence District;
   (D)   R-3, Multi-Family Residence District;
   (E)   R-4, Attached Single-Family Residence District;
   (F)   B-1, Light Commercial District;
   (G)   B-2, General Commercial District; and
   (H)   M, Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 154.005) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.006 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are
shown on the zoning map, which map, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein and is hereby made a
part of this chapter just as if fully described herein. A copy of said map
shall be and remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk. The term MAP
shall include both the zoning map of the territory within the village as well
as any extraterritorial zoning map.
(Prior Code, § 154.006) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.007 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAPS.
   All amendments to this chapter which affect the location and boundaries of
the districts established herein or of districts hereafter established shall be
accompanied by, as part of said amending ordinance, a copy of the zoning map as
modified by said amending ordinance showing the changes made by said amendment,
or in lieu thereof, a detailed description of such changes. In addition, when
major changes are made to the area zoned by this chapter, accompanying the
amending ordinance there shall be a copy of the official zoning map as so
modified which shall be designated: “Amended Official Zoning Map No. ___ of the
Village of Teutopolis,” and which shall be known as the official zoning map
from and after the effective date of the amending ordinance until replaced by a
subsequent amendment.
(Prior Code, § 154.007) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.008 RULES FOR BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Streets and alleys. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of streets or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
   (B)   Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following recorded
lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Village limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
village limits shall be construed as following such village limits.
   (D)   Railroad lines. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed as to be midway between the main tracks.
   (E)   Parallels or extensions of above. Boundaries indicated as parallel to,
or extensions of, features indicated in divisions (A) through (D) above shall
be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning
map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
   (F)   Other. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other
circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Board of
Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
(Prior Code, § 154.008) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.009 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All NU, Non-Urban District territory which may hereafter be annexed to the
village shall be considered as being in the R-1, Single-Family Residence
District until otherwise changed by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 154.009) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
§ 154.020 APPLICATION.
   The regulations and standards set by this chapter within each district shall
be minimum regulations and standards and shall apply uniformly to each class,
kind, or type of structure, use, or land except as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 154.020) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.021 CONSTRUCTION AND USE.
   (A)   Conformity with district regulations and standards. No structure or
land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, remodeled, extended, or moved
unless in conformity with all the regulations and standards herein specified
for the district in which it shall be located.
   (B)   Structures. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected,
altered, remodeled, extended, or moved:
      (1)   To exceed the height;
      (2)   To occupy or house a greater number of families;
      (3)   To occupy a greater percentage of the lot area;
      (4)   To exceed the floor area ratio;
      (5)   To have smaller or less habitable floor area per dwelling unit or
lodging unit; or
      (6)   To exceed the maximum floor area than hereinafter required or in
any manner contrary to the regulations and standards of the district in which
it is located.
   (C)   Main structures and uses. In no case shall there be more than one main
or principal structure, or main or principal use on one lot or tract of land.
   (D)   Accessory uses and structures. No accessory use shall be established
prior to the establishment of the main or principal use, and no accessory
structure shall be constructed, erected, altered, remodeled, extended, or moved
prior to the establishment or construction of the main or principal structure,
except those accessory uses and structures of a temporary nature required for
the establishment of the main or principal use, or for the construction of the
main or principal structure.
   (E)   Access. No structure shall be constructed or erected on a lot or tract
of land or moved to a lot or tract of land which does not abut a public street.
   (F)   Existing structures. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
structure existing or upon which construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date hereof; provided, that such structure shall be completed within
one calendar year from the effective date hereof.
   (G)   Application of standards and the like. The performance standards,
regulations and standards, rules, requirements, provisions, and restrictions
set by this chapter shall apply to all structures, uses, lots, and tracts of
land created or established after the effective date hereof and shall not be
deemed to require any change in the structures, uses, lots, or tracts of land
lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, except as expressly specified
hereinafter.
   (H)   Permitted uses in districts. The uses permitted in one district shall
not be permitted in any other district unless specifically stated.
(Prior Code, § 154.021) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.022 OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Compliance with requirements; limited applicability. No part of a
yard, buffer strip or other open space, off-street parking space or loading
berth, or lot area required about or in connection with any structure or use
for the purpose of complying with the regulations and standards of this chapter
shall be included as part of a yard, buffer strip or other open space, off-
street parking space or loading berth, or lot area similarly required for any
other structure or use.
   (B)   Minimum dimensions.
      (1)   No yard, buffer strip or other open space, off-street parking space
or loading berth, or lot existing on the effective date hereof shall be reduced
in dimension or area below the requirements set forth hereinafter.
      (2)   Yards, buffer strips or other open spaces, off-street parking
spaces or loading berths, or lots created or established after the effective
date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.022) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.023 HEIGHT.
   (A)   Permitted excess. The height of any main or principal structure or
accessory building may exceed the maximum permitted height by one foot for each
additional foot by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard
dimension for the district in which such structure is located.
   (B)   Maximum height. Unless the regulations and standards of the district
in which lots are located require lower maximum heights, no structure on a lot
shall exceed 125 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 154.023) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.024 SETBACK LINES.
   All buildings and all main or principal structures shall be positioned in
conformity with the setback line regulations and standards specified
hereinafter for the district in which they are located.
(Prior Code, § 154.024) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.025 YARDS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum yard
dimensions in §§
154.020 though
154.028 shall not be reduced except through action by the Board of Appeals or
by operation of law.
   (B)   The following yard regulations and standards shall apply to all lots
or tracts of land on which a structure is located. Yards shall be kept
unobstructed for their entire depth except as specified hereinafter. Private
driveways, service drives, easements, sidewalks, flag poles, arbors, trellises,
fences, walls, columns, light poles, hydrants, patios, accessory signs, and
other decorative recreational and utility devices and equipment may be placed
in any yard.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following
visibility regulations and standards shall apply.
      (1)   Fences, walls, or hedges, or combinations thereof, may be placed in
any yard, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge along the sides or front edge
of the front yard of an interior lot shall exceed the height herein permitted.
         (a)   Along the front property line and the side property lines to the
building setback line: a height of four feet.
         (b)   From the building setback line along the side and rear property
line: a fence, wall, or hedge may be placed not to exceed eight feet in height.
      (2)   On a corner lot, nothing shall be constructed, erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as to obstruct the vision of traffic
approaching the corner from either direction. A fence, wall, or hedge, or
combination thereof, may be placed on a corner lot beginning at the building
setback line along the side and rear property line not to exceed eight feet in
height.
      (3)   Junk yards shall have a solid fence or wall eight feet in height
placed along the front of the property at the building setback line, and along
the side and rear property lines to screen the property from view. Entrance
gates to the property shall also be constructed of a solid material the same
height as the fence.
(Prior Code, § 154.025) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.026 LOTS.
   (A)   Minimum area. Unless the regulations and standards of the district in
which lots are located require greater lot areas, lot widths, or lot depths,
the following regulations and standards shall apply to lots platted or created
after the effective date hereof.
      (1)   A lot without a public sanitary sewer system shall not be less than
20,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   A lot served by a public sanitary sewer system shall be not less
than 9,000 square feet in area.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the district regulations within the Non-Urban
District, a lot may be created on which is located, on the effective date
hereof, an existing dwelling, such as a tenant farm home or a farm manager’s
dwelling; provided, such lot shall not be less than 20,000 square feet in area
and a lot of not less than 100 feet in width.
   (B)   Required open spaces. Lots hereafter platted or created shall have
adequate lot area, width, and depth to provide for off-street parking spaces
and loading berths, yards, buffer strips, and other open spaces required by the
regulations and standards of the districts in which the lots are located.
   (C)   Limitations on reduction by sale, and the like. Lots hereafter platted
or created shall not be reduced in area, width, or depth by sale, development,
or subdivision so that lot area, lot width, lot depth, lot area per dwelling
unit, lot area per loading unit, buffer strips, or other open spaces required
are narrower or smaller than specified hereunder.
   (D)   Width. No lot hereafter platted or created shall be less than 70 feet
in width.
   (E)   Measurement of width. The minimum lot width shall be measured along
the front setback line.
(Prior Code, § 154.026) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.027 GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   Garbage receptacles of one and one-half cubic yards or more in capacity
shall be concealed by a fence or wall at least six feet in height or 12 inches
in height above the highest point of the garbage receptacle, whichever is
higher, enclosing the receptacle on not less than four sides.
(Prior Code, § 154.027) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.028 STORAGE SHED.
   (A)   Type of structures allowed. A storage shed may be stick-built, pre-
assembled, or assembled from a kit. If assembled from a kit, the kit must be
designed for the sole purpose of being used as a storage shed. The storage shed
can be placed or built on a foundation of concrete, wood, sand, stone, or on
the ground. It must be constructed from wood, steel, or plastic.
   (B)   Types of structures not allowed. Any container not manufactured for
the sole purpose of being used as a storage shed is not allowed. Examples not
allowed would be: shipping containers made of steel, wood, or any other durable
material, truck boxes, semi-trailers, campers, mobile homes, walk-in coolers,
culverts, or any box structure originally designed to have wheels under them.
   (C)   Placement. A storage shed may be placed behind the main structure in
accordance with setback regulations and standards for the district.
   (D)   Fee. A storage shed will be subject to a building permit with a
minimum fee of $10.
(Prior Code, § 154.028) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.029 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following structures and uses are exempted from the application of the
district regulations and standards, and are permitted in any district.
   (A)   Utility fixtures and the like. Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits,
vaults, laterals, pipe mains, valves, and any other similar distributing
equipment for telephone or other communications, electric power, gas, water and
sewer lines, railroad right-of-way, or water reservoir, provided that the
installations shall conform where applicable with the rules and regulations of
the state’s Commerce Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and of
other public authorities having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Agricultural purposes. Land used or to be used for agricultural
purposes and the erection, maintenance, repair, alteration, remodeling, or
extensions of buildings or structures used or to be used for agricultural
purposes, except that buildings or structures used for agricultural purposes
shall be required to conform to setback lines in the district where located.
   (C)   Landfill. Filling of holes, pits, lowlands, and gullies with
noncombustible material other than refuse and food wastes (for example, clean
soil, sand, and gravel filling).
   (D)   Golf courses. Standard golf courses, provided that all buildings,
structures, and parking spaces appurtenant thereto conform to the setback lines
and yard requirements of the district in which located, and further provided
that if the fairways or greens or any part thereof are illuminated for night
playing, it shall be located as a special use under §§ 154.140 through
154.150.
   (E)   Publicly owned buildings. Public buildings, provided that any
buildings or parking spaces shall conform to the setback lines and yard
requirements of the district in which located.
(Prior Code, § 154.029) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.030 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Maximum size. Subject to the other limitations imposed by this
section, the exterior dimensions of an accessory building:
      (1)   Shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in area on a lot of less than
two acres in area; provided, however, that a porch or covered shelter
projecting from the building is permitted so long as it does not exceed 400
square feet in area.
      (2)   Shall not exceed 2,200 square feet in area on a lot of not less
than two acres in area; provided, however, that a porch or covered shelter
projecting from the building is permitted so long as it does not exceed 800
square feet in area.
      (3)   Shall not exceed 3,200 square feet in area on a lot of not less
than five acres in area; provided, however, that a porch or covered shelter
projecting from the building is permitted so long as it does not exceed 1,200
square feet in area.
   (B)   Lot area and density. The combined exterior dimensions at grade of the
main or principal structure and accessory buildings shall not exceed 30% of the
total lot size, as provided in §
154.050(D)(3).
   (C)   Height limitation. Regardless of the setback from the nearest right-
of-way line or abutting street:
      (1)   No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height on a lot of
less then two acres in area.
      (2)   No accessory building shall exceed 28 feet in height on a lot of
not less than two acres in area.
      (3)   No accessory building shall exceed 35 feet in height on a lot of
not less than five acres in area.
   (D)   Materials. An accessory building shall be constructed of rigid
structural materials with an exterior finish or finishes of masonry, lumber,
vinyl, aluminum, or other conventional exterior finishing materials.
(Ord. 916, passed 5-1-2019; Ord. 956, passed 2-3-2021)
§ 154.031 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“Teutopolis Solar Energy Systems Regulations.”
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations for the location, installation, operation, and maintenance
of solar energy systems; to assure that any development and production of solar
energy systems is safe and to minimize any potentially adverse effects on the
community; to promote the supply of sustainable and renewable energy resources,
in support of national, state, and local goals; and to facilitate energy cost
savings and economic opportunities for residents and businesses situated within
the corporate limits and/or extraterritorial jurisdictional limits of the
village.
   (C)   Solar energy system general regulations. Solar energy systems may be
erected or installed on properties within the corporate limits and/or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village in accordance with this section,
as well as all state and federal laws and regulations, as amended from time to
time, concerning the use and operation of said solar energy system, and shall
be further subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Any person seeking to erect, construct, install, or maintain an
interconnected solar energy system on property located within the corporate
limits and or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village shall submit an
application, on a special form furnished by the village, to the Building
Inspector prior to the installation of any solar energy system. As part of the
application, a person seeking to erect, construct, install, or maintain an
interconnected solar energy system shall also submit a written narrative and/or
graphic form, which includes all of the items below:
         (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of property owner;
         (b)   Name, address, and telephone number of the installer of the
solar energy system;
         (c)   Description of the proposed solar energy system indicating the
following:
            1.   Plan showing the proposed location of the solar energy system;
            2.   System dimensions and specifications;
            3.   Evidence showing compliance with all applicable setback
requirements;
            4.   Evidence showing compliance with applicable setback and/or
height regulations;
            5.   Distance to any roads or overhead utility lines;
            6.   Compliance with each regulation contained in this section; and
            7.   All solar arrays with building mounted inverters or arrays
with inverters mounted on the array within ten feet of a structure, shall
comply with NEC 2020 rapid shut down requirements.
         (d)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any
specifications, plans, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Building Inspector; and
         (e)   A permit and inspection fee will not be charged.
      (2)   Type permitted and maximum roof area regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Flush mounted solar energy systems (six inches or less) are
permitted to be installed on any roof area;
         (b)   Non-flush mounted solar energy systems are permitted on a
building with a flat roof if the solar collector is completely screened from
view to an observer five feet above the ground at any point along an abutting
property line; and
         (c)   The solar collector surface area shall be setback from the roof
as follows:
            1.   Setback from the roof lower eves shall be no lower than the
shingle line;
            2.   Setback from the roof top edge (ridge) a minimum of two feet;
            3.   Solar panels shall not extend past the roof edge on sides and
gutter line; and
            4.   Setback from any roof equipment and/or other obstructions
(examples: chimneys, exhaust fans, vents, and the like) a minimum of one foot,
except skylights shall have a minimum of two feet.
      (3)   Maximum permitted height and building projection/extension
regulations are as follows:
         (a)   The solar energy system shall conform to the height regulations
of the zoning district in which the property where the solar energy system is
to be installed, mounted, or built is located;
         (b)   Non-flush mounted solar energy systems shall not extend above
the highest point on the roof line or parapet wall; and
         (c)   Solar energy systems shall not project/extend beyond the
exterior wall of any building on which said solar energy system has been
installed, mounted, or built.
      (4)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems are only permitted for lots
larger than 1.1 acre;
         (b)   Panel configuration is permitted with maximum tilt angle of 35
degrees or ten feet maximum height. This applies to solar arrays where annual
electricity production measured in kilowatt-hours (kWh) meets the property
owner’s needs while reasonably fitting in the available space and honoring
property line setback requirements. A ground-mounted solar energy system on
residential property shall be no larger than 25% of the square footage of the
property or 25kW system. A ground-mounted solar energy system on business
property shall be no larger than a 75kW system;
         (c)   The ground-mounted solar energy system shall conform to the
setback regulations of the zoning district in which the property where the
solar energy system is to be installed or built is located. They must be placed
in the rear yard and must maintain a minimum of seven feet from the back of the
property line. The back of the primary residential or business structure is
defined as rear of structure from corner to corner, extending out to side
property lines; and
         (d)   All ground-mounted solar energy systems sought to be installed
or constructed in a nonresidential zoning district shall be subject to further
review from the Building Inspector and may be required to be enclosed by
fencing of a height, type, and material required by the Building Inspector, so
long as the fencing, in the determination of the Building Inspector, does not
alter or effect the performance of the solar array.
   (D)   Any solar energy system that is inactive or inoperable for a period of
12 continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. If the solar energy system is
deemed abandoned, the owner is required to repair or remove the solar energy
system from the property at the owner’s expense within 90 days after notice
from the village. If the owner fails to remove the solar energy system, the
Building Official shall enforce this as a violation of this section.
   (E)   Large solar energy systems (solar farms) shall be prohibited and are
not permitted to be constructed on any property within the corporate limits
and/or extraterritorial jurisdictional limits of the village.
(Ord. 1010, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.032 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   Wind energy conversion systems shall be prohibited and are not permitted to
be constructed on any property within the corporate limits and/or
extraterritorial jurisdictional limits of the village.
(Ord. 1009, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.033 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS.
   (A)   General regulation. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs may be erected
or installed on properties within the corporate limits and/or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Permit required. No swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be
constructed, installed, enlarged, or altered until a permit therefor has been
obtained from the Building Official. Application for a permit shall be in
writing on the form prescribed by the Building Official. Such application may
require plans for the construction or erection of the pool proposed by the
applicant. Plans shall accurately show dimensions and construction of the
swimming pool and appurtenances, and properly establish the distances to lot
lines, buildings, walks, and fences, details of water supply system, drainage
and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming
pool. Reasonably detailed plans of the structure, including vertical
elevations, may be required by the Building Official.
   (C)   Location. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas shall be permitted on any
residential property zoned NU, Non-Urban District, R-1, Single-Family Residence
District, R-2, Two-Family Residence District, R-3, Multi-Family Residence
District, and R-4, Attached Single-Family Residence District. A swimming pool,
hot tub, or spa may occupy part or all of a rear yard but shall not be closer
than six feet to any lot line.
   (D)   Fences and walls around pools.
      (1)   All swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence or permanent barrier
wall either around the periphery of the yard containing the swimming pool or
around the swimming pool itself. The fence or solid permanent barrier wall
shall be not less than four feet in height. The fence or other solid permanent
barrier wall shall also meet all requirements relating to fences in this
Chapter 154. Additionally, razor wire, barb wire, electric, snow fencing,
plywood, t-posts, or other temporary fence materials are not allowed. Fence
enclosures shall have self-closing, self-latching gates when gates are
provided.
      (2)   Swimming pools that have an overall height of at least 36 inches
above grade and are only accessible by means of a folding or otherwise
removable ladder so as to make unauthorized entry into the pool difficult shall
be exempt from the fence requirements as set forth in division (D)(1) above,
provided, however, that said ladders shall either be removed or folded and
locked to not allow access to the swimming pool at all times that the swimming
pool is not in use.
      (3)   Swimming pools utilizing and protected with a powered safety cover
that complies with ASTM F 1346, which have already been constructed or
installed prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be exempt from the
fence requirements as set forth in division (D)(1) above, provided, however,
that said powered safety cover shall be closed over the swimming pool at all
times that the swimming pool is not in use.
      (4)   Failure to properly utilize and maintain the safety features
related to swimming pools, as required by divisions (D)(1), (D)(2), and/or (D)
(3) above, shall be considered a violation of this section.
   (E)   Water supply and control. All backwash water and effluents shall be
discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection. Drainage of any pool
shall be carefully controlled and provided for so that such drainage shall not
leave the property that the swimming pool is located.
   (F)   Prior existing pools.
      (1)   Swimming pools which have been constructed or installed prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be brought into conformity with the
provisions of this chapter or removed prior to June 1, 2024. The Building
Official may, in his or her sole discretion, provide an extension, provided
that the property owner provides evidence of:
         (a)   A written contract for the installation of the fence or other
improvements that has been entered into prior to June 1, 2024; and
         (b)   That the installation of the fence or other improvements will be
completed on or before September 30, 2024.
      (2)   Furthermore, swimming pools of a demountable or portable nature
which are dismounted or dismantled for any reason whether it be for the winter
season, change of location, or the like, upon their re-erection or
reconstruction, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Safety covers. A spa or hot tub shall have a safety cover secured in
place when not in use.
(Ord. 1020, passed 10-18-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.034 SHORT TERM RENTAL.
   (A)   Permit required. Short term rentals may be established and maintained
on properties within the corporate limits and or extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the village in accordance with this section; provided, however, that no
alteration of any kind shall be made to a building in any residential district
which changes its residential character as a dwelling unit or adds any
additional short term rental spaces. No person shall operate, conduct, or
maintain a short term rental within the corporate limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village, unless such person shall have first obtained a
duly issued and authorized permit issued by the village, authorizing such short
term rental hereinafter referred to as the “short term rental permit”).
   (B)   Application for permit. Any owner desiring to secure a short term
rental permit from the village shall complete and file with the Building
Official an application for a short term rental permit on such forms as
prescribed by the Building Official (hereinafter referred to as the “short term
rental permit application”). A short term rental permit application shall
include at least the following information:
      (1)   Name, business name, permanent business address (which must include
a street address), residence address of the owner and, if the applicant is a
partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the name and residence
address of each officer, shareholder, member, partner, and the like;
      (2)   Layout of the property with a floor plan of the building showing,
with labels, all rooms and spaces; bedrooms, bathrooms, kitchen, living/family
room, laundry room, parking locations, street access, and the like; provided,
however, that if only a portion of a building will be used for short term
rental, the conceptual plan shall show in sufficient detail the horizontal and
vertical limits of each short term rental space;
      (3)   If the owner is a state limited partnership, a copy of the filed
certificate of limited partnership and a certificate of good standing from the
Secretary of State must be attached. If the owner is a foreign limited
partnership, a copy of the filed certificate of limited partnership from the
Secretary of State for admission to transact business as a foreign limited
partnership in the state must be attached. If the owner is a state corporation,
a copy of the articles of incorporation and a certificate of good standing from
the Secretary of State must be attached. If the owner is a foreign corporation,
a certificate from the Secretary of State to conduct business in the state as a
foreign corporation must be attached. If the owner is a state limited liability
company, a copy of the articles of organization and a certificate of good
standing from the Secretary of State must be attached. If the owner is a
foreign limited liability company, a certificate from the Secretary of State to
conduct business in the state as a foreign limited liability company must be
attached;
      (4)   Whether the owner has ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this section, and whether the owner has ever had a short term
rental permit revoked. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or
limited liability company, whether any officer, shareholder, member, partner of
said partnership, corporation, or limited liability company has ever been
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section or had a
short term rental permit revoked;
      (5)   The owner’s registration number under the Hotel Operator’s
Occupation Tax Act; and
      (6)   The owner shall submit a written acknowledgment that the owner
agrees to and accepts the limitations of liability and the requirement to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend the village and the village’s employees and
agents, including that the village shall not be liable to the owner, employees,
any members, guests, or invitees of the term rental, for any damage, injury,
accident, loss, compensation or claim, based on, arising out of, or resulting
from the property for which the short term rental permit is requested being
used. This limitation of liability provision shall survive termination of the
use of property as a short term rental.
   (C)   Issuance of permit. The Building Official, or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized and directed to issue such short term rental permit in
accordance with this section if the Building Official, or his or her designee,
determines that the applicant and the short term rental comply with the
provisions of this section. No short term rental permit shall be issued to any
owner:
      (1)   If the owner has failed to supply all of the information requested
on the application;
      (2)   If the owner has not fully complied with this section or any other
applicable state, federal, or local laws or regulations;
      (3)   Who has been twice convicted in the previous five years of a
violation of any of the provisions of this section;
      (4)   If the owner has previously had a short term rental permit revoked
pursuant to this section;
      (5)   Who is lacking a State Department of Revenue tax identification
number; or
      (6)   If the owner is delinquent of any debt owed to the village.
   (D)   Maximum number of permits. No more than a maximum of 20 short term
rental permits shall be issued by the village at any given time for short term
rentals within the corporate limits and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village.
   (E)   Term of permit and permit fee.
      (1)   Any short term rental permit issued pursuant to this section shall
terminate one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked.
      (2)   There shall be no fee assessed by the village for a short term
rental permit.
   (F)   Renewal.
      (1)   Any owner may renew a short term rental permit at the expiration
thereof; provided that the owner is then qualified to receive a short term
rental permit. The requirements for and the procedures for obtaining a renewal
of a short term rental permit shall be the same as that provided for in case of
an original application for a short term rental permit, however, any
application for renewal of an annual short term rental permit shall be filed
with the Building Official not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the
annual short term rental permit.
      (2)   The failure to renew a short term rental permit as prescribed
before the expiration date shown on the short term rental permit being renewed
shall result in the lapse of the short term rental permit.
   (G)   Privilege granted by short term rental permit. A short term rental
permit issued under this section shall be purely a personal privilege, good for
a period of time listed in the short term rental permit; provided in no event
shall it exceed one year after issuance, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such short term
rental permit shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution,
but it shall cease upon the death of the permittee of a short term rental
permit; provided that the executor of the will or administrator of the estate
of any deceased permittee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
permittee, when such estate consists in part of a short term rental
establishment, may continue the business of the short term rental under order
of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased,
insolvent, or bankrupt permittee until the expiration of such short term rental
permit or until six months after the death, insolvency, or bankruptcy of such
permittee, whichever is the shorter period of time.
   (H)   Transfer. All short term rental permits issued under this section
shall be considered personal and may not be transferred to any person.
   (I)   Guests.
      (1)   The owner shall keep a register in which the name and age of every
guest and his or her arrival and departure dates are recorded. The register
shall be freely accessible to any officer of the police, the Fire Protection
District, and the Building Official Department. The owner shall maintain this
register for the entire term of the short term rental permit.
      (2)   No more than four guests in a short term rental shall be unrelated
persons aged 18 or older.
      (3)   Persons under 18 (minors) shall be accompanied by at least one
family member (as defined in §
154.004) age 18 or older, or shall be accompanied by at least two chaperones
age 21 or older per six minors. The chaperones shall have and provide copies of
written authorization from the parents or legal guardians of the minors to the
owner.
      (4)   The length of stay for a short term rental shall not be more than
29 consecutive days.
   (J)   Off-street parking. An owner shall provide a minimum of one designated
off-street parking space for each short term rental space on a property.
   (K)   Hotel/motel tax. Short term rentals are subject to the imposition of
the hotel/motel tax imposed by § 33.090.
   (L)   Short term rental permit suspension or revocation.
      (1)   The Building Official and/or designee may revoke or suspend any
short term rental permit issued by the village if the Building Official and/or
designee determines that the owner has violated any of the provisions of this
section, the owner is deemed to have maintained any nuisance on the property in
violation of Chapter 92, or if the owner is delinquent in payment of any debt
owed to the village. No such short term rental permit shall be so revoked or
suspended except after a public hearing by the Building Official and/or
designee and written notice to the owner affording such owner an opportunity to
appear and defend. All such proceedings shall be instituted by a written
citation. Said citation shall state the particular provision, rule, or
regulation alleged to have been violated and shall be signed by the Building
Official and/or designee. Said citation and a notice of hearing shall be served
on the owner named therein, not less than three calendar days prior to the date
specified in the notice of hearing. Service of the citation and notice of
hearing on the agent or employee of the owner shall constitute service on said
owner. If the owner’s whereabouts are unknown or reasonable attempts to serve
the owner have failed, service shall be by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation within the village. Said owner named in the citation and
notice of hearing shall appear at the time and place designed in said citation
and notice of hearing.
      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted under the rules issued by the
Building Official and/or designee. Such rules shall be consistent with the
nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present
evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. All
such hearings shall be open to the public, and the Building Official and/or
designee shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an official
record of the proceedings.
      (3)   The Building Official and/or designee, within five calendar days
after such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the short
term rental permit should be suspended or revoked, shall state the reason or
reasons for such determination in a written order, and either the period of
suspension for a short term rental permit, or that the short term rental permit
has been revoked. The period of the suspension or the declaration of
revocation, and all costs shall be clearly set forth in said written order. All
costs of the public hearing incurred by the village shall be charged to the
owner or upon a determination of a violation and the issuance of an order
setting forth a suspension, or revocation. A copy of the written order shall be
served on the owner within the five calendar days after the hearing. Service of
the written order on the agent or employee of the owner shall constitute
service on the owner. If the owner’s whereabouts are unknown or reasonable
attempts to serve the owner have failed, service shall be by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village.
      (4)   Any review of decisions of the Building Official and/or designee
shall be as provided for in the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/3-
101 et seq.
      (5)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary,
at any time, for the purposes of preserving the peace; protecting the safety of
the public; or abating any imminent, continuing public nuisance, the Building
Official and/or designee may then issue a temporary emergency suspension of
that short term rental permit, but in no case shall such temporary emergency
suspension exceed 24 hours from the time of its issuance, except as allowed by
law or local ordinance.
   (M)   The grant of a short term rental permit does not invalidate or
supersede any other regulations of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 1037, passed 3-20-2024)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.045 DESCRIPTION.
   The residential districts include single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, multi-family dwellings, and attached single-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 154.040) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.046 R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted uses in the R-1, Single-Family Residence District are
dwellings of the following type: single-family detached dwellings;
   (B)   Any structure within this district may be converted into one of the
dwellings permitted in this district, provided all requirements for such
dwellings are met.
   (C)   Home occupations are permitted in this district. They shall be subject
to the following regulations and standards.
      (1)   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises,
except such as is produced on the premises or is provided incidental to the
service or profession conducted on the premises.
      (2)   There shall be no exterior storage of materials or equipment.
      (3)   There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation other
than a sign and no variation from the residential character of the dwelling.
      (4)   No heat, glare, noise, vibration, noxious or toxic fumes, odors,
vapors, gases, or matter shall be produced at any time by a home occupation
which are readily detectable without the use of instruments at any point on the
boundaries of the premises.
      (5)   The occupation shall be conducted wholly within the principal
structure.
      (6)   Signs in conjunction with a home occupation shall:
         (a)   Not be illuminated;
         (b)   Not extend beyond lot lines; and
         (c)   Not exceed two square feet in total area per lot.
      (7)   No person not a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit
shall be employed in the home occupation.
      (8)   The home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner that it
does not create parking or traffic congestion for the abutting or adjoining
neighbors or for the immediate neighborhood.
   (D)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the main or
principal structures are permitted in this residence district.
   (E)   Agriculture is permitted throughout this residential district, but not
the keeping or raising of poultry or livestock, nor the spreading of raw animal
waste as a soil nutrient or for any other purpose.
   (F)   Public, parochial, or private schools offering instruction in one or
more grades from kindergarten through twelfth grade, with a special use permit.
   (G)   Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, rectories, and
similar uses, with a special use permit.
   (H)   Public libraries, public parks, playgrounds, and community centers,
with a special use permit.
   (I)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and medical or dental clinics, with a
special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 154.041) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 1038, passed 3-20-
2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.047 R-2, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   Permitted uses in the R-2, Two-Family Residence District are:
   (A)   Dwellings of the following types: single-family detached and two-
family attached dwellings; and
   (B)   Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residence District.
(Prior Code, § 154.042) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.048 R-3, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   Permitted uses in the R-3, Multi-Family Residence District are:
   (A)   Dwellings of the following types: single-family detached and two-
family attached, multi-family dwelling structures, boarding houses, and lodging
houses;
   (B)   Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residence District; and
   (C)   Any use permitted in the R-2, Two-Family Residence District.
(Prior Code, § 154.043) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.049 R-4, ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   Permitted uses in the R-4, Attached Single-Family Residence District are:
   (A)   Dwellings of the following types: single-family detached dwellings,
single-family attached dwellings, and group homes; and
   (B)   Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residence District.
(Ord. 878, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 154.050 UNIVERSAL STANDARDS.
   The following regulations and standards shall apply to all dwellings.
   (A)   Occupancy.
      (1)   Residential occupancy per dwelling unit shall be limited to one
family and not more than two roomers or boarders.
      (2)   Residential occupancy per lodging unit shall be limited to one
family.
   (B)   Habitable floor area. The minimum habitable floor area for a dwelling
unit and per lodging unit shall be as follows:
      (1)   Single- and two-family dwelling: 750 square feet per dwelling unit;
      (2)   Multi-family dwelling: 750 square feet per dwelling unit; and
      (3)   Boarding house, lodging house: 300 square feet per dwelling unit,
300 square feet per lodging unit.
   (C)   Off-street parking space.
      (1)   The minimum required number of parking spaces shall be as follows:
         (a)   Single- and two-family dwellings: two parking spaces per
dwelling unit; and
         (b)   Multi-family dwellings, boarding houses, and lodging houses: one
and one- half parking spaces per dwelling unit and one parking space per
lodging unit.
      (2)   All such parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or tract
of land as the dwelling or building served.
      (3)   Such parking space for the accommodation of an automobile or light
motor truck shall total at least 200 square feet exclusive of maneuvering area,
and at least ten feet in width.
      (4)   Such parking space for the accommodation of a heavy motor truck,
motor bus, or other vehicle shall be of dimensions herein specified for an off-
street loading berth.
      (5)   Not more than one such space within a private garage or private
carport shall be rented or leased to a nonresident of the premises.
   (D)   Lot area and density.
      (1)   Each zoning lot shall have an area of at least 9,000 square feet, a
lot width of at least 70 feet, and a lot depth of at least 100 feet.
      (2)   The number of dwelling units per lot shall not exceed the lot area
in square feet divided by 7,500 square feet; provided, however, that in the R-
3, Multi-Family Residence District, the number of dwelling units per lot shall
not exceed the lot area in square feet divided by 5,000 square feet. Fractional
dwelling units resulting from this computation shall not be counted or rounded
upward to the next higher whole number.
      (3)   The amount of the total lot area which may be covered by all
principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 30%.
(Prior Code, § 154.045) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.051 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as provided in §
154.023:
   (A)   No main or principal structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, except
that multi-family dwellings shall be permitted to a height not to exceed two
stories; and
   (B)   No accessory building shall exceed the height limitations contained in
§
154.030(C).
(Prior Code, § 154.046) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 956, passed 2-3-2021)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.052 SETBACK LINES.
   The following setback line regulations and standards shall apply to all main
or principal structures and all detached accessory structures, except such as
are permitted in yards as provided in §
154.025(B) hereof.
   (A)   The minimum setback line shall be 25 feet from the nearest right-of-
way line or 55 feet from the centerline of the abutting street, whichever is
greater.
   (B)   Where 25% or more of the lots within a block were occupied by main or
principal structures prior to the effective date hereof, the average of the
setback lines of such structures shall be the minimum setback line of the
remaining vacant lots within such block, except where the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, or welfare are endangered.
   (C)   Where the lot abuts a storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin, the
minimum setback line shall be 50 feet from the nearest shore line or high water
line.
(Prior Code, § 154.047) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 916, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 154.053 YARDS.
   On every lot a front yard, a rear yard, and two side yards are required, and
the dimensions of which shall be equal to or greater than the following:
   (A)   Front yard depth: 25 feet, unless the building is constructed in an
established block front, in which case, the front yard depth shall be the
average of the front yard depths of the two buildings on either side. Where a
lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a
front yard on each street side of the lot. No accessory building shall project
into the required front yard space. An accessory building constructed on a lot
of two acres or more in area may not be erected closer than 100 feet from the
front lot line.
   (B)   Side yard width: seven feet, except that a 20-foot side yard shall be
required in the R-3, Multi-Family Residence District for side yards adjacent to
any other residential district. No accessory building shall project into the
required side yard space. An accessory building constructed on a lot of two
acres or more in area may not be erected closer than 40 feet from the side lot
lines. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no side yard shall be required between
attached buildings in the R-4, Attached Single-Family Residence District.
   (C)   Rear yard depth: 25 feet. Accessory buildings may be erected in a rear
yard, provided they are located at least three feet from the rear or side lot
lines, and provided further, that the maximum lot coverage is not exceeded.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an accessory building constructed on a lot of
two acres or more in area may not be erected closer than 40 feet from the rear
lot line.
(Ord. 916, passed 5-1-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.065 DESCRIPTION.
   The commercial districts include B-1, Light Commercial District and B-2,
General Commercial District.
(Prior Code, § 154.060) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.066 B-1, LIGHT COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Permitted uses in the B-1, Light Commercial District are:
   (A)   Those uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Residence Districts, subject
to the yard requirements of those residential districts;
   (B)   Retail stores and shops;
   (C)   Banks, post offices, medical or dental clinics, and business or
professional offices;
   (D)   Service-type business such as barber shops, beauty shops, laundromats,
music, dancing, art or photography studios, servicing or repair of home
appliances, and similar uses; and
   (E)   Customary accessory uses located on the same or adjacent lot with a
permitted use. Signs advertising a business, service, or product available on
the premises shall be permitted, provided the total area of such signs shall
not be more than 50 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 154.061) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.067 B-2, GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Permitted uses in the B-2, General Commercial District are:
   (A)   Those uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2, Residence Districts and in
the B-1, Commercial District, subject to the yard requirements of those
districts;
   (B)   Retail stores and shops;
   (C)   Banks, post offices, medical or dental clinics, and business or
professional offices;
   (D)   Service-type business such as barber shops, beauty shops, laundromats,
music, dancing, art or photography studios, servicing or repair of home
appliances or farm equipment, and similar uses;
   (E)   Automobile service stations and public garages, new or used car sale
areas, new or used farm equipment sale areas, but not including the storage of
wrecked vehicles or farm equipment;
   (F)   Hotel, motel, boarding or lodging houses, and dwelling units located
on the same lot with a permitted use;
   (G)   Clubs, lodges, and public meeting halls, theaters, bowling alleys, and
similar places of assembly or recreation;
   (H)   Customary accessory uses located on the same or adjacent lot with a
permitted use. Signs advertising a business, service, or product available on
the premises shall be permitted, provided the total area of such signs shall
not be more than 50 square feet; and
   (I)   Machine shop for the fabrication and repair of equipment incidental to
a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 154.062) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.068 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The following performance standards shall apply in the commercial district.
   (A)   Vibrations, heat, or glare. No commercial establishment shall be
allowed which produces vibrations, heat, or glare readily detectable by normal
human senses without the use of instruments at the lot lines of each
establishment.
   (B)   Toxic or noxious matter, odors, vapors, or gases. No use shall
discharge across the lot lines wherein it is located toxic or noxious matter,
odors, vapors, or gases in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to property or business.
   (C)   Flammable or explosive hazards.
      (1)   The use of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible
to moderate burning is permitted.
      (2)   The storage and use of solid materials or products ranging from
free or active burning to intense burning is permitted, provided said materials
or products shall be stored and used within completely enclosed buildings
having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an effective
automatic fire extinguishing system.
(Prior Code, § 154.063) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.069 SIGNS.
   (A)   No part of roof-mounted signs shall be higher than 50 feet above
average curb level.
   (B)   The gross area of signs per establishment shall not exceed 100 square
feet.
   (C)   No sign affixed to a structure shall project more than three feet
beyond the limits of such structure and shall not project across lot lines.
   (D)   The dimension limitations for double-faced signs shall be determined
by measuring one face, but not both faces, and by measuring the larger of the
two faces if one face is larger than the other.
   (E)   No flashing electric sign is permitted.
(Prior Code, § 154.064) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.070 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking spaces for B-1, Light Commercial District establishments
shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   All such parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or tract of
land as the establishment served.
   (B)   The number of such parking spaces shall be the sum of the individual
requirements of the various individual establishments computed separately in
accordance with this section. Such parking spaces for one such establishment
shall not be considered as providing the number of such parking spaces for any
other establishment.
   (C)   Such parking space for the accommodation of an automobile or a light
motor truck shall total at least 300 square feet including both parking and
maneuvering area.
   (D)   Such parking space for the accommodation of a heavy motor truck, motor
bus, or other shall be of dimensions herein specified for an off-street loading
berth.
   (E)   No such parking spaces shall be located less than 20 feet from any
front curb line or four feet from any sidewalk, or, if there is no sidewalk or
curb on the front of the property, then no such parking spaces shall be located
less than five feet from any front lot line.
   (F)   No such parking spaces shall be located less than five feet from any
side or rear lot line.
   (G)   Schedule of off-street spaces shall be as follows:
 
Location                                Spaces Required
Animal hospitals, clinics, and offices  One parking space for each employee,
of physicians and dentists.             plus five parking spaces for each staff
                                        or visiting physician.
Hotel, motel, tourist home, private     One parking space for the manager, plus
club, and all other similar places      one parking space for each
offering overnight accommodations.      accommodation.
                                        One parking space for each five seats
Mortuaries, undertaking, and funeral    or portion thereof in the chapel or
parlors.                                parlor, plus one parking space for each
                                        vehicle maintained on the premises.
Places of public assembly including
private clubs, lodges, fraternal
organizations not providing overnight   One parking space for each five seats
accommodations, town halls,             provided for patron use, or at least
auditoriums, skating rinks, dance       one parking space for each 200 square
halls, bowling alleys, athletic fields, feet of floor area used or intended to
sports arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums,    be used for service to the public as
amusement parks, fair grounds,          customers, patrons, or clients,
community buildings, public             whichever requires the greater number
administration buildings, and other     of parking spaces.
similar places of relatively infrequent
public assembly.
Retail establishments for the sale of   One parking space for every 100 square
food or beverages to be consumed on the feet of floor area or portion thereof.
premises.
Retail establishments other than
specified above (for example, banks,    One parking space for every 200 square
business, financial, and professional   feet of floor area or portion thereof.
buildings).
 
   (H)   All such parking spaces shall be surfaced with all-weather, dustless
material.
(Prior Code, § 154.065) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.071 OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS.
   Off-street loading berths for B-2, General Commercial District
establishments shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   All such berths shall be located on the same lot or tract of land as
the establishments served, except when serving adjacent establishments when the
loading berth requirement is sufficient to serve both establishments.
   (B)   No such berth shall be located less than 50 feet from the building
restriction line of a dwelling or residential building, unless such berth is
screened from public view by a fence, wall, or hedge at least 75% solid and at
least eight feet in height.
   (C)   No such berth shall be located within 50 feet from the nearest point
of intersection of two streets.
   (D)   All such berths shall be designed with means of vehicular access to a
street or alley which will least interfere with traffic movement.
   (E)   All such berths shall be improved with a compacted base at least six
inches thick and shall be surfaced with at least two inches of some all-
weather, dustless material.
   (F)   (1)   Schedule of off-street loading berths.
 
Floor Area of Establishment in Square Feet Minimum Required Number and Size of
                                           Loading Berths
1 - 9,999                                  1 (12 x 40 feet)
10,000 - 24,999                            2 (10 x 40 feet)
25,000 - 39,999                            2 (10 x 70 feet)
40,000 - 99,999                            3 (10 x 70 feet)
100,000 - 249,999                          4 (10 x 70 feet)
 
      (2)   For each additional 200,000 square feet or portion thereof of floor
area, one additional berth shall be provided to be at least ten by 70 feet in
dimensions.
   (G)   All such berths shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
   (H)   No vehicle repair or service work shall be performed in any such
berth, excepting emergency repair or service work requiring less than four
hours to complete.
   (I)   No such berth shall be located less than ten feet from any front lot
line.
   (J)   No such berth shall be located less than five feet from any side or
rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 154.066) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.072 BUFFER STRIP.
   Where a lot on which a commercial establishment shall be located abuts or
adjoins any other district except an industrial district, a buffer strip of
land not less than 30 feet in width shall be provided and:
   (A)   Shall be located on such lot on the side of such lot abutting any
other district;
   (B)   Shall be parallel to the lot lines of such lot facing any other
district;
   (C)   Shall be maintained with a screen planting at least six feet in
height, except where such buffer strip parallels the front lot line of such
lot, in which case, such screen planting shall not be required;
   (D)   Shall not be used for parking, loading, or unloading;
   (E)   Shall not be included in any side or rear yard dimension;
   (F)   May coincide with the front 30 feet of the front yard; and
   (G)   May be crossed by sidewalks, easements, access ways, and service
drives not more than 35 feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 154.067) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.073 FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   The following regulations and standards shall apply when computing the floor
area ratio of a commercial building.
   (A)   Cellars may be excluded from such computations.
   (B)   The minimum floor area ratios as herein specified shall not apply to
outdoor commercial recreation uses nor to commercial parking lots.
   (C)   For a commercial building the minimum floor area ratio shall be 0.2
and the maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.2.
(Prior Code, § 154.068) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.074 HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in §
154.023:
   (A)   No main or principal structure shall exceed 35 feet in height; and
   (B)   No detached accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 154.069) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.075 YARDS.
   On every lot in any commercial district, yards shall be required as follows:
   (A)   Front yard: none required in a B-2 District, except that gasoline
pumps or similar fuel-dispensing equipment shall be at least ten feet from the
front property line. Twenty five feet is required in a B-1 District;
   (B)   Side yards: none required in a B-2 District. Seven feet is required in
a B-1 District; and
   (C)   Rear yard: one required, at least 20 feet in depth.
(Prior Code, § 154.070) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.076 PORTABLE BUILDINGS; INCIDENTAL USE ONLY.
   A portable building may not be used as the principal structure for
conducting any use or uses permitted in a commercial district. Such a structure
shall be used exclusively for storage purposes.
(Ord. 945, passed 6-17-2020)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.090 DESCRIPTION.
   The M, Industrial District embraces all types of industrial uses including
both light and heavy industry and related operations.
(Prior Code, § 154.085) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.091 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses in the M, Industrial District are:
   (A)   Those uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2, Residential and the B-1 and
B-2, Commercial Districts, subject to the standards and regulations applicable
to those districts;
   (B)   Grain storage, feed mills, fertilizer storage, and processing, but not
including liquid or gaseous fertilizer storage or processing in quantities
exceeding 100 gallons or 50 cubic feet, whichever is less;
   (C)   Wholesale, storage, and warehouse facilities, except those
specifically prohibited;
   (D)   Railroad yards, siding and switching facilities, and public utilities;
   (E)   Fuel storage, building material storage yard, or similar storage
yards, but not including salvage or junk yards, and not including the
aboveground storage of petroleum products in quantities greater than 1,000
gallons;
   (F)   Agriculture;
   (G)   The manufacture or processing of goods or products;
   (H)   Customary accessory uses;
   (I)   Sanitary landfills; and
   (J)   Adult oriented business, except where prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 154.086) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.092 SIGNS.
   The following regulations as to signs shall apply in the M, Industrial
District.
   (A)   The top of roof-mounted signs shall not be higher than ten feet from
roof level.
   (B)   The gross area of signs per lot shall not exceed 50 square feet each
and 100 square feet in the aggregate.
   (C)   No sign affixed to a structure shall project more than five feet
beyond the limits of such structure and shall not project across lot lines.
   (D)   No flashing electric signs are permitted.
(Prior Code, § 154.087) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.093 BUFFER STRIP.
   Where a lot on which an industrial use shall be located abuts or adjoins any
residential district, a buffer strip of not less than 40 feet in width shall be
provided and:
   (A)   Shall be located on such lot on the side thereof abutting the zoning
district boundary;
   (B)   Shall be parallel to the lot line of such lot facing the other zoning
district;
   (C)   Shall be maintained with a screen planting at least eight feet in
height, except where such buffer strip parallels the front lot line of such
lot, in which case such screen planting shall not be required;
   (D)   Shall not be used for parking, loading, or unloading;
   (E)   Shall not be included in any side or rear yard dimension;
   (F)   May coincide with the front 40 feet of the front yard; and
   (G)   May be crossed by sidewalks, easements, access ways, and service
drives not more than 35 feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 154.088) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.094 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking spaces for industrial uses shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   One such space shall be provided for each two employees, based upon
the maximum number of persons employed during one work period during the day or
night, plus one such space for each vehicle used in the conduct of such use.
   (B)   Such space for the accommodation of an automobile or light motor truck
shall total at least 300 square feet, including both parking and maneuvering
areas.
   (C)   Such space for the accommodation of a heavy motor truck, motor bus, or
other vehicle shall be of dimensions herein specified for an off-street loading
berth.
   (D)   All such spaces shall be surfaced with all-weather, dustless material.
   (E)   No such space shall be located less than 20 feet from any front curb
line or ten feet from a sidewalk.
   (F)   No such space shall be located less than five feet from any side or
rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 154.089) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.095 OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS.
   Off-street loading berths for industrial uses shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   All such berths shall be located on the same lot as the industrial use
served.
   (B)   No such berth shall be located less than 100 feet from the building
restriction line of a dwelling or residential building unless such is screened
from public view by a fence, wall, or hedge at least 75% solid and at least six
feet in height.
   (C)   No such berth shall be located less than 50 feet from the nearest
point of intersection of two streets.
   (D)   All such berths shall be improved with a compacted base at least seven
inches thick and shall be surfaced with at least two inches of some all-
weather, dustless material.
   (E)   All such berths shall be designed with means of vehicular access to a
street or alley which will least interfere with traffic movement.
   (F)   (1)   Schedule of off-street loading berths:
 
Floor Area of Building in Square Feet Minimum Required Number and Size of
                                      Loading Berths
1,000 - 9,999                         1 (12 x 40 feet)
10,000 - 24,999                       2 (10 x 40 feet)
25,000 - 39,999                       2 (10 x 70 feet)
40,000 - 99,999                       3 (10 x 70 feet)
100,000 - 249,999                     4 (10 x 70 feet)
 
      (2)   For each additional 200,000 square feet or portion thereof of floor
area, one additional such berth shall be provided to be at least ten by 70 feet
in dimensions.
   (G)   All such berths shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
   (H)   No vehicle repair or service work shall be performed on any such
berth, excepting emergency repair or service work requiring less than four
hours to complete.
   (I)   No such berth shall be located less than ten feet from any front lot
line nor less than five feet from any side or rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 154.090) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.096 YARDS.
   On every lot in the industrial district, yards shall be required as follows:
   (A)   Front yard: 25 feet from the front property line;
   (B)   Side yards: seven feet; and
   (C)   Rear yard: 20 feet.
(Prior Code, § 154.091) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.097 ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Adult entertainment facilities (as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5) are
prohibited from locating within 1,000 feet of the property boundaries of any
school, day care center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public
housing, and place of worship.
   (B)   Adult oriented businesses are prohibited within 1,000 feet of any
residential or non-urban district.
   (C)   Adult oriented businesses are prohibited from operating, locating, or
otherwise conducting business within 1,000 feet of another adult oriented
business.
   (D)   Adult oriented businesses are prohibited from operating, establishing,
locating, or maintaining more than one adult oriented business in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof.
   (E)   For the purpose of divisions (A) and (B) above, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part
of the premises where an adult oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed above. Presence of a municipal,
county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
   (F)   For the purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any two
adult oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (G)   (1)   An adult oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the adult oriented business license, of a use listed in
division (C) above within 1,000 feet of the adult oriented business.
      (2)   This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and
does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license
has expired or been revoked.
   (H)   All adult oriented businesses shall comply with the following sign
requirements.
      (1)   All signs shall be permanent, flat wall signs attached to the
exterior walls of the premises only.
      (2)   The amount of allowable sign area shall not exceed ten feet by ten
feet.
      (3)   No sign shall be equipped with lighting mechanisms capable of
flashing.
      (4)   (a)   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed on any sign or in any window areas, or any
area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building.
         (b)   A two square foot sign shall be placed on the entrance to the
premises stating the hours of operation of the adult oriented business and
admittance to adults only.
(Prior Code, § 154.092) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
NON-URBAN DISTRICTS
§ 154.110 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this district is to provide for agricultural activities, for
protection of natural resources, and to provide for rural residences.
(Prior Code, § 154.105) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.111 PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses in the NU, Non-Urban District are:
   (A)   Agricultural purposes, as defined in §
154.029(B);
   (B)   Roadside stands for the display and sale of farm products raised or
grown on the premises;
   (C)   Greenhouse or nursery;
   (D)   Park, playground, or forest preserve;
   (E)   R-1, Single-Family Residence; and
   (F)   Home occupation.
(Prior Code, § 154.106) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.112 HEIGHT AND AREA.
    The height and area requirements for the specific uses shall be observed.
(Prior Code, § 154.107) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.113 PARKING.
   The parking requirements for the specific uses shall be observed.
(Prior Code, § 154.108) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
NON-CONFORMITIES
§ 154.125 DESCRIPTION.
   Within the districts established by this chapter, or by amendments that may
later be adopted, there may exist lots, premises, structures, and uses which
were lawful before this chapter or any amendment thereto was effective, but
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the provisions of
this chapter or future amendment. These are commonly known as non-conforming
uses, structures, and the like, and are herein referred to under the general
term “non-conformities.”
(Prior Code, § 154.120) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.126 INTENT.
   Under the law, non-conformities are permitted to be continued, subject to
certain conditions and restrictions. It is the intent of this chapter to permit
these non-conformities to continue until they are removed (except as otherwise
herein provided), but not to encourage their survival. Such non-conformities
are declared by this subchapter to be incompatible with the permitted
structures and uses of land and structures in the districts involved. It is
further the intent of this chapter that such non-conformities shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded, or extended except as provided for herein, nor to be
used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district.
(Prior Code, § 154.121) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.127 RULES.
   (A)   A non-conforming use of land, premises, or structures shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded, or extended after the effective date hereof by the
attachment of a structure, premises or land, of additional signs intended to be
seen off the premises or land, or by the addition of other uses of a nature
which would be prohibited in the district involved.
   (B)   A non-conforming use or a non-conforming structure which is non-
conforming only because of failure to provide required off-street parking
spaces, loading berths, or setbacks shall have all the rights of a conforming
use or structure.
(Prior Code, § 154.122) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.128 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any
lot which is a lot of record on the effective date thereof. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or
width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that
yard dimensions and other requirements not involved area or width, or both, of
the lots shall conform to the regulations hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   Yard regulations and standards for single non-conforming lots of
record are as follows:
         (a)   Front yard. The front yard regulations and standards of the
district in which such lot is located shall apply.
         (b)   Rear yard. The rear yard regulations and standards of the
district in which such lot is located shall apply.
         (c)   Side yard. On such lot with a width of 50 feet or more, two side
yards shall be provided as required by the regulations and standards of the
district in which such lot is located.
      (2)   On such lot less than 50 feet but not less than 27 feet in width,
two side yards shall be provided, each equaling 10% of the lot width.
      (3)   On such lot less than 27 feet but not less than 20 feet in width,
the structure located on such lot shall have a width of not more than 90% of
such lot width. Only one side yard need be provided, equaling in width the
difference between the lot width and the maximum permitted width of the
structure. No other side yard need be provided.
      (4)   The wall of any building facing the side of the lot on which no
side yard is required shall be without openings and shall not be constructed as
a common wall.
(Prior Code, § 154.123) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.129 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, on the effective date hereof or amendment of this chapter, a lawful
use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the regulations and
standards of this chapter as adopted or amended, such use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No such non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, or
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No such non-conforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part
to any other portion of the lot or tract of land occupied on the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 180 consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the regulations and standards set by this chapter for the district
in which such land is located.
(Prior Code, § 154.124) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.130 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where, on the effective date hereof or amendment hereto, a lawful structure
exists that could not be built under the regulations and standards of this
chapter as adopted or amended, by reasons of restrictions on lot area, lot
coverage, floor area ratio, height, yards, spacing between buildings, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following
provisions.
   (A)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Should any such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations and standards for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
(Prior Code, § 154.125) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.131 NON-CONFORMING TRAILER COACHES.
   Where, on the effective date of adoption or an amendment of this chapter, a
lawful trailer coach exists on a residential lot which could not exist there
under the regulations and standards of this chapter as adopted or amended, such
trailer coach may continue to exist on such a lot as long as it remains lawful
subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Such non-conforming trailer coaches must be removed on the sale,
lease, bequest, devise, inheritance, or legacy of the property.
   (B)   Should such trailer coach be destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of its destruction, it shall
not be replaced except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.126) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.132 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.
   Where, on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a
lawful use of a structure or of a premises exists that is no longer permissible
under the regulations and standards of this chapter as adopted or amended, such
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered except in changing the use of
such structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of the
building or structure which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy land outside of such structure.
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a
structure or of any premises may be changed to another non-conforming use,
provided that the Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-
conforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   Any structure, or any premises, in or on which a non-conforming use is
superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations and
standards of the district in which such structure or premises is located, and
the non-conforming use shall not be resumed.
   (E)   When a non-conforming use of a building or structure, or of a
premises, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three-year period, the structure or the premises shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations and standards of
the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Where a non-conforming use status applied to a premises, removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming use status of
the land, except as it may qualify as a non-conforming lot of record.
(Prior Code, § 154.127) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.133 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   Where, on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a
lawful sign exists that could not be located under the regulations and
standards of this chapter as adopted or amended, by reasons of restrictions on
location, sign area, height, or other characteristics, such sign may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject, however, to the
following limitations and provisions.
   (A)   No such sign may be enlarged or altered which increases its non-
conformity, but the substitution or interchange of poster panels or painted
boards shall be permitted.
   (B)   Should such sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than
50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Should such sign be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it
shall hereafter conform to the regulations and standards for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Prior Code, § 154.128) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.134 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use or
which itself is non-conforming, work may be done in any period of 12
consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not to exceed 10%
of the then current replacement value of the structure; provided, that the
volume of such building or the size of such structure as it existed at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Prior Code, § 154.129) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
SPECIAL USES
§ 154.145 DESCRIPTION.
   A SPECIAL USE is a use which is necessary or desirable for the public
welfare, but which is potentially incompatible with the uses normally permitted
in the zoning districts established herein.
(Prior Code, § 154.140) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.146 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared the policy and purpose of this chapter to employ the
special use as a flexible means of permitting certain exceptions to the
districts established, and the rules and regulations adopted herein, in cases
where the public benefit of such uses outweighs the potential harm, and under
such conditions imposed as are necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare and individual property rights.
(Prior Code, § 154.141) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.147 AUTHORIZING SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   Special use permits may be granted by the Village Board by ordinance in a
specific case, and after a public hearing before the Plan Commission in
accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth when it appears:
   (A)   It is reasonably necessary for the public convenience at that
location;
   (B)   It is so designed, located, and proposed as to be operated so that it
will not be injurious to the district in which it shall be located or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare;
   (C)   It conforms to the applicable regulations and standards of, and
preserves the essential character of, the district in which it shall be
located; and
   (D)   In the case of an existing non-conforming use, will make such use more
compatible with its surroundings.
(Prior Code, § 154.142) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.148 SCHEDULE OF SPECIAL USES.
   Special uses which may be authorized by the Village Board are as follows:
   (A)   Cemeteries in residential districts;
   (B)   Churches and places of public worship, convents, monasteries, and
rectories in all districts except the industrial district;
   (C)   Clubs, private clubs, private lodges, and country clubs in the
residential districts;
   (D)   Commercial establishments in the residential districts supplying the
everyday needs and services of the residents of the surrounding area, subject
to the regulations specified in this chapter;
   (E)   Electric substations, filtration plants, pumping stations, telephone
exchanges, police stations, fire stations, and governmental administration
buildings in all districts;
   (F)   Hospitals, or nursing or convalescent homes in the residential
districts;
   (G)   Schools in any district; and
   (H)   Sewage treatment plants in the industrial and commercial districts.
   (I)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems larger than a 75kW system in
industrial and commercial districts.
(Prior Code, § 154.143) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 1010, passed 6-21-
2023)
§ 154.149 APPLICABILITY.
   In addition to any special conditions or restrictions prescribed by the
Village Board, the yard and setback line regulations and standards of the
district in which the special use is located shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 154.144) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.150 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The following specific regulations and standards shall apply to the
commercial establishments in residential districts, classified as special uses
herein.
   (A)   Business.
      (1)   All businesses shall be conducted within an enclosed building,
except for off-street parking, loading, and unloading, and except for those
businesses serving agriculture, located in an agriculture district, which are
normally carried on in the open.
      (2)   Establishments of the “drive-in” type offering goods and services
directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles shall not be permitted.
   (B)   Performance standards, nuisances, and hazards.
      (1)   No use shall emit vibrations, heat, or glare which are readily
detectable by normal human senses without the use of instruments at the lot
lines.
      (2)   No use shall discharge across the lot lines wherein it is located,
toxic or noxious matter, odors, vapors, or gases in such concentrations as to
be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare,
or cause injury or damage to property, business, crops, or livestock.
   (C)   Signs. Signs in connection with a commercial establishment shall:
      (1)   Not be illuminated;
      (2)   Not extend beyond lot lines; and
      (3)   Not exceed an area of 25 square feet.
   (D)   Landscaping. Commercial establishments in a residential district shall
maintain the following landscape standards.
      (1)   All open, unpaved, uncovered, and unsheltered yards, and all other
open spaces shall be planted with trees at least two inches in diameter,
measured at a point five feet above the ground surface. A tree-planting ratio
of at least one such tree for every 2,000 square feet of lot area shall be
maintained.
      (2)   All parking lots and carports, with a capacity of six or more
vehicles, visible from the front line of the front yard of the lot on which
such parking lots and carports are located, shall be screened from public view
with a fence, wall, or hedge at least 50% solid and at least two and one-half
feet but not more than four feet in height.
   (E)   Off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces for commercial
establishments shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   All such parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or tract
of land as the establishment served.
      (2)   The number of such parking spaces required shall be the sum of the
individual requirements of the various individual establishments, computed
separately in accordance with this section. Such parking spaces for one such
establishment shall not be considered as providing the number of such parking
spaces for any other establishment.
      (3)   Such parking space for the accommodation of an automobile or a
light motor truck shall be at least 300 square feet, including both maneuvering
and parking area.
      (4)   Such parking space for the accommodation of a heavy motor truck,
motor bus, or other vehicle shall be of dimensions herein specified for an off-
street loading berth.
      (5)   All such parking space in a residential district shall be surfaced
with some all-weather, dustless material.
      (6)   No such parking space shall be located less than ten feet from any
front lot line.
      (7)   No such parking space shall be located less than five feet from any
side or rear lot line.
      (8)   Schedule of off-street parking spaces is as follows:
         (a)   Clinics and offices of physicians shall provide three such
parking spaces for each staff or visiting physician plus one such parking space
for each other employee.
         (b)   Business, professional, financial, and office buildings shall
provide one such parking space for every 100 square feet of floor area.
         (c)   Retail stores shall provide one such parking space for every 100
square feet of floor area.
         (d)   Farm businesses shall provide one such parking space for each
employee not being on the premises.
   (F)   Off-street loading berths. Off-street loading berths for commercial
establishments shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   All such loading berths shall be located on the same lot or tract
of land as the establishment served, except when serving adjacent
establishments when the loading berth requirements are sufficient to serve both
such establishments.
      (2)   No such loading berth in a residential district shall be located
less than 50 feet from the building restriction line of a dwelling or
residential building, unless such loading berth is screened from view by a
fence, wall, or hedge at least 75% solid and at least six feet in height.
      (3)   No such loading berth shall be located within 50 feet from the
nearest point of intersection of two streets.
      (4)   Such loading berth shall be designed with means of vehicular access
to a street or alley which will least interfere with traffic movement.
      (5)   Such loading berth in a residential district shall be improved with
a compacted base at least seven inches thick and shall be surfaced with at
least two inches of some all-weather, dustless material.
      (6)   No such loading berth shall be located less than ten feet from any
front lot line.
      (7)   No such loading berth shall be located less than five feet from any
side or rear lot line.
      (8)   No vehicle repair or service work shall be performed on any such
loading berth located in a residential district.
      (9)   All such loading berths shall have a vertical clearance of at least
14 feet.
(Prior Code, § 154.145) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.151 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for one of the special uses of land specified above may
be made by filing a written application or petition to the Village Board in the
office of the Village Clerk. Such application shall:
      (1)   State the name and address of the applicant (and the name and
address of the owner of record, if the applicant is not such owner);
      (2)   State the location of the property for which the special use is
sought;
      (3)   Request the specific special use desired; and
      (4)   State facts sufficient to demonstrate that the conditions
prescribed in §
154.147 exist, and support such statements with any plans and data necessary
for a proper understanding of the application of such plans and data as are
recommended by the Building Official or the Village Board.
   (B)   The original copy of such application or petition shall be retained by
the Village Clerk and a duplicate copy shall be transmitted to the Building
Official and the Village Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 154.146) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.152 HEARING DATE AND NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   If the application for special use is in proper form, the Village
Clerk shall arrange a hearing date for the application and shall cause a notice
of the time and place of such public hearing to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village not less than 15 days, nor more than 30
days, prior to the date of hearing. Such notice shall contain the particular
location for which the special use is requested as well as a brief statement
describing the special use.
   (B)   If the application is not in proper form, the Village Clerk shall
notify the applicant in writing and send a copy of such communication to the
Building Official and Village Attorney, and no hearing shall be set nor notice
published until a proper application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 154.147) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.153 HEARING BY PLAN COMMISSION ON SPECIAL USE.
   (A)   A public hearing on the application for special use shall be conducted
by the Plan Commission on the date set in accordance with its general rules for
meetings and public hearings.
   (B)   After the hearing, the Plan Commission shall make a report of its
findings to the Village Board, and in said report shall indicate its approval
or disapproval of the special use applied for. Every report shall contain a
finding of fact specifying the reason for the Zoning Board’s recommendations or
approval or disapproval. Such report may also recommend that special conditions
and safeguards for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare be
imposed by the Village Board if it grants the application for special use.
(Prior Code, § 154.148) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.154 ACTION OF THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   Upon the report of the Plan Commission, the Village Board may, by
ordinance, without further public hearing, grant the application or petition
for the special use or it may refer the application back to the Plan Commission
for further consideration.
   (B)   An ordinance granting an application for special use may be adopted by
the majority vote of the Village Board regardless of the recommendation of the
Plan Commission, except in those cases where a written protest against the
granting of such special use is filed with the Village Clerk, signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 50% of the frontage immediately adjoining, across
an alley therefrom, or directly opposite the frontage for which the special use
is sought. In these cases, a two-thirds vote of the members of the Village
Board present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be
required. A written protest shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
at least five days before the Village Board meeting next following the Plan
Commission hearing. The Village Clerk shall forward the same to the President
of the Village Board and the Village Attorney.
   (C)   Every ordinance granting an application for special use shall contain
a finding of fact specifying the reason for granting same, and shall specify
any special conditions or safeguards for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare that the Village Board may impose.
(Prior Code, § 154.149) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.155 IMPLEMENTATION.
   If a special use that has been granted is not implemented within one year
from the date of enactment by application for, and issuance of, a permit
according to plans as presented and approved, that special use shall be
rescinded and the land area involved shall revert to the zoning use that
existed at the time of the grant of said special use. A special use about to
expire may be extended for a year by application for renewal through the same
process as required for the initial grant of such use.
(Prior Code, § 154.150) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
VARIANCES
§ 154.170 DESCRIPTION.
   A variance may be granted in cases where there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of the
regulations herein relating to the use, construction, or alteration of
buildings or structures or the use of land.
(Prior Code, § 154.165) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.171 PURPOSE.
   Such variance in the application of the regulations must be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter and the regulations and
standards adopted herein, and in accordance with the general and specific rules
and standards hereinafter set forth in regard to the granting of such
variances.
(Prior Code, § 154.166) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.172 RULES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals may grant a variance in a specific case and after
a public hearing in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth when it
appears:
      (1)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are not applicable
to other lands or structures in the same district;
      (2)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other lands or structures
in the same district under the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and/or
      (4)   The granting of the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands
or structures in the same district.
   (B)   No non-conforming use of neighboring lands or structures in the same
district, and no permitted use of lands or structures in other districts, shall
be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
(Prior Code, § 154.167) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.173 LIMITATION IN GRANTING VARIANCES.
   When it appears that the conditions set forth in §
154.172 have been satisfied, the Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance,
except in the following instances:
   (A)   To permit any yard, court, buffer strip, setback line, or spacing
between buildings of less dimension than required by the applicable
regulations;
   (B)   To permit a reduction in the minimum or an increase in the maximum
floor area ratio imposed by the applicable regulations;
   (C)   To permit any structure to exceed the height limitations imposed by
the applicable regulations;
   (D)   To permit greater coverage than required by the applicable
regulations;
   (E)   To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely
because of the insufficient area of the lot;
   (F)   To permit a reduction in the minimum habitable floor area of a
dwelling unit or a lodging unit;
   (G)   To permit a reduction in the minimum or an increase in the maximum
floor area of a building as imposed by the applicable regulations;
   (H)   To permit a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces or
loading berths required about or in connection with a use;
   (I)   To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming structure which has
been destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50% of its value by fire,
an act of God or the public enemy, where the Board of Appeals shall find some
compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the non-conforming structure;
and
   (J)   To permit in a residential district the creating of new lots having
areas less than the minimum specified for the district, where such new lots
conform with the size of lots directly across the street from and immediately
adjacent on either side to the tract being subdivided; provided, that the tract
is located in an area which has been partially subdivided prior to the
enactment of this chapter, it being the purpose of this variance to allow the
logical completion of a subdivision plan already in progress, and not to permit
the extension of small lot sizes to surrounding lands.
(Prior Code, § 154.168) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.174 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Variances in the application of the zoning regulations and standards
adopted herein may be applied for by filing a written application or petition
to the Board of Appeals in the office of the Village Clerk. Such application
shall:
      (1)   State the name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   State the location of the property for which the variance is
sought;
      (3)   State facts which the applicant believes bring him or her within
the requirements set forth in §
154.172; and
      (4)   Request a variance restricted to one or more of the situations
described in §
154.173.
   (B)   The original copy of such application shall be retained by the Village
Clerk. Duplicate copies shall be transmitted by the Village Clerk to the
Chairperson of the Board of Appeals and Village Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 154.169) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.175 HEARING DATE AND NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   If the application for variance is in proper form, the Village Clerk
shall arrange a hearing date for the application and shall cause a notice of
the time and place of such public hearing to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village not less than 15 days, nor more than 30
days, prior to the date of hearing. Such notice shall contain the particular
location for which the variance is requested as well as a brief statement of
what the proposed variance consists.
   (B)   If the application is not in proper form, the Village Clerk shall
notify the applicant in writing and send a copy of such communication to the
Chairperson of the Board of Appeals and Village Attorney, and no hearing shall
be set nor notice published until a proper application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 154.170) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.176 HEARING BY BOARD OF APPEALS ON VARIANCE.
   A public hearing on the application for variance shall be conducted by the
Board of Appeals on the date set in accordance with its general rules for
meetings, and such hearing may be continued from time to time as required.
(Prior Code, § 154.171) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.177 VOTE OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals may vote to approve the proposed variance or it
may require further consideration and public hearings.
   (B)   Every granting of a variance shall contain findings of fact specifying
the reason for making such variation.
(Prior Code, § 154.172) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.190 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
the provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall be appointed by the
Village Board. The Building Official shall have the power to:
      (1)   Issue building permits;
      (2)   Grant certificates of occupancy permits;
      (3)   Make inspections of buildings and premises necessary to carry out
the duties of administration and enforcement of this chapter; and
      (4)   Perform such other further functions necessary and proper to
enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   No building or structure within the village or its extra-
territorial jurisdiction shall hereafter be erected, moved, altered, or razed,
nor shall any such work be started to erect, move, alter, or raze, until a
building permit shall have been obtained from the Building Official; nor shall
any material change be made in the use of any building or land without a
building permit having been obtained from the Building Official. No such
building permit shall be issued to erect a building or structure or make any
change of use of a building or land unless it is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and all amendments hereto.
      (2)   The Building Official shall have the authority to issue permits for
temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes when said building or
use will not continue for a period exceeding one year. Unless construction is
started within six months after the date of issuance of a building permit, the
building permit shall automatically become void and fees forfeited. The
Building Official may reinstate a building permit that has become void for
failure to commence construction without payment of further fees in his or her
discretion upon good cause shown.
      (3)   Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or
copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
collected by the Building Official in advance of issuance. The amount of such
fees shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
   (C)   The Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit when
conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant, despite
violations of contracts such as covenants or private agreement which may occur
upon the granting of such permit.
   (D)   The Building Official shall require that all applications for building
permits be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
      (1)   The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot drawn to
scale;
      (2)   The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures
upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate; and
      (3)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may
be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
observed. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Building Official after he or she shall have marked such copy either as
approved or disapproved. The second copy shall be retained in the records of
the Building Official.
   (E)   Upon the completion of the work authorized by a building permit, the
holder thereof shall seek final inspection thereof by notifying the Building
Official. The Building Official shall make such final inspection promptly.
(Prior Code, § 154.185) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.191 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Organization.
      (1)   A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the
provisions of the state statutes applicable thereto.
      (2)   Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at such time and place
within the village as the Board may determine. Special meetings may be held at
the call of the Chairperson or as determined by the Board. Such Chairperson or,
in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel
attendance of witnesses.
      (3)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Such Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member of every
question. If any member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate
such fact. The Board may adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with
the applicable state statutes or this chapter.
   (B)   Appeals, how taken.
      (1)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an
officer, department, or board of the village.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days from the date of the
action appealed from by filing with the Building Official and with the Board of
Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Building
Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the
records upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      (3)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Board, after the
notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property.
      (4)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the use, requirement, decision, or determination as, in its opinion,
ought to be made in the premises.
   (C)   Jurisdiction. The Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter
or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any
change in the terms of this chapter, but does have the power to act on those
matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review,
interpretation, and to authorize a variance as defined in this chapter and laws
of the state. Said powers include:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal
made by the Building Official or any other administrative official in carrying
out or enforcing any provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   To grant a variance from the strict application of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Standards. Each case before the Board of Appeals shall be considered
as an individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the
following standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of
such case. All uses as listed in any district requiring Board approval for a
permit shall be of such location, size, and character that, in general, it will
be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in
which it is situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of
adjacent districts. The Board shall give consideration to the following:
      (1)   The location and size of the use;
      (2)   The nature and intensity of the operations involved in, or
conducted in connection with;
      (3)   Its size, layout, and its relation to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic to and from the use;
      (4)   The assembly of persons in connection with it will not be hazardous
to the neighborhood or be incongruous therewith, or conflict with normal
traffic of the neighborhood;
      (5)   Taking into account, among other things, convenient routes of
pedestrian traffic, particularly of children;
      (6)   Vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow,
relation to street intersections, sight distance, and the general character and
intensity of development of the neighborhood;
      (7)   The location and height of buildings, the location, nature, and
height of walls, fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping of the site
shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof;
      (8)   The nature, location, size, and site layout of the uses shall be
such that it will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated
taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits,
convenience of access by prospective patrons, and the physical and economic
relationship of one type of use to another; and
      (9)   The location, size, intensity, and site layout of the use shall be
such that its operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings by
reason of noise, fumes, or flash of lights to a greater degree than is normal,
with respect to the proximity of commercial to residential uses, nor interfere
with an adequate supply of light and air, nor increase the danger of fire or
otherwise endanger the public safety.
   (E)   Miscellaneous. No order of the Board of Appeals permitting the
erection or alteration of buildings shall be valid for a period longer than one
year unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained
within such period and such erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. No order of the Board
of Appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a
period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period;
provided, however, that the use of such permit is dependent upon the erection
or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in full force and effect
if a building permit for such use, erection, or alteration is obtained within
such period and such erections or alterations are commenced and proceed to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Prior Code, § 154.186) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.192 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, terms, phrases, words and their
derivations used herein requiring definition shall have the meanings set forth
in this chapter as enacted, and as hereafter amended.
   (B)   The Building Official shall require that all applications for building
permits be accompanied by the good faith estimate of the owner or the owner’s
agent certifying the estimated cost of the building or structure. The fees
provided for herein shall be paid to the Building Official at the time the
application for the building permit is made.
   (C)   The following fees shall be imposed for building permit applications:
      (1)   Ten dollars for each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of
building or structure floor area up to 20,000 square feet of floor area, and $5
for each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of floor area exceeding 20,000
square feet in the same building or structure. The unfinished floor area of
basements and cellars of single-family and two-family dwellings shall be
excluded in determining the square footage of floor area upon which the
building permit application fees are calculated;
      (2)   Twenty-five dollars for each garage designed for fewer than three
automobiles or for a building or structure other than the main or principal
building on the lot, and $50 for a garage designed for three or more
automobiles; provided, however, that the fee for any building or structure
other than the main or principal building on the lot that exceeds 1,200 square
feet in floor area shall be calculated according to the quantity of floor area,
except as provided in division (C)(4) below;
      (3)   Twenty-five dollars for each sign;
      (4)   Twenty-five dollars for each building or structure constructed and
used exclusively for agricultural purposes in a NU, Non-Urban District,
including, but not limited to, equipment storage and livestock; and
      (5)   Ten dollars for a permit to raze a building or structure within the
village.
(Prior Code, § 154.187) (Ord. 743, passed 8-18-2004; Ord. 881, passed 6-21-
2017)
AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS
§ 154.205 PROPOSING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Village Board may from time to time on its own motion, or Plan
Commission, or on petition, amend by ordinance the districts created and
established and the regulations and standards adopted in this chapter and in
any future amendments hereto.
   (B)   The Village Board may, by resolution, refer to the Plan Commission a
proposed amendment stating the specific changes proposed to be made, and shall
transmit one copy of the resolution to the Building Official and one to the
Plan Commission.
   (C)   When an amendment is proposed by the Plan Commission, the Commission
shall prepare a statement of recommendation to the Village Board stating the
specific changes proposed to be made and explain why such amendment may be
needed or desirable and shall file such statement in the office of the Village
Clerk. The Village Clerk shall retain the original copy of the statement and
the duplicate copies shall be transmitted to the Building Official and Village
Attorney.
   (D)   (1)   If the amendment is proposed by petition of a person or persons
other than the Plan Commission, such proposal may be made by filing a written
petition to the Village Board in the office of the Village Clerk, such petition
shall:
         (a)   State the name and address of the petitioner or petitioners;
         (b)   State the interest of the petitioner in the property involved
and in the changes sought by the amendment;
         (c)   State the specific changes sought and state facts sufficient to
demonstrate need for or desirability of such changes, and support such
statements with any plans and data necessary for a proper understanding of the
changes proposed and the grounds therefor, or such plans and data as are
recommended by the Building Official or prescribed by the Plan Commission or
Village Board.
      (2)   The original copy of such petition and any supporting documents
shall be retained by the Village Clerk, and duplicate copies shall be
transmitted to the Building Official and Village Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 154.200) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.206 PETITION BEFORE HEARING.
   If the amendment proposed may not be adopted legally under the laws of the
state, the Village Clerk shall notify the petitioner in writing and send a copy
of the communication to the Building Official and Village Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 154.201) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.207 HEARING DATE AND NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   Within a reasonable time after receipt of a copy of a resolution, statement
of recommendation, or petition, as provided in §
154.205, the Plan Commission shall set a hearing date for the proposed
amendment and shall cause a notice of the time and place of such public hearing
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not less
than 15 days, nor more than 30 days, before the date of hearing. Such notice
shall set forth in full the proposed changes in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.202) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.208 HEARING BY PLAN COMMISSION ON AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be conducted by the
Plan Commission on the date set in accordance with its general rules for
meetings, and such hearings may be continued from time to time as required.
   (B)   After the conclusion of the last hearing required herein, the Plan
Commission shall make a report of its findings to the Village Board and in said
report shall indicate their approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment.
Every report shall contain a finding of fact specifying the reason for the Plan
Commission’s recommendation of approval or disapproval.
(Prior Code, § 154.203) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 154.209 VOTE OF THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   Upon the report of the Plan Commission after the public hearing, the
Village Board may, by ordinance, adopt the proposed amendment by majority vote
regardless of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, except in those cases
where a written protest against the proposed amendment is filed with the
Village Clerk, signed and acknowledged by:
      (1)   The owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered;
      (2)   The owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or across
an alley from the frontage proposed to be altered; or
      (3)   The owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage
proposed to be altered.
   (B)   In these cases, a three-fourths vote of all the members of the Village
Board shall be required for adoption of the proposed amendment.
   (C)   A written protest pursuant to this section shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk at least five days before the Village Board meeting
next following the Plan Commission hearing.
(Prior Code, § 154.204) (Ord. 770, passed 2-20-2008)
CHAPTER 155: UTILITY FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Short title
   
155.02   Purpose
   
155.03   Intent
   
155.04   Definitions
   
155.05   Facilities subject to this chapter
   
155.06   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements
   
155.07   Conflicts with state, federal laws
   
155.08   Annual registration
   
155.09   Change in ownership
   
155.10   Enforcement
Permits
   
155.25   Permit required; application, fees
   
155.26   Actions on permit applications
   
155.27   Effect of permit
   
155.28   Revised permit drawings
Insurance, Security
   
155.40   Insurance
   
155.41   Indemnification
   
155.42   Security
Construction; Maintenance
   
155.55   General construction standards
   
155.56   Traffic control
   
155.57   Location of facilities
   
155.58   Relocation of public utilities
   
155.59   Construction methods, materials
   
155.60   Vegetation control; repair
   
155.61   Removal, relocation, modification
   
155.62   No delay
   
155.63   Clean up, restoration of public ways
   
155.64   Maintenance; emergency maintenance
   
155.65   Damage to water lines, sewer lines, lateral pipes
   
155.66   Variances
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, may be cited, and is hereafter designated as
“The Village of Teutopolis Standards for Construction, Repair and Maintenance
of Utility Facilities within Public Ways Ordinance” or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for the
construction, repair, and maintenance of facilities on public ways within the
corporate limits of the village, which shall provide public benefit consistent
with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual quality of the
public ways located within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.03 INTENT.
   By enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over
the public ways within the corporate limits of the village, and particularly
the use of public ways and public property by utility providers, by
establishing uniform standards and procedures to address issues presented by
the demand for access to and use of public ways in the village, including, but
not limited to:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, highways, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways, and other public ways and places;
   (B)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions, which are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (C)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in public ways or
public property;
   (D)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from
the installation of facilities;
   (E)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
   (F)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
   (G)   Preserve open space;
   (H)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in public
ways; and
   (I)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AASHTO. The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. The person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who:
      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         (a)   Video programming; or
         (b)   Other programming service.
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE SYSTEM. A utility provider’s facility, consisting of a set of closed-
transmission paths and associated signal general, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service and/or video service, which
includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within
the service area.
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas, or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. The structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CASING PIPE. A pipe used for bores over six inches in diameter, which
carries the pipe, conduit, wires, or cables being constructed. CASING PIPE for
jack and auger boring shall be steel. CASING PIPE for other bores may be HDPE,
restrained joint PVC, or other materials as approved by the Village Foreman.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. The protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CONDUCTOR. A wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more public way lines of a
public way.
   DISRUPT THE PUBLIC WAY. Any work that obstructs the public way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the public way for its intended use. Such
work may include, but is not limited to, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of
the soil, but does not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner
that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   DRILLING FLUID/MUD. A mixture of water and usually bentonite and/or polymer
continuously pumped to a rotating cutting head or rotating backreamer to
facilitate cutting, reduce required torque, facilitation the removal of
cuttings, stabilizing the borehole, cooling the head, and/or lubricating the
installation of a boring. In suitable soil conditions, the Village Foreman may
authorize, in his or her sole discretion, the use of water alone.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the public way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Any provision of a protective casing.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION or EXCAVATING. The making of a hole or cavity by removing
material, or laying bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. To include, but is not limited to, any and all structures,
devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, cables,
cabinets, ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes,
pipes, pipelines, splice boxes, surface location markers, track and rails,
tunnels, utilities, vaults, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, boxes,
equipment enclosures, pedestals, poles, grates, covers, and appurtenances
thereto located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within a public
way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall
not include any facility owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A roadway, usually a parallel roadway, providing access to
land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Foreman to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health,
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute, or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of public way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, frontage road, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures, and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The State Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended
from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable service or video service from the ICC pursuant to the State Cable
and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   HORIZONTAL DIRECTIONAL BORING OR DRILLING. A method of trenchless technology
in which a steerable, small diameter (less than six inches) in diameter is
drilled from either a pit or the ground surface. For pipes, conduits, wires, or
cables less than six inches in diameter, the pilot bore is pulled back with or
without a rotating backreamer and the pipe, conduit, wire, or cable attached.
For multiple pipes, conduits, wires, or cable or bores greater than six inches
in diameter, a casing pipe shall be pulled aback with the backreamer.
   ICC. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACK AND AUGER BORING. A method of trenchless technology in which a steel
casing pipe is jacked from a bore pit using hydraulic cylinders (jacks),
mechanical jacks, or air jacks with the soil is removed from inside the casing
pipe by means of a rotating cutting head with an auger attached to transport
the soil to the rear of the casing pipe where it is removed from the bore pit.
The rotating cutting edge in JACK AND AUGER BORING shall not be extended so as
to be completely past the leading edge of the casing pipe. A device may be
attached to the leading edge of the casing pipe to provide limited steering
capabilities.
   JACKING. The pushing of a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means without boring or angering.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches, or other facilities by two or
more utility providers.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within a public way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a public way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of a public way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. The person to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
155.25 and
155.26.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, organization, corporation,
limited liability company, association, proprietorship, governmental entity, or
other legal entity. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver, or other representative appointed according to law.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible, or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PIPE BURSTING/RAMMING. A method of trenchless technology in which a new pipe
is mechanically forced through the ground or an existing pipe, bursting or
breaking and forcing pieces of the old pipe into the adjacent ground.
   PROMPTLY. That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 calendar days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state, or federal level.
   PUBLIC WAYS or PUBLIC WAY. The surface of, and the space above and below,
any public street, highway, boulevard, alley, roadway, sidewalk, parkway, lane,
public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-
way dedicated for compatible use now or hereafter held by the village. PUBLIC
WAYS or PUBLIC WAY shall not include any real or personal property owned by the
village that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and
shall not include buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements
owned by the village, regardless of whether they are situated in the PUBLIC
WAY.
   RESTORATION. The removal of the facility and/or repair of a public way,
highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
155.42.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications provider for use as a component part of the service provided
by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates
the end-to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable
Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. § 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following),
as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates, or
controls facilities in public ways used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Every person engaged in making SALES OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   TUNNELING. A method of trenchless technology in which an opening beneath the
ground is excavated by various means but is not followed by the immediate
installation of pipe, conduit, wire, cable, or casing for pipe, conduit, wire,
and/or cable for other means of support to prevent cave-in or collapse.
   UTILITY PROVIDER. Any person, including, but not limited to, a holder and/or
telecommunications provider, owning or operating any FACILITY as defined
herein, other than the village.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and video subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and that is provided through facilities located at least in part in the public
way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in subsection (d) of 47 U.S.C. §
332 or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that
enables subscribers to access content, information, electronic mail, or other
services offered over the public internet.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Teutopolis, Illinois.
   VILLAGE FOREMAN. The Village Foreman for the village, or his or her
designee.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.05 FACILITIES SUBJECT TO THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within public ways within the corporate limits of the
village.
   (B)   A facility lawfully established and operated by a utility provider
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired, and operated by said utility provider presently constructed and
located, so long as said maintenance, repair, and operation is in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, as amended from time to time, and as
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license, permit, or similar
agreement.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.06 FRANCHISES, LICENSES, OR SIMILAR AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The village, in its sole discretion and as limited by law, may require
utility providers to enter into a franchise agreement, license, or similar
agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the village’s public ways. Utility
providers that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may
request the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the
village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
a utility provider other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license, or similar agreement with the village such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license, or similar agreement between the village, and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.07 CONFLICTS WITH STATE, FEDERAL LAWS.
   In the event applicable federal laws, state laws, or regulations conflict
with the requirements of this chapter, the utility provider shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal laws, state laws, or regulations.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.08 ANNUAL REGISTRATION.
   Every utility provider occupying public ways within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Village Foreman, providing the
utility provider’s name, address, and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility provider in connection with emergencies involving the utility
provider’s facilities in the public way and a 24-hour telephone number for each
such person, and evidence of insurance as required in §
155.40.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.09 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility provider shall provide written
notice to the village no less than 30 calendar days prior to the transfer of
ownership of any facility in the public way or change in identity or legal
status of the utility provider. The new owner of the utility provider or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in
the public way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit and
this chapter, including, but not limited to, the indemnification provisions
contained in §
155.41 if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the public
way of the village.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage must be changed
to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
Furthermore, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the village’s
ability to correct and require compliance with matters inadvertently excluded
during any application and/or permit review process.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
PERMITS
§ 155.25 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION, FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village public way which:
      (1)   Changes the location of the facility;
      (2)   Adds a new facility;
      (3)   Disrupts the public way; or
      (4)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public way,
without first filing an application with the Village Foreman and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the
public way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility provider, or its duly authorized representative, and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility provider’s name and address and telephone and telecopy
numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility
provider, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest
in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses, telephone, and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility provider has placed on file with the
village the following items:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed by the utility provider consistent
with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies and the intended response by the utility
provider. The intended response shall include notification to the village and
shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans, and specifications showing the existing facilities
and work proposed, including the certification of a State Professional Engineer
that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes,
rules, and regulations and are located within the surveyed public way(s);
      (7)   Evidence that the applicant is a member of the Joint Utility
Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.L.I.E.);
      (8)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
155.40;
      (9)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
155.42;
      (10)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter pursuant to §
155.66; and
      (11)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility
provider subject to the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable service, video service, or natural
gas distribution system: evidence of any certificate of public convenience and
necessity or other regulatory authorization the applicant is required by law to
obtain, or evidence the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the
ICC, IDOT, or other jurisdictional authority said authorizations;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied, and attach a copy of any permit required by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied, and attach a copy of
any permit required by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility provider in writing to the village within 30 calendar
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $1,500. No application fee is required
to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.26 ACTIONS ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A) Review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing
all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Foreman within 45
calendar days after filing. If the application does not conform to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Village Foreman shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. Furthermore, if the Village Foreman requests additional
information and/or documentation as part of the permit application, and the
applicant fails to provide said information and/or documentation in a timely
manner, said permit application shall be rejected and said applicant shall be
required to resubmit a new permit application. If the Village Foreman is
satisfied the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and
all other applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
Village Foreman shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Village Foreman, in his or her sole discretion, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional review requirements of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall provide written notice to the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such written notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten calendar days
prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30
calendar days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The
Village Foreman shall specify the portion of the public way upon which the
facility may be placed, used, and constructed.
      (2)   (a)   In the event the Village Foreman fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either:
            1.   Ten calendar days after service of notice to the village by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction; or
            2.   Thirty calendar days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction.
         (b)   The telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter, provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer shall provide written notice to the Village Foreman
of the date in which the telecommunications retailer will commence work and
provide evidence of the payment of the application fee as required in §
155.25, posting of the security fund as required in §
155.42, and evidence of insurance as required in §
155.40.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
155.55, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications, and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional review of applications of holders of state authorization
under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility
provider that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission
to the village unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder
has complied with all applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations and
has provided evidence of the payment of the application fee as required in §
155.25, posting of the security fund as required in §
155.42, and evidence of insurance as required in §
155.40.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.27 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on the public ways within the
village and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
public way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction has begun within that period
and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any permit issued under this chapter shall expire two years after
issuance.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time, and place designated by the village,
with such village representatives in attendance as the Village Foreman deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the
permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work
will occur, including, but not limited to, presence or absence of other utility
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of public way by the public during construction and
ingress and egress by adjacent property owners, and methods of construction.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit under this
chapter by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.28 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event the actual location of any facilities deviates in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings, and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village, within 90 calendar
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where and how the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall
be treated as a request for variance in accordance with §
155.66. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the public way or modify the facility so
it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. If the
permittee fails to remove or modify the facility promptly, as required by the
village, then the village may remove said facility at the permittee’s expense.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
INSURANCE, SECURITY
§ 155.40 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverage and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility provider occupying public way or
constructing any facility in the public way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies ensuring the utility provider as named
insured and naming the village and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds, on a primary, non-
contributory basis, on the policies listed divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4)
below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles with
a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage
for each accident;
      (3)   Worker’s compensation insurance with the prescribed statutory
limits; and
      (4)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
   (B)   Contractor and subcontractor insurance. If the utility provider is not
providing such insurance to protect contractors and subcontractors performing
the work, then such contractors and subcontractors of the utility provider
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (D)   Copies required. The utility provider shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten calendar days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (E)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) calendar
days after receipt by the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, by registered mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to
the Village President of the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, of such intent to
cancel or not to renew. Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt by the
Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, of said notice, and in no event later than ten
(10) calendar days prior to said cancellation, the Utility Provider shall
obtain and furnish to the Village of Teutopolis, Illinois, evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.”
   (F)   Self-insurance.
      (1)   A utility provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above. A
utility provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C), and (D)
above.
      (2)   A utility provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A)
above, such as evidence that the utility provider is a “private self-insurer”
under the State Workers Compensation Act, 820 ILCS 305.
   (G)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility provider to the village and any person for any
of the matters subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by
this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (H)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by the A.M. Best Company.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.41 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in public ways, a utility provider
shall be deemed to agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the village
and its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, and
representatives from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses, causes of action, liabilities, settlement payments,
costs, interest, awards, and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and
costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or in relation to the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct
of the utility provider or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors, or subcontractors, as said conduct relates to any action required
or contemplated pursuant to this chapter, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license,
or similar agreement; provided, however, the utility provider’s indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses, or expenses directly caused by the willful
negligence or willful misconduct by the village and its officials, officers,
employees, agents, or representatives.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.42 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village due to the
permittee’s failure to comply with any ordinances, rules, regulations, orders,
permits, and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter;
and
      (3)   The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-
performance by the permittee in violation of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform which the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional irrevocable letter of credit in
a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide it will not be canceled without prior written notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Provide a location convenient to the village and within the state
at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the public way to at least
as good a condition as existing prior to the construction under the permit, as
determined by the Village Foreman, in his or her sole discretion, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs the village estimates are likely to
be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations within the village with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Foreman
may, in the exercise of his or her sole discretion, allow the permittee to post
a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each individual phase
of the construction allowed under the permit. The amount of the security fund
for individual phases of construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
which would have been required under the provisions of this division (C) for
any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village upon 14 calendar days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within
the 14 calendar day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities which are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs, or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter which the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount sufficient
from the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 calendar days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request any and all interest accrued on
the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
losses, or damages incurred by the village as a result the revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss, or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE
§ 155.55 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the public way shall be
consistent and in accordance with the village’s management of the village
right-of-way, applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and,
where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time:
      (1)   Standard specifications for road and bridge construction;
      (2)   Supplemental specifications and recurring special provisions;
      (3)   Highway design manual;
      (4)   Highway standards manual;
      (5)   Standard specifications for traffic control items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger’s handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village Foreman shall determine, in the exercise of his or her
sole discretion, in accordance with the village’s management of the public
ways, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested,
the Village Foreman shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.56 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, IDOT’s Highway Standards Manual, and this chapter.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility provider
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices,
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility provider’s workers
when performing any work on the public way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased and conducted in a
manner so there is minimal interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work which will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business, or institution, the utility provider shall provide written notice to
the village as well as to the resident, business, or institution of the
approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, in
cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
155.65, the utility provider shall provide such notice as is reasonable and
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility provider shall take immediate action to
correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements brought to the
utility provider’s attention by the village.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.57 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this section.
      (1)   No interference with facilities owned by the village. No facilities
shall be placed in any location that the Village Foreman determines will
require the relocation or displacement of any of the village’s facilities or
will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the
village’s facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only minimal interference with the use of the public way and shall cause only
minimal impact upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin said public way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that in anyway interferes with the usual travel on such public way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No facility shall be placed in any
location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the public way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the public way lines of a highway, only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the public way line
and as nearly parallel to the public way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge and/or gutter as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2m)
outside the outer shoulder line or gutter of the roadway and are not within the
clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot
(0.3m) of the public way line or as near as possible to the public way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the public way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the public way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4m) from and parallel to the public
way line;
         (b)   A new facility may, in the sole discretion of the village, be
located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are
impracticable or inconsistent (for example, a new cable may be installed in a
existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near to the public way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5m) from the public way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3m) of the public way line or
as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of the highways of
the village may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as
encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, water lines, or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as possible.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Ill. Adm. Code § 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3m) of the public way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility provider’s foreseeable future expansion
needs is provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility provider to provide a
marker at each public way line where an underground facility other than a power
or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the
type of facility, the utility provider’s name, and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations found
at 49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within a particular public way. The village
may require in its sole discretion, utility providers to locate facilities
within particular public ways that are not highways, rather than within
particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a public way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
public way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may only be
installed if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible, as
determined by the Village Foreman, in his or her sole discretion; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility provider has demonstrated all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports,
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility provider shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure, or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility provider and
their comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve the aesthetic and visual qualities of
the area.
      (2)   A facility may only be constructed if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the public way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.58 RELOCATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   In the event a utility provider must relocate utilities owned by the
village, the utility provider’s plans must be approved by the Village Foreman.
The proposed relocation shall meet the standards of the village for water,
sewers, and street, as set forth in Title V of this code.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.59 CONSTRUCTION METHODS, MATERIALS.
   (A)   General standards and safety requirements. The construction,
operation, and maintenance of facilities located in the public way shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and shall further be performed
in such a manner to maintain customer service. All such work shall be performed
in substantial accordance with generally applicable federal, state, and local
regulations, as well as the National Electric Safety Code. Furthermore, all
vehicles, machinery, and/or equipment utilized during Construction and
maintenance work shall be moved and/or stored out of the public way when not in
use.
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   No borings or trenches will be allowed in the public way within ten
feet of culverts, storm sewers, drainage structures, water mains, sanitary
sewer mains, sanitary force mains, or any other underground utility unless
prior approval has been obtained from the Village Foreman.
      (2)   Compressed air missile or mole boring methods shall not be allowed
unless prior approval has been obtained from the Village Foreman. Consent must
be obtained from the Village Foreman prior to each bore utilizing either
compressed air missile or mole boring methods.
      (3)   Jacking, jetting, tunneling, and pipe bursting/ramming for a pipe,
conduit, wire, or cable greater than two inches in diameter for a roadway
crossing shall not be allowed.
      (4)   The Village Foreman shall, in his or her sole discretion, approve
any roadway crossing by bore or open trench of a pipe, conduit, wire, or cable
six inches in diameter or larger or multiple pipes, conduits, wires, or cables.
A separate plan sheet showing the plan and profile of a roadway crossing shall
be included in the plans. The plan view shall show dimensions from the proposed
crossing to such visible features as to reasonably locate the location of the
proposed crossing. The profile view shall show the existing surface at the
proposed with elevations at, but not limited to, ditch flowlines, each edge of
the right-of-way and/or easement, each edge of pavement, each center of lane
(s), each edge of lane(s), centerline of pavement, and depths of existing
utilities. The benchmark from which the elevations were derived shall be
included on sheets in the plans.
      (5)   A pipe, conduit, wire, or cable six inches in diameter or larger
installed by boring shall be in a casing pipe.
      (6)   Multiple pipes, conduits, wires, or cables may be laid in the same
open trench unless other regulations, rules, or requirements prohibit placement
in the same trench. Multiple pipes, conduits, wires, or cables placed by boring
will require casing pipe. If more than one bore is required, the minimum width
between the bores shall be the width of the largest pipe but no less than three
feet.
      (7)   A record of any bore six inches in diameter or larger shall be
submitted to the Village Foreman within one business day after completion of
the bore. Elevations shall be taken at each edge of pavement, each center of
lane(s), each edge of lane(s), and the centerline of pavement and recorded on
the plan and profile sheet in the plans.
      (8)   Any damage to the roadway by boring, including, but not limited to,
raising or cracking the pavement shall be repaired or replaced.
      (9)   Jack and auger boring may be utilized for installation, repair, or
maintenance of a facility on the public way if authorized and/or required by
the Village Foreman, in his or her sole discretion, but is typically utilized
for larger borings under roadways, railroads, streams, and similar areas where
open cut/trenches are not practical or allowed. If jack and auger boring is
authorized and/or required, the jack and auger boring shall be completed in
compliance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Pits shall be a minimum of ten feet from the
back of curb, edge of gutter, edge of pavement shoulder, or edge of pavement.
Pits shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of the operations and
shall be backfilled within 48 hours after operations are completed. While pits
are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades and
temporary fencing. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it until backfill operations are completed.
         (b)   Drilling fluid/mud. Water or a mixture of water and bentonite
and/or polymer may be pumped to the rotating cutting head to ease cutting of
soil material and auger to the back of the casing pipe.
         (c)   Rotating cutting head. The rotating cutting edge shall not be
extended so as to be completely past the leading edge of the pipe casing.
      (10)   Horizontal directional boring or drilling may be utilized for
installation, repair, or maintenance of a facility on the public way if
authorized and/or required by the Village Foreman, in his or her sole
discretion. If horizontal directional boring or drilling is authorized and/or
required, the horizontal directional boring or drilling shall be completed in
compliance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Pits shall be a minimum of ten feet from the
back of curb, edge of gutter, edge of pavement shoulder, or edge of pavement.
Pits shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of the operations and
shall be backfilled within 48 hours after operations are completed. While pits
are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades and
temporary fencing. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it until backfill operations are completed.
         (b)   Surface launch bore. A horizontal directional boring or drilling
may be launched from the existing ground surface if sufficient easement and/or
right-of-way is available. A surface launch bore shall be such that the
required depth is achieved at the right-of-way or easement line.
         (c)   Drilling fluid/mud. Water or a mixture of water and bentonite
and/or polymer may be pumped to the back reamer to ease cutting of soil
material, consolidating the materials, and lubrication of the pipe or casing
following the backreamer. Drilling fluid/mud that has escaped the bore, bore
pit, or is otherwise not contained shall be cleaned up. Under no circumstances
is the fluid/mud to be washed into a drain, storm sewer, ditch, creek, stream,
river, or other bodies of water.
         (d)   Backreamer. The cutting diameter of the backreamer shall not
exceed the greatest outside diameter of the casing pipe by more than two
inches.
         (e)   Casing pipe. Under no circumstances shall a backreamer with a
diameter of six inches or more be pulled back without the casing pipe.
      (11)   Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on the
public way shall be done in accordance with the applicable portions of § 603 of
IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum, consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Village Foreman.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where public way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility provider shall not trench within
the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (12)   (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be
used. If the utility provider utilizes an open trench, the trench shall be
backfilled and compacted with CA6 gradation and the surface of public ways
shall be replaced with the same depth and material as previously existed.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility provider shall be responsible to remove and
restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the
facility. If so ordered by the Village Foreman, the utility provider, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Village Foreman.
      (13)   Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be
permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (B)(13) is
permitted under §
155.66 the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
by mechanical means as soon as practicable with granular material of CA6 or
CA10 gradation, as designated by the Village Foreman.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all public ways which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last five
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E.
locate.
      (14)   (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing pipe shall be continuous
either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved
by the village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3m) of the public way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or jointed pipe approved
by the village is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and its continuous or mechanical joints
are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the public way.
      (15)   Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount
specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                       Minimum Cover
Electric lines                         30 inches
Communication, cable, or video service 24 inches
lines
Gas or petroleum products              30 inches
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or        Sufficient to provide freeze protection
drainage line                          per IEPA requirements
Water line                             Sufficient to provide freeze protection
                                       per IEPA requirements
 
   (C)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
along any public way in the village shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code § 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
“Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines” and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utility providers shall make every reasonable effort to design
the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads;
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip
augers,” or other approved method which compresses the earth to make the
opening for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
cable or group of cables measuring six inches or more in diameter must be
encased.
         (d)   National Electrical Safety Code. Cable shall be grounded in
accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
         (e)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 31 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 1 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utility
providers shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten
business days after placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking, boring, or horizontal directional drilling with vented
encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
or
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution, and service. Gas pipelines within a
public way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a manner approved
by the village and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192,
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within a
public way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for
Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSLB31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines, or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within a public way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois” and any applicable IEPA requirements.
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground, when permitted within a public way, shall be provided
with a vegetation-free area extending one foot in width beyond the appurtenance
in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of
the mounting pad or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
Village Foreman. With the approval of the Village Foreman, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The
housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to
blend with the surroundings.
   (D)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within public ways shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on public way. No material shall be stored on the
public way without the prior written approval of the Village Foreman. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the public way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
public way maintenance or damage to the public way and other property. If
material is to be stored on public way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility provider to
the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (E)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on the public way may, at the discretion of
the village be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the public way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Foreman if
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted or required by the village the days and
hours of construction shall be Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
   (F)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility provider proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the
presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within public ways to be occupied by its proposed facilities. When notified of
an excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility
provider shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023; Ord. 1011, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 155.60 VEGETATION CONTROL; REPAIR.
   (A)   Electric utilities, compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility provider shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation
control activities in the public way in accordance with applicable state laws
and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utility provider’s, tree trimming, or removal permit required.
Tree trimming that is done by any other utility provider with facilities in
public ways and is not performed pursuant to applicable state laws and
regulations specifically governing the same, shall not be considered a normal
maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance
of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming or removal permit. Applications for
tree trimming or removal permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning or removal practices. Tree trimming or removal permits
shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work
will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
      (3)   Removal of tree stumps. The utility provider shall remove all tree
stumps resulting from tree trimming or removing at the expense of the utility
provider. Such removal shall include removal of the tree stump, by excavating
and/or grinding the tree stump, not less than 18 inches below the surface of
the ground. All tree stumps shall be removed no later than 30 calendar days
following the tree trimming or removal.
      (4)   Tree trimming. All tree trimming and/or tree pruning shall meet the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) pruning standards and pruning
methods, as endorsed by the International Society of Arborist (ISA). All crew
foremen shall be certified line clearance tree trimmers, and all general
foremen shall be arborists certified by the ISA. Evidence that the crew foreman
and/or general foreman are properly certified shall be provided to the village
prior to commencement of any tree trimming and/or tree pruning activities.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
aim extensions, covered wire, or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(1), no utility provider shall
spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs, or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects, or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on public way unless the utility provider demonstrates to the
satisfaction and sole discretion of the Village Foreman such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control. If the Village Foreman
authorizes such spraying, the utility provider must provide a copy of its
applicable Department of Agriculture applicator license.
   (E)   Repair of landscaping. If any utility provider disturbs any
landscaping or surface area in constructing any facility on public way, said
utility provider shall be obligated, at the utility provider’s expense, to
repair any and all landscaping and lime, seed, and mulch any damaged surface
area within the public way in accordance with Class 1 or 1A temporary and final
landscaping requirements contained within the IDOT Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, unless otherwise approved by the Village Foreman.
All landscaping and/or seeding shall be completed no later than 30 calendar
days following completion of the work on the public way. All materials utilized
to repair landscaping and/or surface area shall be as designated by the Village
Foreman, at his or her sole discretion.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.61 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, MODIFICATION.
   (A)   Notice. Within 60 calendar days following written notice from the
village a utility provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change, or alter the
position of any utility facilities within public ways whenever the village has
determined such removal, relocation, change, or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the public way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 calendar days following
written notice from the village any utility provider that owns, controls, or
maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal by the village in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the public
ways of the village as deemed necessary, appropriate or useful in response to
any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the village
shall attempt to notify the utility provider, if known, prior to cutting or
removing a facility and shall notify the utility provider, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of or useful life of a
facility within the public ways of the village the utility provider shall
provide written notice to the village within 90 calendar days. Following
receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility provider to remove
all or any portion of the facility if the Village Foreman determines, in his or
her sole discretion, such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the
utility provider which abandoned the facility to remove it by giving notice of
abandonment to the village the abandoning utility provider shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility provider or person.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.62 NO DELAY.
   A utility provider shall conduct all construction, relocation, and repairs
to facilities in a timely fashion so as not to delay any projects undertaken by
the village. All work shall be commenced and completed promptly as defined in §
155.59.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.63 CLEAN UP, RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   The utility provider shall remove all excess material and restore all turf
and terrain and other property within ten calendar days after any portion of
the public ways are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility provider. This shall be done to the satisfaction of
the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration
of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
Village Foreman. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, rough grading, final regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the public way to a condition substantially equivalent
to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. Under no
circumstances shall a utility provider dispose of any material into a storm or
sanitary sewer line within the village without the prior approval of the
Village Foreman. The time period provided in this section may be extended, in
his or her sole discretion, by the Village Foreman for good cause shown.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.64 MAINTENANCE; EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within public ways are to be maintained by or for the utility provider in a
manner satisfactory to the village at the utility provider’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   (a)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of
public ways, the utility provider shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the public
way, including the use of signs, lights, barricades, or flaggers. If a hazard
does not exist on the traveled portion of the public way, but the nature of the
emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided.
         (b)   Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be
permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility provider shall, as soon as possible,
notify the Village Foreman, or his or her duly authorized agents, of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the Village Police Department, the County Sheriff’s
Department, and the Village Fire Protection District shall be notified
immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility provider shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience
to the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility provider must file in writing with the
village a description of the repairs undertaken in the public way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.65 DAMAGE TO WATER LINES, SEWER LINES, LATERAL PIPES.
   In the event a utility provider damages a water line, sewer line or lateral
pipe and causes the village or any other person to incur expenses associated
with repairing the damage to the line caused by the utility provider, the
utility provider shall be liable for the costs of all repairs and damages
incurred by the village or private party as a result of the utility provider’s
damage to a water line, sewer line, or lateral pipe.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.66 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility provider requesting a variance from
one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Village Foreman as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Foreman shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Foreman may authorize
a variance only if the utility provider requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility
provider (such as terrain features or an irregular public way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities
that would conform to the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Foreman may require the utility provider
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter, but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility provider, aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision, or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the Village Foreman under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the Village President for the village. The application for
appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk for the village
within 30 calendar days after the date of such order, requirement, decision, or
determination. The Village President shall issue a decision on the appeal
within 14 calendar days after the filing of the appeal.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, permittee, utility provider or entity which violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a civil
ordinance violation and shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $750
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any
fine, the village may seek injunctive and declaratory relief directing the
violator(s) to cure the violation, and the village may revoke any permit
authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs,
including third party claims, because the person, permittee, or utility
provider will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the person, permittee, or utility provider shows another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
person, permittee, or utility provider shall bear the village costs of damages
and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing
the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency
or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility provider which does not pay
the costs apportioned to it.
   (C)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any provision of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any person, permittee, or utility provider, shall be deemed and
held to be the act of such person, permittee, or utility provider and the
person, permittee, or utility provider shall be punishable in the same manner
as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by him or her personally.
(Ord. 1008, passed 6-21-2023)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ZONING
      
III.   LAND USAGE
      
IV.   ANNEXATIONS AND VACATIONS; REAL ESTATE
      
V.   STREET NAMING
      
VI.   WEST MAIN STREET REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA
      
VII.   CENTRAL TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT
      
VIII.   APPOINTMENT ORDINANCES
      
IX.   APPROPRIATION ORDINANCES
      
X.   LEVY ORDINANCES
      
XI.   ENTERPRISE ZONE
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Franchise agreement for telegraph/telephone
73       9-6-1902    infrastructure.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
79       12-2-1905   Granting rights for telephone infrastructure.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to a light, heat, and power company to
100      8-5-1916    operate in the village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
113      1-11-1923   Agreement concerning transportation through the village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
128      2-2-1927    Granting a license to a telephone company.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
325      11-5-1941   Agreement concerning electricity for pumping.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
326      11-5-1941   Agreement concerning street lighting service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to a telephone company to operate in the
350      8-22-1947   village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
-        9-7-1949    Agreement concerning electricity for pumping.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to a telephone company to operate in the
357      9-7-1949    village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
367      6-6-1951    Agreement concerning electricity for pumping.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to a telephone company to operate in the
385      2-5-1958    village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
-        3-6-1958    Agreement concerning the Social Security Act.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing a company to operate and maintain a gas
391      8-13-1958   transmission main.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to a light, heat, and power company to
401      9-14-1960   operate in the village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
421      5-6-1964    Agreement with cable TV service provider.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
434      3-8-1967    Agreement with a company for street lighting service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
447      9-4-1968    Agreement with a company for street lighting service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
461      11-3-1971   Agreement concerning electricity for pumping.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
467      8-1-1973    Agreement with a company for street lighting service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Agreement with the Illinois Environmenta l Protection
478      4-2-1975    Agency.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
494      6-2-1976    Agreement with the City of Effingham for water service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
499      11-3-1976   Amendment to water service agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to the telephone company to operate in the
507      11-15-1977  village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
522      2-6-1980    Agreement with a company for street lighting service.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
526      7-2-1980    Water purchase contract.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
533      3-19-1981   Agreement concerning electricity for pumping.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
-        5-5-1981    Amendment to water service agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting United Cable Television of Southern Illinois,
537      2-17-1982   Inc. the right to operate an antenna television system.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting United Cable Television of Southern Illinois,
555      8-20-1986   Inc. the right to operate a cable television system.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
564      8-19-1987   Amendment to a water purchase contract.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to Norris Electric Cooperative to operate
686      8-2-2000    in the village.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
767      12-5-2007   agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
774      3-19-2008   agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
780      7-16-2008   agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to Ameren CIPS to operate a gas utility
782      8-6-2008    system.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
794      2-3-2010    agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Granting rights to Ameren CIPS to operate an electric
799      9-1-2010    utility system.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
809      10-19-2011  agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Extending the expiration date of the cable franchise
822      8-1-2012    agreement.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
857      8-19-2015   Service provider fee for Mediacom Illinois, LLC.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing sale of real estate in Prairie View
892      10-18-2017  Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of termination agreement (Tina J.
897      2-21-2018   Hoelscher, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 35).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing platting and restrictive covenants of Prairie
900      4-18-2018   View Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
911      3-6-2019    possibility of reverter (J. Sparks, et al., Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 40).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
912      3-20-2019   possibility of reverter (Imagine It Investments, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 35).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
913      4-17-2019   possibility of reverter (James R. Miller, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 4).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
914      4-17-2019   possibility of reverter (Jared M. Purcell, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 8).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
915      5-1-2019    possibility of reverter (Ryan Buscher, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 9).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
918      7-3-2019    possibility of reverter (Nathaniel Niemrg, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 31).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
919      7-3-2019    possibility of reverter (Jordan L. Pals, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 7).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
922      8-7-2019    possibility of reverter (Stephen Quandt, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 5).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
925      9-18-2019   possibility of reverter (B&E Developers, LLC, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 36).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
926      10-2-2019   possibility of reverter (Drew Sudkamp, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 33).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
927      10-2-2019   possibility of reverter (Imagine It Investments, LLC,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 34).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
928      10-16-2019  possibility of reverter (Lawrence A. Thoele, et al.,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 10).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
929      11-20-2019  possibility of reverter (Philip Repking, et al., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 6).
                     Authorizing the transfer of real estate (Bradley W.
930      1-15-2020   Bowling, et ux., Prairie View Subdivision Lot 49).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
931      1-15-2020   Authorizing the transfer of real estate (Aaron Stortzum,
                     et ux., Prairie View Subdivision Lot 45).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
932      1-15-2020   possibility of reverter (Jacob E. Meyer, et ux., Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 32).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing Second Amendment to platting and restrictive
934      2-5-2020    covenants of Prairie View Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Amending Ord. 892 and authorizing the sale of real estate
935      2-5-2020    (Prairie View Subdivision, agreement to purchase).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
936      2-19-2020   possibility of reverter (B&E Developers, LLC, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 44).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
937      3-18-2020   possibility of reverter (SNB Investments, LLC, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 46).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
939      4-15-2020   possibility of reverter (Ronald G. Goldstein, et ux.,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 38).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing the transfer of real estate (HRR Development
940      5-6-2020    Group, LLC, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 37).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
942      5-20-2020   possibility of reverter (Bradley W. Bowling, et ux.,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 49).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
948      8-5-2020    Authorizing the Transfer of Real Estate (Jane M. Pruemer,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 48).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
952      10-7-2020   possibility of reverter (Pummill, Prairie View Subdivision
                     Lot 11).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
955      11-4-2020   possibility of reverter (Imagine It Investments, LLC,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 12).
                     Agreement between the village and the state, through the
                     Department of Transportatio n, relative to the improvement
953      1-6-2021    of FAU 8354 (U.S. 40), State Section (J, G) RS-3, 16Z RS-
                     2 by milling and hot-mix asphalt resurfacing from each of
                     Salt Creek east to east of 1500th Avenue east of the
                     village.
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
957      3-3-2021    possibility of reverter (SNB Investments, LLC, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 18).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
959      4-7-2021    possibility of reverter (HHR Development Group, LLC,
                     Prairie View Subdivision Lot 37).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
960      4-21-2021   possibility of reverter (B&E Developers, LLC, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 26).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
961      4-21-2021   possibility of reverter (B&E Developers, LLC, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 54).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
962      5-5-2021    possibility of reverter (Marjorie J. Haarmann, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 60).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
965      5-19-2021   possibility of reverter (Bradley E. Jeffries and Laura K.
                     Jeffries, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 25).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
966      5-19-2021   possibility of reverter (Brent Sandschafer and Holly
                     Sandschafer, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 19).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
968      6-16-2021   possibility of reverter (Jane M. Pruemer Trust, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 48).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
971      8-18-2021   possibility of reverter (William F. Casselman and Kathleen
                     Casselman, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 14).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing the transfer of real estate (P.E.L. Land
972      9-15-2021   Trust, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 16).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Amending Ordinance No. 892, and Authorizing the Sale
974      10-6-2021   Transfer of Real Estate (Prairie View Subdivision).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
975      10-20-2021  possibility of reverter (Belle Maison Homes, LLC, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 17).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing the transfer of real estate (W. David Toombs
977      11-3-2021   and Joyce E. Tombs, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 15).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
982      1-5-2022    possibility of reverter (Adam and Amy Goecker, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 30).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
983      1-19-2022   possibility of reverter (W. David Toombs and Joyce E.
                     Toombs, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 15).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing third amendment to certificate of platting and
984      2-2-2022    certificate of restrictions and covenants of Prairie View
                     Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing the Transfer of Real Estate (P.E.L. Land
993      9-21-2022   Trust, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 16).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1003     5-3-2023    possibility of reverter (Angela M. Hotze, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 13).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1004     5-17-2023   possibility of reverter (Jacob E. Hoelscher and Brittany
                     A. Hoelscher, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 55).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1006     6-7-2023    possibility of reverter (Belle Maison Homes, LLC, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 17).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing the Transfer of Real Estate (Brent Probst and
1007     6-7-2023    Andrea Palac, Prairie View Subdivision Lot 29).
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table I)
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1014     7-19-2023   possibility of reverter (Aaron L. Hoelscher, Prairie View
                     Subdivision Lot 24).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1016     9-6-2023    possibility of reverter (P.E.L. Land Trust/Platz, Prairie
                     View Subdivision Lot 16).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1025     12-6-2023   possibility of reverter (Brent Probst and Andrea Palac -
                     Lot 29).
1044     4-3-2024    Authorizing execution of license agreement (Steven and
                     Nicole Gray - 207 W. Walnut Street).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1045     4-3-2024    possibility of reverter (Belle Maison Homes, LLC - Lot
                     50).
1052     5-15-2024   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Todd and Allison Mette - Lot 58).
1056     7-8-2024    Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Aaron Hoelscher - Lot 23).
1059     8-7-2024    Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Ryan Sandschafer - Lot 22).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1062     9-4-2024    possibility of reverter (Gebben Construction, LLC - Lot
                     52).
1074     1-15-2025   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Aaron Hoelscher - Lot 43).
1078     2-19-2025   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Deters - Lot 59).
1083     4-16-2025   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Zuber - Lot 27).
1086     5-7-2025    Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Rincker - Lot 39).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1087     5-7-2025    possibility of reverter (Fieldcrest Development, LLC - Lot
                     47).
1095     6-18-2025   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Schmidgall - Lot 56).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1105     7-16-2025   possibility of reverter (Belle Maison Homes, LLC - Lot
                     51).
                     Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
1107     8-6-2025    possibility of reverter (Imagine It Investments, LLC - Lot
                     20).
1110     8-6-2025    Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Adam T. Hoene - Lot 1).
1113     11-5-2025   Authorizing execution of release of reservation of
                     possibility of reverter (Garrett L. Bartels - Lot 42).
                    
 
TABLE II: ZONING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Changing the classification of the zoning district from
787      3-18-2009   NU, Non-Urban Housing to M, Industrial District.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table II)
                     Changing the classification of the zoning district from M,
837      5-7-2014    Industrial District to B-2, General Commercial District.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table II)
                     Changing the classification of 613 W. Walnut Street from
879      5-17-2017   R-2, Two-Family Residence District, to R-4. Attached
                     Single-Family Residence District.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table II)
                     Changing the classification of the zoning district from
889      8-2-2017    NU, Non-Urban Housing to R-1, Single-Family Residence
                     District: E/2 E/2 SE/4 Section 24.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table II)
                    
 
TABLE III: LAND USAGE
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
366      3-7-1951    Leasing Outlots 114 through 117.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
373      9-3-1952    Leasing property on Lot 130, Block 3 to the county.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
398      6-1-1960    Granting an easement for electric transmission equipment.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
530      12-17-1980  Lease agreement for property owned by Larry McMahon.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
577      3-21-1990   Vacating an easement in Lot 1 of Lidy Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
                     Vacating easements in Lots 55 and 56 of Rhine Ridge
607      1-5-1994    Subdivision Addition D.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
641      1-9-1997    Leasing property to Stevens Industries, Inc.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
813      3-7-2012    Extending lease with Stevens Industries, Inc.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
853      5-20-2015   Lease agreement with St. Francis of Assisi Parish.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
                     Authorizing purchase of real estate from K. Marquardt, et
874      4-5-2017    al.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
                     Authorizing sale of real estate in Prairie View
892      10-18-2017  Subdivision.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
951      9-16-2020   Authorizing purchase of real estate from Nicholas L.
                     Martin, et al.
954      10-21-2020  Authorizing purchase of real estate from James Tolliver,
                     et al.
                     Authorizing grant of easement (Project: Ameren Illinois
990      6-15-2022   Company, doing business as Ameren Illinois, an Illinois
                     corporation). Renumbered by Ordinance passed on 6-15-2022.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
1000     2-1-2023    Farm lease agreement with John B. Meyer.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table III)
1026     12-20-2023  Authorizing sale of real estate in Prairie View
                     Subdivision.
1030     2-7-2024    Authorizing purchase of 816 S. John Street from Rodrigo
                     Santana De Camargo and Jaelen A. Deters.
1031     2-21-2024   Authorizing purchase of sidewalk easement at 309 E. Main
                     Street from The Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield.
1032     2-21-2024   Authorizing transfer of 813 S. Oak Street to Todd and
                     Allison Mette.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1034     3-6-2024    purposes at 601 S. Race Street from Scott and Tina
                     Brumleve.
1035     3-6-2024    Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 605 W. Elm Street from Kenneth Hardiek.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1039     3-20-2024   purposes at 308 S. Wall Street from Mark and Christina
                     Probst.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1040     3-20-2024   purposes at W. Southern Row from Mark and Christina
                     Probst.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1041     3-20-2024   purposes at 801 W. Southern Row from Seth and Traci
                     Hoffman.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1042     4-3-2024    purposes at 408 W. Southern Row from Roy and Marsha
                     Brumleve.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1043     4-3-2024    purposes at 410 S. Wooden Shoe Road from Jason and Stacey
                     Ruholl.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1049     5-1-2024    purposes at 503 W. Northern Row from Stephen and Marlene
                     Hille.
1050     5-1-2024    Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 415 S. Smith Street from Meinhart Trust.
1051     5-1-2024    Authorizing transfer of 812 S. John Street to Ryan
                     Sandschafer.
1053     6-5-2024    Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 201 W. Elm Street from Kahtz Land Trust.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1058     8-7-2024    purposes at 310 S. Race Street from Estate of Sherry
                     Pruemer.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1061     8-21-2024   purposes at 612 S. Wooden Shoe Road from David and Roxanna
                     Apke.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1063     9-4-2024    purposes at 600 S. Wooden Shoe Road from Thomas and
                     Margaret Mette.
1069     11-20-2024  Authorizing purchase of drainage easement at 6 Meadowview
                     Drive from Michael and Cindy Gaddis.
1070     11-20-2024  Authorizing purchase of drainage easement at 515 E. Main
                     Street from Lauren Thoele.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1071     12-4-2024   purposes at 817 W. Southern Row from Neil and Noelle
                     Zerrusen.
1072     12-18-2024  Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 504 Wooden Shoe Road from Linda Pruemer.
                     Authorizing purchase of certificate of dedication of
1073     1-15-2025   right-of-way for public street and utility purposes at 325
                     E. Main Street and 105 S. Oak Street from Teutopolis
                     Community School District.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1076     2-19-2025   purposes at 105 S. Oak Street from Teutopolis Community
                     Unit School District.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1077     2-19-2025   purposes at 609 E. Main Street from The Roman Catholic
                     Diocese of Springfield.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1080     3-19-2025   purposes at 401 E. Main Street from Jacob and Katherine
                     Pruemer.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1081     3-19-2025   purposes at 516 S. Wooden Shoe Road from Stephen and
                     Sharon Miller.
1082     4-2-2025    Authorizing purchase of 511 John Street from Blake and
                     Hannah Schumacher.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1091     6-18-2025   purposes at 705 S. John Street from Belle Maison Homes,
                     LLC.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1092     6-18-2025   purposes at 209 Morning Glory Lane from Charles J. and
                     Gerilyn J. Stuckey.
1093     6-18-2025   Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 813 S. Oak Street from Todd and Alison Mette.
1094     6-18-2025   Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 709 S. Oak Street from Linda M. Workman.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1097     7-16-2025   purposes at 208 E. Primrose Avenue from Darren Anthony
                     Probst.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1098     7-2-2025    purposes at 713 S. Oak Street from Kevin V. Hoene, Adam T.
                     Hoene, and Matt L. Schumacher.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1099     7-2-2025    purposes at 809 S. Oak Street from Fieldcrest Development,
                     LLC.
                     Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
1100     7-2-2025    purposes at 801 S. Oak Street from Jacob E. and Brittany
                     A. Hoelscher.
1101     7-2-2025    Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 805 S. Oak Street from Lee Ann Schmidgall.
1102     7-2-2025    Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 17976 E. 1400th Avenue from Nicole Ann Deters.
1104     7-16-2025   Authorizing transfer of 509 S. Oak Street to Aaron
                     Hoelscher.
1106     8-6-2025    Authorizing transfer of 713 S. Oak Street to Kevin V.
                     Hoene, Adam T. Hoene, and Matt L. Schumacher.
1112     9-17-2025   Authorizing transfer of 809 S. Oak Street to Fieldcrest
                     Development, LLC.
1115     12-3-2025   Authorizing purchase of easement for sidewalk and utility
                     purposes at 209 S. Oak Street from Wendy S. Hawickhorst.
                    
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS AND VACATIONS; REAL ESTATE
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
94   7-6-   Section 13, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1912   meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
330  7-1-   Vacation of a portion of Garrett Street.
     1942   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
331  4-28-  Incorporating the John Hakman Addition to the village.
     1943   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
338  5-3-   Vacation of a portion of Washington Street.
     1944   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
339  5-3-   Vacation of a portion of Plum Street.
     1944   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
343  4-4-   Sale of property near Outlot 121.
     1945   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
352  12-15- Vacation of alleys in the John Hakman Addition.
     1947   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
365  11-18- Sale of a portion of Outlots 114 through 117.
     1950   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation concerning the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
423  9-2-   Section 13, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1964   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
429  5-4-   Vacation of a portion of Herin Street.
     1966   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
430  5-4-   Vacation of a portion of Plum Street.
     1966   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     3-4-   Annexation of part of Lot 12 of the north half of Section 23, Township 8
454  1970   north, Range 6 east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     6-27-  Annexation of part of Lot 2 of Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6
465  1973   east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
483  6-4-   Conveying property to the county for highway improvement.
     1975   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
493  6-2-   Conveying property to the county for development.
     1976   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
521  1-16-  Vacation of a portion of Walnut Street.
     1980   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     6-18-  Annexation of land near the northeast corner of Section 23, Township 8,
524  1980   Range 6 east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
538  3-17-  Vacation of a portion of Walnut Street.
     1982   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
549  6-5-   Vacation of a portion of Smith Street.
     1985   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the southeast corner of the southeast quarter of
550  6-5-   Section 13, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1985   meridian lying south of Walnut Street.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
557  11-19- Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1986   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter
560  12-3-  of Section 13, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1986   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
561  12-3-  Annexation of Lot 3 of First Addition to Teutopolis Commercial Park.
     1986   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of Lot 2 of First Addition to Teutopolis Commercial Park
567  12-2-  being a part of Lot 2 of the north half of Section 23, Township 8 north,
     1987   Range 6 east of the third principal meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
571  4-5-   Annexation of property owned by Robert and Harold Drees.
     1989   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of Lot 2 of Hakman’s Subdivision of a part of the
578  4-4-   southwest fractional quarter of Section 18, Township 8 north, Range 7
     1990   east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
582  11-21- Vacation of a part of Water Street.
     1990   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter
586  5-15-  of Section 14, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1991   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
588  6-5-   Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1991   meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
606  12-1-  Annexation of the Rhine Ridge Subdivision Addition D.
     1993   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
609  2-16-  Vacation of an alley along the south side of Outlot 142.
     1994   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
611  5-4-   Annexation of the Paul Kralman Subdivision.
     1994   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
620  4-5-   Annexation of the Rhine Ridge Subdivision Addition E.
     1995   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of
626  7-19-  Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     1995   meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
628  11-15- Vacation of a portion of Washington Street.
     1995   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section
629  2-21-  14, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal meridian, with
     1996   exceptions.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
638  8-21-  Vacation of an alley along the west side of Block 47.
     1996   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Exchange of property including a part of the southeast quarter of the
642  1-22-  southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the
     1997   third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the southeast fractional quarter of Section 18,
655  12-17- Township 8 north, Range 7 east of the third principal meridian, and
     1997   other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
661  7-1-   Vacation of a portion of Smith Street.
     1998   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     2-17-  Vacation of an alley along the west line of Sections 13 and 24, Township
667  1999   8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter
692  2-7-   of Section 25, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     2001   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
701  7-18-  Vacation of the plat of K&W Subdivision, First Addition.
     2001   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     1-16-  Sell of property located in the northeast quarter of Section 24,
709  2002   Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
712  6-19-  Vacation of a portion of Green Street.
     2002   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
716  11-6-  Vacation of a portion of Plum Street.
     2002   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     11-20- Annexation of part of Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the
717  2002   third principal meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
724  3-19-  Vacation of the plat of Jerry Walkers Subdivision.
     2003   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
735  4-7-   Exchange of property including Outlots 117 and 118.
     2004   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
749  1-19-  Annexation of lots in the August Winds Subdivision, First Addition.
     2005   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter
755  3-15-  of Section 24, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     2006   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
769  3-5-   Vacation of a portion of Elm Street.
     2008   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
781  7-16-  Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     2008   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Vacation of an alley beginning at the intersection of the north line of
     9-1-   Walnut Street, as extended, with the east line of Outlot 141, thence
800  2010   north along the east lines of Outlots 141 through 135 to the north line
            of Outlot 135.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of a part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter
803  4-6-   of Section 14, Township 8 north, Range 6 east of the third principal
     2011   meridian, and other property.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Annexation of part of the west half of the west half of the southwest
824  10-17- quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 8 north, Range
     2012   6 east of the third principal meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
            Vacating a portion of Wall Street lying adjacent to and within Outlots
            109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 117, 118, 119, 120, and 121, except that part
859  1-6-   lying within five feet of even width of the south side of Outlot 113 and
     2016   the part lying within five feet of even width of the west half of the
            south side of Outlot 121.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
863  7-6-   Vacating all of Green Street, lying south of the south line of Lot 2 of
     2016   Green Street Subdivision.
            Annexation of the north half of the southeast quarter of the northeast
867  7-20-  quarter of Section 23, Township 8 north, Range 6 east, third principal
     2016   meridian.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
875  4-19-  Annexation of Francis A. Brummer, et al.
     2017   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
     11-15- Annexation of William Zerrusen Family Holdings, LLC, and Theodore J.
894  2017   Rhodes, et al.
            (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
899  4-4-   Annexation of Brooke L. Martin property.
     2018
910  2-6-   Vacating a portion of Herin Street.
     2019   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
938  4-1-   Vacating a portion of Green Street.
     2020   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV)
           
 
TABLE V: STREET NAMING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     The street located south of, and adjacent to, Lots 1
584      1-2-1991    through 5 of Buhnerkempe Subdivision is named State
                     Street.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table V)
                     The public road which runs north and south on the west
657      12-17-1997  side of Outlots 61 through 71 is named Wooden Shoe Road.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table V)
                     East 1400th Avenue, between its intersection with the west
                     right-of-way line of Wooden Shoe Road and its intersection
693      2-7-2001    with the east right-of-way line of Smith Street is named
                     Deutsch Road.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table V)
                     The public road which runs north and south in said
                     subdivision, along the east side of Lot 1 and the west
721      12-4-2002   side of Lot 2, to the south side of Lot 3 is named
                     Automotive Street.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table V)
891      9-20-2017   Naming Farmweld Avenue.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table V)
                    
 
TABLE VI: WEST MAIN STREET REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Approving the tax increment redevelopmen t plan and
841      8-20-2014   project area.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
842      8-20-2014   Designating the project area.
843      8-20-2014   Adopting tax increment financing for the project area.
847      3-18-2015   Amendment to Ord. 841.
848      3-18-2015   Amendment to Ord. 842.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
849      3-18-2015   Amendment to Ord. 843.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
                     An ordinance authorizing the execution of a TIF
963      9-1-2021    redevelopmen t agreement with SRMD Solutions, an Illinois
                     Limited Liability Company.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
                     An ordinance authorizing the execution of a TIF
986      4-6-2022    redevelopmen t agreement with Brumleve Properties, an
                     Illinois Limited Liability Company.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
                     Authorizing grant of easement; Ameren Illinois Company,
989      6-1-2022    doing business as Ameren Illinois.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
                     An ordinance authorizing the first amendment to TIF
                     Redevelopme nt Agreement between the Village of Teutopolis
996      9-21-2022   and SRMD Solutions, LLC, an Illinois Limited Liability
                     Company.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VI)
1021     10-18-2023  Authorizing the first amendment to TIF Redevelopme nt
                     Agreement between the village and Farmweld, Inc.
                    
 
TABLE VII: CENTRAL TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     An ordinance approving the Village of Teutopolis central
886      8-2-2017    tax increment financing redevelopmen t project area
                     redevelopmen t plan and project.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VII)
                     An ordinance designating the Village of Teutopolis central
887      8-2-2017    tax increment financing redevelopmen t project area.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VII)
                     An ordinance adopting tax increment financing for the
888      8-2-2017    Village of Teutopolis central tax increment financing
                     redevelopmen t project area.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VII)
                     An ordinance authorizing the execution of a tax increment
943      5-20-2020   financing agreement with Siemer Milling Company.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VII)
                     Authorizing the execution of a contract for private
1019     9-20-2023   development pursuant to the village plan for the central
                     tax increment financing redevelopmen t project area with
                     Repking Eye Care, PLLC.
                     Authorizing the first amendment to contract for private
1029     2-7-2024    development pursuant to the village plan for the central
                     tax increment financing redevelopmen t project area with
                     Repking Eye Care, PLLC.
                    
 
TABLE VIII: APPOINTMENT ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
852      5-20-2015   FY 2016.
862      5-4-2016    FY 2017.
877      5-17-2017   FY 2018.
890      8-16-2017   Appointment ordinance.
902      5-2-2018    FY 2019.
917      6-5-2019    FY 2020.
921      7-17-2019   FY 2020; supplemental ordinance.
941      5-20-2020   FY 2021.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
964      5-19-2021   FY 2022.
973      10-6-2021   Appointing Taylor Law Offices.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
979      12-1-2021   Amending FY 2022.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
987      5-4-2022    FY 2023.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
988      5-18-2022   Amending FY 2023.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
1002     5-3-2023    FY 2024.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table VIII)
1015     9-6-2023    Amending Ord. 1002.
1028     2-7-2024    FY 2024.
1047     4-17-2024   FY 2025.
1084     4-16-2025   FY 2026.
                    
 
TABLE IX: APPROPRIATION ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
856      6-17-2015   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2015 and ending April 30,
                     2015.
865      7-6-2016    Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2016 and ending April 30,
                     2017.
884      7-19-2017   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2017 and ending April 30,
                     2017.
904      7-18-2018   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2018 and ending April 30,
                     2019.
920      7-17-2019   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2019 and ending April 30,
                     2020.
946      7-15-2020   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2002 and ending April 30,
                     2021.
                     Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2021 and Ending April 30,
970      7-21-2021   2022.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IX)
                     Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2022 and Ending April 30,
991      7-20-2022   2023.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IX)
                     Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2023 and Ending April 30,
1005     6-7-2023    2024.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table IX)
1090     6-18-2025   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2025 and ending April 30,
                     2026.
                    
 
TABLE X: LEVY ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
          
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
          
858      10-21-2015  Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2015 and ending April 30,
                     2016.
869      9-21-2016   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2016 and ending April 30,
                     2017.
893      10-18-2017  Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2017 and ending April 30,
                     2018.
907      10-17-2018  Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2018 and ending April 30,
                     2019.
924      9-18-2019   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2019 and ending April 30,
                     2020.
950      9-16-2020   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2020 and ending April 30,
                     2021.
                     Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2021 and ending April 30,
976      11-3-2021   2022.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table X)
                     Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2022 and ending April 30,
997      10-19-2022  2023.
                     (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table X)
1024     11-15-2023  Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2023 and ending April 30,
                     2024.
1064     10-2-2024   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2024 and ending April 30,
                     2025.
1111     9-17-2025   Fiscal year commencing May 1, 2025 and ending April 30,
                     2026.
                    
 
TABLE XI: ENTERPRISE ZONE
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
992      - -         Teutopolis, Illinois, amending the City of Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone (2022 Enterprise Zone
                     Boundary Modifications).
                   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table XI)
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
                     Teutopolis, Illinois, enacting a policy statement
1018     - -         expressing a commitment to encourage the development of
                     business entities and the hiring of individuals defined as
                     minorities, women, and persons with disabilities within
                     the City of Effingham/Effingham County Enterprise Zone.
                     Establishing an Enterprise Zone in the City of Effingham,
868      8-17-2016   Illinois, and the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the
                     Village of Teutopolis, Illinois.
                   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table XI)
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
969      7-20-2021   Teutopolis, Illinois, amending the City of Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone (Enterprise Zone Boundary
                     Modifications).
                     Joint ordinance amending Ord. 71-2016 to modify local
994      9-21-2022   incentives and property tax abatements for the Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone.
                   (Prior Code, Table of Special Ordinances, Table XI)
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
1009     8-6-2025    Teutopolis, Illinois, amending the City of Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone (2025 Enterprise Zone
                     Boundary Modifications).
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
1017     9-6-2023    Teutopolis, Illinois, amending the City of Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone (2023 Enterprise Zone
                     Boundary Modifications).
                     Joint ordinance of the City of Effingham, Illinois, and
                     the County of Effingham, Illinois, and the Village of
1033     2-21-2024   Teutopolis, Illinois, amending the City of Effingham/
                     Effingham County Enterprise Zone (2024 Enterprise Zone
                     Boundary Modifications).
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                    Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                  10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                  10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                     10.04
5 ILCS 120                      31.080
5 ILCS 140/1                    32.02
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.            32.06
5 ILCS 140/6(b)                 32.02
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.          32.03
5 ILCS 430/5 through 15         32.03
5 ILCS 430/10-10 et seq.        32.04
5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40  32.02
5 ILCS 430/20-5                 32.04
5 ILCS 430/20-23                32.04
5 ILCS 430/50-5                 32.03
5 ILCS 430/70-5                 32.03;
                                32.04
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)              32.03
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)              32.03
20 ILCS 1605/et seq.            135.02
20 ILCS 1605/7.12               135.02
20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.       137.02
25 ILCS 610/16                  92.002
30 ILCS 405                     52.60
30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.           50.01
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.           33.06
35 ILCS 115/9                   33.07
35 ILCS 120/2-27                33.02
35 ILCS 120/3                   33.08
35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.           33.09
35 ILCS 145/2                   33.09
35 ILCS 145/5                   33.09
35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.         33.03
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.           33.02
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.           33.02
35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.         33.02
35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.           33.02
35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.         155.25
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.            33.03
50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.           30.02
55 ILCS 5/3-9005                137.02
55 ILCS 5/5-1127                70.01
65 ILCS 5                       10.02;
                                30.04
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                 10.02
                                10.99;
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                 115.99;
                                151.01
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1               10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4                 33.08
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30             31.022
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                33.08
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5                33.07
65 ILCS 5/8-11-6                33.06
65 ILCS 5/11-1-5                132.02
65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5              154.004;
                                154.097
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12              151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2               151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8               151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2               151.01
65 ILCS 5/11-42-5               Ch. 112
65 ILCS 5/11-60-1               110.02
65 ILCS 5/11-131-1              33.01
65 ILCS 5/11-143-1              33.04
70 ILCS 1205/3-9                70.01
205 ILCS 740                    132.01
210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.       132.01
210 ILCS 47/1-101 et seq.       132.01
220 ILCS 5                      33.02
220 ILCS 5/9-221                33.02
220 ILCS 5/9-222                33.02
220 ILCS 5/9-222.2              33.02
220 ILCS 5/21-401               155.04
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.           155.59
220 ILCS 65/4                   155.26
225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq.        137.02
225 ILCS 610/1.1 et seq.        92.002
230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.           135.02;
                                135.03
230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.           135.02
230 ILCS 20/et seq.             135.02
230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.           111.03
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.           111.03;
                                135.02
230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.           135.02
                                111.03;
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.           135.02;
                                135.03
                                111.02;
235 ILCS 5                      111.04;
                                111.24;
                                111.45
235 ILCS 5/3-1                  111.02
410 ILCS 705                    114.01
415 ILCS 5                      92.002
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.            92.001
415 ILCS 5/3.360                136.01;
                                136.02
415 ILCS 5/57.2                 154.004
415 ILCS 105/3                  136.01
415 ILCS 105/4                  136.02
415 ILCS 105/5                  136.03
415 ILCS 105/6                  136.04
415 ILCS 105/8(a), (b)          136.99
415 ILCS 105/8(a), (b), (d)     136.99
415 ILCS 105/8(c)               136.07
415 ILCS 105/9                  136.05
415 ILCS 105/10                 136.06
430 ILCS 65/0.01 through 16-3   Ch. 137
430 ILCS 150/1                  92.005
515 ILCS 5                      137.03
520 ILCS 5                      137.03
525 ILCS 30/3.11                131.02
525 ILCS 30/3.14                131.02
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.        155.04
605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.          70.35
605 ILCS 120/50                 136.99
615 ILCS 5/18(g)                151.01
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.        136.01
625 ILCS 5/1-101.8              71.01
625 ILCS 5/1-102                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-104.2              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-105                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-106                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-107                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-108                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-111.8              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-112                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-113                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-116                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-117.7              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-120                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-120.7              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-123.9              71.01
625 ILCS 5/1-125                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-126                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-130                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-131                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-132                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-135                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-136                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-137                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-138                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-139.1              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-140                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-140.10             70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-140.15             70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-141                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-145.001            70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-146                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-147                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-148.2              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3a-5           70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-148.6              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-153                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-154                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-155                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-156                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-157                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-157.5              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-158                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-159.1              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-162                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-162.3              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-162.5              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-163                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-166                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-166.1              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-167                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-167.5              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-168                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-169                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-171                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-171.6              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-171.8              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-172                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-174                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-176                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-177                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-178                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-179                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-181                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-182                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-187                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-187.1              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-188                10.02;
                                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-193                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-194                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-195                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-196                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-197                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-199                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-200                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-201                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-203                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-205                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-205.1              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-207                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-208                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-209                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-210.01             70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-211                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-211.01             70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-212                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-214                70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-214.8              70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-217                70.01;
                                131.02
625 ILCS 5/3-101(d)             70.01
625 ILCS 5/11-203               70.15;
                                70.99
625 ILCS 5/11-205               70.16
625 ILCS 5/11-206               70.17
625 ILCS 5/11-208(a) et seq.    Ch. 72, Schd. IV
625 ILCS 5/11-301               70.01;
                                70.19
625 ILCS 5/11-302               70.41
625 ILCS 5/11-305               70.30
625 ILCS 5/11-306               70.31
625 ILCS 5/11-307               70.32
625 ILCS 5/11-308               70.33
625 ILCS 5/11-309               70.34
625 ILCS 5/11-310               70.35
625 ILCS 5/11-311               70.36;
                                70.99
625 ILCS 5/11-312               70.37;
                                70.99
625 ILCS 5/11-313               70.38
625 ILCS 5/11-502               71.02
625 ILCS 5/11-605               Ch. 72, Schd. II
625 ILCS 5/11-1204              70.41
625 ILCS 5/12-201               71.02
625 ILCS 5/12-215               70.11
625 ILCS 5/12.709               71.02
625 ILCS 5/12-801               70.01
625 ILCS 5/12-802(a)            70.01
625 ILCS 5/12-803               70.01
625 ILCS 5/12-805               70.01
625 ILCS 5/15-111               Ch. 72, Schd. IV
625 ILCS 5/15-316               Ch. 72, Schd. IV
625 ILCS 5/16-101 et seq.       70.99
625 ILCS 40                     70.01
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.        132.99
720 ILCS 5/2-2                  130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-3                  130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-4                  130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-12                 130.01
720 ILCS 5/4-4                  130.02
720 ILCS 5/4-5                  130.03
720 ILCS 5/4-6                  130.04
720 ILCS 5/4-7                  130.05
720 ILCS 5/6D-2                 135.01
720 ILCS 5/8-4                  130.06
720 ILCS 5/11-9                 134.01
720 ILCS 5/11-20                134.02
720 ILCS 5/11-21                134.03
720 ILCS 5/12-12                134.01
720 ILCS 5/12c-60               132.02
                                130.99;
720 ILCS 5/21-1                 131.01;
                                131.03
720 ILCS 5/21-1.4               131.04
720 ILCS 5/21-3                 131.02
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(1)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(2)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(3)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(4)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(5)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7)           137.02;
                                137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(8)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(9)           137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(10)          137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(11)          137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(13)          137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(c)              137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)              137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-2(a)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(b)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(d)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(e)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(f)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(g)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(g-1)            137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(h)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(i)              137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1               137.03
720 ILCS 5/24-6                 137.04
720 ILCS 5/24.8-0.1             137.15
720 ILCS 5/24.8-1               137.16
720 ILCS 5/24.8-2               137.17
720 ILCS 5/24.8-3               137.18;
                                137.19
720 ILCS 5/24.8-4               137.19
720 ILCS 5/24.8-5               137.20
720 ILCS 5/26-1                 132.01
720 ILCS 5/28-1                 135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4)           135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-2(a)(4)           135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-3                 135.03
720 ILCS 5/28-5(a)              135.04
720 ILCS 5/28-5(b)              135.04
720 ILCS 5/31-1                 133.01
720 ILCS 5/31-8                 133.02
720 ILCS 5/32-9                 133.03
720 ILCS 5 Title VIII Art. 124B 134.02
720 ILCS 30                     132.02
720 ILCS 505/1                  92.005
725 ILCS 5/112A-3(7)            131.02
725 ILCS 5/112A-14(b)           131.02
725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.          137.02
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.        115.04;
                                154.034
815 ILCS 333                    10.02
820 ILCS 305                    155.40
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section                     Code Section
10.01                                  10.01
10.02                                  10.02
10.03                                  10.03
10.04                                  10.04
10.05                                  10.05
10.06                                  10.06
10.07                                  10.07
10.08                                  10.08
10.09                                  10.09
10.10                                  10.10
10.11                                  10.11
10.12                                  10.12
10.13                                  10.13
10.14                                  10.14
10.15                                  10.15
10.16                                  10.16
10.17                                  10.17
10.99                                  10.99
30.01                                  30.01
30.02                                  30.02
30.03                                  30.03
30.05                                  30.04
31.001                                 31.001
31.015                                 31.015
31.016                                 31.016
31.018                                 31.018
31.019                                 31.019
31.020                                 31.020
31.021                                 31.021
31.022                                 31.022
31.023                                 31.023
31.024                                 31.024
31.025                                 31.025
31.040                                 31.040
31.041                                 31.041
31.042                                 31.042
31.055                                 31.055
31.056                                 31.056
31.057                                 31.057
31.058                                 31.058
31.059                                 31.059
31.060                                 31.060
31.061                                 31.061
31.062                                 31.062
31.063                                 31.063
31.064                                 31.064
31.065                                 31.065
31.066                                 31.066
31.067                                 31.067
31.068                                 31.068
31.069                                 31.069
32.01                                  32.01
32.02                                  32.02
32.03                                  32.03
32.04                                  32.04
32.05                                  32.05
33.01                                  33.01
33.02                                  33.02
33.03                                  33.03
33.04                                  33.04
33.05                                  33.05
33.06                                  33.06
33.07                                  33.07
33.08                                  33.08
50.01                                  50.01
50.02                                  50.02
50.15                                  50.15
50.16                                  50.16
50.17                                  50.17
50.18                                  50.18
50.19                                  50.19
50.20                                  50.20
50.21                                  50.21
50.22                                  50.22
50.23                                  50.23
50.24                                  50.24
50.35                                  50.35
50.36                                  50.36
50.37                                  50.37
50.38                                  50.38
50.39                                  50.39
50.40                                  50.40
50.41                                  50.41
50.42                                  50.42
50.43                                  50.43
50.55                                  50.55
50.56                                  50.56
50.57                                  50.57
50.58                                  50.58
50.59                                  50.59
50.60                                  50.60
50.61                                  50.61
50.62                                  50.62
50.63                                  50.63
50.64                                  50.64
51.01                                  51.01
51.02                                  51.02
51.03                                  51.03
51.15                                  51.15
51.16                                  51.16
51.17                                  51.17
51.18                                  51.18
51.19                                  51.19
51.20                                  51.20
51.21                                  51.21
51.35                                  51.35
51.36                                  51.36
51.37                                  51.37
51.38                                  51.38
51.39                                  51.39
51.40                                  51.40
51.41                                  51.41
51.55                                  51.55
51.56                                  51.56
51.57                                  51.57
51.58                                  51.58
52.01                                  52.01
52.02                                  52.02
52.03                                  52.03
52.15                                  52.15
52.16                                  52.16
52.17                                  52.17
52.18                                  52.18
52.19                                  52.19
52.21                                  52.21
52.22                                  52.22
52.24                                  52.23
52.25                                  52.24
52.26                                  52.25
52.40                                  52.40
52.41                                  52.41
52.42                                  52.42
52.43                                  52.43
52.44                                  52.44
52.45                                  52.45
52.46                                  52.46
52.47                                  52.47
70.01                                  70.01
70.10                                  70.15
70.11                                  70.16
70.12                                  70.17
70.13                                  70.18
70.30                                  70.30
70.31                                  70.31
70.32                                  70.32
70.33                                  70.33
70.34                                  70.34
70.35                                  70.35
70.36                                  70.36
70.37                                  70.37
70.38                                  70.38
70.39                                  70.39
70.40                                  70.40
70.41                                  70.41
70.99                                  70.99
90.01                                  90.01
90.02                                  90.02
90.03                                  90.03
90.04                                  90.04
90.05                                  90.05
90.06                                  90.06
90.07                                  90.07
90.08                                  90.08
90.09                                  90.09
90.20                                  90.20
90.21                                  90.21
90.22                                  90.22
90.23                                  90.23
90.24                                  90.24
90.25                                  90.25
91.01                                  91.01
91.02                                  91.02
91.03                                  91.03
92.15                                  92.020
92.16                                  92.021
92.17                                  92.022
92.18                                  92.023
92.45                                  92.050
92.47                                  92.052
92.48                                  92.053
92.49                                  92.054
92.50                                  92.055
110.01                                 110.01
110.02                                 110.02
110.03                                 110.03
110.04                                 110.04
110.05                                 110.05
110.06                                 110.06
110.07                                 110.07
110.08                                 110.08
110.09                                 110.09
110.10                                 110.10
110.11                                 110.11
110.99                                 110.99
111.01                                 111.01
111.02                                 111.02
111.03                                 111.03
111.04                                 111.04
111.15                                 111.15
111.17                                 111.17
111.18                                 111.18
111.19                                 111.19
111.20                                 111.20
111.21                                 111.21
111.22                                 111.22
111.23                                 111.23
111.24                                 111.24
111.25                                 111.25
111.26                                 111.26
111.27                                 111.27
111.28                                 111.28
111.29                                 111.29
111.30                                 111.30
111.45                                 111.45
111.46                                 111.46
111.47                                 111.47
111.48                                 111.48
111.49                                 111.49
111.99                                 111.99
112.01                                 112.01
112.02                                 112.02
112.03                                 112.03
112.04                                 112.04
112.05                                 112.05
112.06                                 112.06
112.07                                 112.07
112.08                                 112.08
112.09                                 112.09
112.10                                 112.10
112.11                                 112.11
112.12                                 112.12
112.13                                 112.13
112.99                                 112.99
130.01                                 130.01
130.02                                 130.02
130.03                                 130.03
130.04                                 130.04
130.05                                 130.05
130.06                                 130.06
130.99                                 130.99
131.01                                 131.01
131.02                                 131.02
131.03                                 131.03
131.04                                 131.04
132.01                                 132.01
132.02                                 132.02;
                                       132.99
132.03                                 132.03
132.04                                 132.04
133.01                                 133.01
133.02                                 133.02
133.03                                 133.03
134.01                                 134.01
134.02                                 134.02
134.03                                 134.03;
                                       134.99
135.01                                 135.01
135.02                                 135.02
135.03                                 135.03
135.04                                 135.04
136.01                                 136.01
136.02                                 136.02;
                                       136.99
136.03                                 136.03;
                                       136.99
136.04                                 136.04;
                                       136.99
136.05                                 136.05
136.06                                 136.06
136.07                                 136.07
137.01                                 137.01
137.02                                 137.02
137.03                                 137.03
137.04                                 137.04
137.15                                 137.15
137.16                                 137.16
137.17                                 137.17
137.18                                 137.18
137.19                                 137.19
137.20                                 137.20
150.15                                 150.01
150.16                                 150.02
150.17                                 150.03
152.01                                 152.01
152.02                                 152.02
152.15                                 152.15
152.16                                 152.16
152.17                                 152.17
152.18                                 152.18
152.19                                 152.19
152.20                                 152.20
152.21                                 152.21
152.22                                 152.22
152.23                                 152.23
153.001                                153.001
153.002                                153.002
153.003                                153.003
153.015                                153.015
153.016                                153.016
153.017                                153.017
153.018                                153.018
153.019                                153.019
153.020                                153.020
153.021                                153.021
153.022                                153.022
153.023                                153.023
153.024                                153.024
153.035                                153.035
153.036                                153.036
153.037                                153.037
153.050                                153.050
153.051                                153.051
153.052                                153.052
153.053                                153.053
153.054                                153.054
153.055                                153.055
153.056                                153.056
153.057                                153.057
153.070                                153.070
153.071                                153.071
153.072                                153.072
154.001                                154.001
153.002                                154.002
154.003                                154.003
154.004                                154.004
154.005                                154.005
154.006                                154.006
154.007                                154.007
154.008                                154.008
154.009                                154.009
154.020                                154.020
154.021                                154.021
154.022                                154.022
154.023                                154.023
154.024                                154.024
154.025                                154.025
154.026                                154.026
154.027                                154.027
154.028                                154.028
154.029                                154.029
154.040                                154.045
154.041                                154.046
154.042                                154.047
154.043                                154.048
154.045                                154.050
154.046                                154.051
154.047                                154.052
154.060                                154.065
154.061                                154.066
154.062                                154.067
154.063                                154.068
154.064                                154.069
154.065                                154.070
154.066                                154.071
154.067                                154.072
154.068                                154.073
154.069                                154.074
154.070                                154.075
154.085                                154.090
154.086                                154.091
154.087                                154.092
154.088                                154.093
154.089                                154.094
154.090                                154.095
154.091                                154.096
154.092                                154.097
154.105                                154.110
154.106                                154.111
154.107                                154.112
154.108                                154.113
154.120                                154.125
154.121                                154.126
154.122                                154.127
154.123                                154.128
154.124                                154.129
154.125                                154.130
154.126                                154.131
154.127                                154.132
154.128                                154.133
154.129                                154.134
154.140                                154.145
154.141                                154.146
154.142                                154.147
154.143                                154.148
154.144                                154.149
154.145                                154.150
154.146                                154.151
154.147                                154.152
154.148                                154.153
154.149                                154.154
154.150                                154.155
154.165                                154.170
154.166                                154.171
154.167                                154.172
154.168                                154.173
154.169                                154.174
154.170                                154.175
154.171                                154.176
154.172                                154.177
154.185                                154.190
154.186                                154.191
154.187                                154.192
154.200                                154.205
154.201                                154.206
154.202                                154.207
154.203                                154.208
154.204                                154.209
Chapter 72, Schedule I                 Ch. 72, Schd. I
Chapter 72, Schedule II                Ch. 72, Schd. II
Chapter 72, Schedule III               Ch. 72, Schd. III
Chapter 72, Schedule IV                Ch. 72, Schd. IV
Chapter 73, Schedule I                 Ch. 73, Schd. I
Table of Special Ordinances Table I    TSO Table I
Table of Special Ordinances Table II   TSO Table II
Table of Special Ordinances Table III  TSO Table III
Table of Special Ordinances Table IV   TSO Table IV
Table of Special Ordinances Table V    TSO Table V
Table of Special Ordinances Table VI   TSO Table VI
Table of Special Ordinances Table VII  TSO Table VII
Table of Special Ordinances Table VIII TSO Table VIII
Table of Special Ordinances Table IX   TSO Table IX
Table of Special Ordinances Table X    TSO Table X
Table of Special Ordinances Table XI   TSO Table XI
                                       
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
529      - -         33.05
445      7-19-2000   31.016
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
992      - -         TSO Table XI
1018     - -         TSO Table XI
-        8-1-1874    31.001
1        12-2-1899   31.015;
                     31.016
                     31.017—
                     31.021;
2        12-2-1899   31.023;
                     31.025;
                     31.040;
                     31.042
                     90.20—
3        12-2-1899   90.25;
                     132.04
                     31.055—
8        12-2-1899   31.060;
                     31.062—
                     31.069
73       9-6-1902    TSO Table I
79       12-2-1905   TSO Table I
94       7-6-1912    TSO Table IV
100      8-5-1916    TSO Table I
-        6-2-1917    31.061
-        7-7-1917    31.040
113      1-11-1923   TSO Table I
128      2-2-1927    TSO Table I
129      3-14-1928   31.041
131      3-14-1928   31.024
325      11-5-1941   TSO Table I
326      11-5-1941   TSO Table I
330      7-1-1942    TSO Table IV
331      4-28-1943   TSO Table IV
337      5-3-1944    Ch. 73, Schd. I
338      5-3-1944    TSO Table IV
339      5-3-1944    TSO Table IV
343      4-4-1945    TSO Table IV
350      8-22-1947   TSO Table I
352      12-15-1947  TSO Table IV
-        9-7-1949    TSO Table I
357      9-7-1949    TSO Table I
365      11-18-1950  TSO Table IV
366      3-7-1951    TSO Table III
367      6-6-1951    TSO Table I
373      9-3-1952    TSO Table III
385      2-5-1958    TSO Table I
388      2-15-1958   32.05
-        3-6-1958    TSO Table I
391      8-13-1958   TSO Table I
393      3-4-1959    Ch. 73, Schd
397      7-27-1959   52.40
398      10-7-1959   32.05
398      6-1-1960    TSO Table III
401      9-14-1960   TSO Table I
403      9-29-1960   Ch. 73, Schd. I
404      4-5-1961    150.01—
                     150.03
411      12-6-1961   Ch. 72, Schd. I
421      5-6-1964    TSO Table I
422      8-5-1964    Ch. 72, Schd. III
423      9-2-1964    TSO Table IV
425      2-3-1965    30.04
429      5-4-1966    TSO Table IV
430      5-4-1966    TSO Table IV
434      3-8-1967    TSO Table I
437      7-5-1967    33.08
438      7-19-1967   33.07
447      9-4-1968    TSO Table I
454      3-4-1970    TSO Table IV
455      4-14-1970   152.15—
                     152.23
461      11-3-1971   TSO Table I
465      6-27-1973   TSO Table IV
467      8-1-1973    TSO Table I
473      9-4-1974    152.01;
                     152.02
478      4-2-1975    TSO Table I
483      6-4-1975    TSO Table IV
493      6-2-1976    TSO Table IV
494      6-2-1976    TSO Table I
499      11-3-1976   TSO Table I
507      11-15-1977  TSO Table I
                     92.050;
513      7-19-1978   92.052—
                     92.055
521      1-16-1980   TSO Table IV
522      2-6-1980    TSO Table I
524      6-18-1980   TSO Table IV
526      7-2-1980    TSO Table I
529      12-3-1980   33.06
530      12-17-1980  TSO Table III
533      3-19-1981   TSO Table I
-        5-5-1981    TSO Table I
536      1-6-1982    33.06
537      2-17-1982   TSO Table I
538      3-17-1982   TSO Table IV
                     51.01—
                     51.03;
                     51.15—
548      12-5-1984   51.21;
                     51.35—
                     51.41;
                     51.55—
                     51.58
549      6-5-1985    TSO Table IV
550      6-5-1985    TSO Table IV
555      8-20-1986   TSO Table I
557      11-19-1986  TSO Table IV
560      12-3-1986   TSO Table IV
561      12-3-1986   TSO Table IV
564      8-19-1987   TSO Table I
566      9-16-1987   Ch. 72, Schd. I
567      12-2-1987   TSO Table IV
569      9-7-1988    92.020—
                     92.023
571      4-5-1989    TSO Table IV
575      1-17-1990   30.03
577      3-21-1990   TSO Table III
578      4-4-1990    TSO Table IV
579      4-18-1990   Ch. 72, Schd. I
582      11-21-1990  TSO Table IV
584      1-2-1991    TSO Table V
586      5-15-1991   TSO Table IV
588      6-5-1991    TSO Table IV
606      12-1-1993   TSO Table IV
607      1-5-1994    TSO Table III
609      2-16-1994   TSO Table IV
610      3-2-1994    Ch. 72, Schd. I
611      5-4-1994    TSO Table IV
613      6-15-1994   Ch. 72, Schd. I
620      4-5-1995    TSO Table IV
626      7-19-1995   TSO Table IV
628      11-15-1995  TSO Table IV
629      2-21-1996   TSO Table IV
638      8-21-1996   TSO Table IV
641      1-9-1997    TSO Table III
642      1-22-1997   TSO Table IV
643      3-19-1997   Ch. 72, Schd. I
652      10-15-1997  Ch. 72, Schd. I
655      12-17-1997  TSO Table IV
656      12-17-1997  Ch. 72, Schd. I
657      12-17-1997  TSO Table V
660      7-1-1998    Ch. 72, Schd. I
661      7-1-1998    TSO Table IV
667      2-17-1999   TSO Table IV
672      5-19-1999   32.04
677      4-19-2000   Ch. 72, Schd. I
686      8-2-2000    TSO Table I
687      10-18-2000  33.04
690      12-6-2000   33.03
692      2-7-2001    TSO Table IV
693      2-7-2001    TSO Table V
694      4-18-2001   Ch. 72, Schd. IV
701      7-18-2001   TSO Table IV
705      10-3-2001   Ch. 72, Schd. I
709      1-16-2002   TSO Table IV
710      3-6-2002    Ch. 72, Schd. I
712      6-19-2002   TSO Table IV
715      9-18-2002   33.02
716      11-6-2002   TSO Table IV
717      11-20-2002  TSO Table IV
719      11-20-2002  Ch. 72, Schd. II
721      12-4-2002   TSO Table V
722      1-15-2003   Ch. 72, Schd. I
724      3-19-2003   TSO Table IV
735      4-7-2004    TSO Table IV
737      5-19-2004   32.03
743      8-18-2004   154.192
745      10-6-2004   Ch. 72, Schd. I
748      1-5-2005    Ch. 72, Schd. I
749      1-19-2005   TSO Table IV
755      3-15-2006   TSO Table IV
767      12-5-2007   TSO Table I
                     154.001—
                     154.009;
                     154.020—
                     154.029;
                     154.045—
                     154.048;
                     154.050—
                     154.052;
                     154.065—
                     154.075;
                     154.090—
770      2-20-2008   154.097;
                     154.110—
                     154.113;
                     154.125—
                     154.134;
                     154.145—
                     154.155;
                     154.170—
                     154.177;
                     154.190;
                     154.191;
                     154.205—
                     154.209
                     153.001—
                     153.003;
                     153.015—
                     153.024;
771      2-20-2008   153.035—
                     153.037;
                     153.050—
                     153.057;
                     153.070—
                     153.072
769      3-5-2008    TSO Table IV
774      3-19-2008   TSO Table I
775      4-2-2008    Ch. 72, Schd. I
780      7-16-2008   TSO Table I
781      7-16-2008   TSO Table IV
782      8-6-2008    TSO Table I
787      3-18-2009   TSO Table II
789      6-3-2009    Ch. 73, Schd. I
794      2-3-2010    TSO Table I
795      3-3-2010    32.02
799      9-1-2010    TSO Table I
800      9-1-2010    TSO Table IV
802      2-16-2011   32.01
803      4-6-2011    TSO Table IV
807      8-3-2011    33.01
809      10-19-2011  TSO Table I
                     111.01—
                     111.04;
                     111.15;
810      10-19-2011  111.17—
                     111.30;
                     111.45—
                     111.49;
                     111.99
813      3-7-2012    TSO Table III
814      5-16-2012   30.02
819      8-1-2012    111.03
822      8-1-2012    TSO Table I
                     52.01—
                     52.03;
                     52.15—
823      9-19-2012   52.19;
                     52.21—
                     52.25;
                     52.41—
                     52.47
824      10-17-2012  TSO Table IV
826      4-3-2013    Ch. 73, Schd. I
                     50.01;
                     50.15—
                     50.24;
827      5-1-2013    50.35—
                     50.43;
                     50.55—
                     50.64
837      5-7-2014    TSO Table II
841      8-20-2014   TSO Table VI
842      8-20-2014   TSO Table VI
843      8-20-2014   TSO Table VI
844      9-3-2014    Ch. 72, Schd. I
846      12-3-2014   30.01
847      3-18-2015   TSO Table VI
848      3-18-2015   TSO Table VI
849      3-18-2015   TSO Table VI
850      5-6-2015    91.01—
                     91.03
852      5-20-2015   TSO Table VIII
853      5-20-2015   TSO Table III
854      5-20-2015   90.01—
                     90.09
856      6-17-2015   TSO Table IX
857      8-19-2015   TSO Table I
858      10-21-2015  TSO Table X
859      1-6-2016    TSO Table IV
860      3-2-2016    50.02
861      5-4-2016    Ch. 72, Schd. I
862      5-4-2016    TSO Table VIII
863      7-6-2016    TSO Table IV
865      7-6-2016    TSO Table IX
866      7-20-2016   52.60—
                     52.64
867      7-20-2016   TSO Table IV
868      8-17-2016   TSO Table XI
869      9-21-2016   TSO Table X
                     111.02;
                     111.03;
                     111.16;
871      12-7-2016   111.19;
                     111.20;
                     111.24;
                     111.99
872      2-15-2017   32.06
                     52.03;
873      2-15-2017   52.20;
                     52.26
874      4-5-2017    TSO Table III
875      4-19-2017   TSO Table IV
876      4-19-2017   153.054;
                     153.057
877      5-17-2017   TSO Table VIII
878      5-17-2017   154.004;
                     154.049
879      5-17-2017   TSO Table II
881      6-21-2017   154.192
884      7-19-2017   TSO Table IX
885      7-19-2017   111.03
886      8-2-2017    TSO Table VII
887      8-2-2017    TSO Table VII
888      8-2-2017    TSO Table VII
889      8-2-2017    TSO Table II
890      8-16-2017   TSO Table VIII
891      9-20-2017   TSO Table V
892      10-18-2017  TSO Table I;
                     TSO Table III
893      10-18-2017  TSO Table X
894      11-15-2017  TSO Table IV
897      2-21-2018   TSO Table I
                     92.035—
898      2-21-2018   92.037;
                     92.999
899      4-4-2018    TSO Table IV
900      4-18-2018   TSO Table I
                     92.001—
901      5-2-2018    92.008;
                     92.051;
                     92.999
902      5-2-2018    TSO Table VIII
903      6-20-2018   113.01—
                     113.07
904      7-18-2018   TSO Table IX
906      10-3-2018   Ch. 72, Schd. I
907      10-17-2018  TSO Table X
909      11-7-2018   Ch. 72, Schd. I
910      2-6-2019    TSO Table IV
911      3-6-2019    TSO Table I
912      3-20-2019   TSO Table I
913      4-17-2019   TSO Table I
914      4-17-2019   TSO Table I
915      5-1-2019    TSO Table I
                     154.004;
916      5-1-2019    154.030;
                     154.052;
                     154.053
917      6-5-2019    TSO Table VIII
918      7-3-2019    TSO Table I
919      7-3-2019    TSO Table I
920      7-17-2019   TSO Table IX
921      7-17-2019   TSO Table VIII
922      8-7-2019    TSO Table I
                     114.01—
923      8-21-2019   114.03;
                     114.99
924      9-18-2019   TSO Table X
925      9-18-2019   TSO Table I
926      10-2-2019   TSO Table I
927      10-2-2019   TSO Table I
928      10-16-2019  TSO Table I
929      11-20-2019  TSO Table I
930      1-15-2020   TSO Table I
931      1-15-2020   TSO Table I
932      1-15-2020   TSO Table I
933      2-5-2020    32.08
934      2-5-2020    TSO Table I
935      2-5-2020    TSO Table I
936      2-19-2020   TSO Table I
937      3-18-2020   TSO Table I
938      4-1-2020    TSO Table IV
939      4-15-2020   TSO Table I
940      5-6-2020    TSO Table I
941      5-20-2020   TSO Table VIII
942      5-20-2020   TSO Table I
943      5-20-2020   TSO Table VII
944      6-3-2020    31.017
945      6-17-2020   154.004;
                     154.076
946      7-15-2020   TSO Table IX
947      7-15-2020   Ch. 72, Schd. I
948      8-5-2020    TSO Table I
949      9-2-2020    Ch. 73, Schd. I
950      9-16-2020   TSO Table X
951      9-16-2020   TSO Table III
952      10-7-2020   TSO Table I
954      10-21-2020  TSO Table III
955      11-4-2020   TSO Table I
953      1-6-2021    TSO Table I
956      2-3-2021    154.030;
                     154.051
957      3-3-2021    TSO Table I
                     50.55;
958      3-17-2021   52.22;
                     52.26;
                     52.60
959      4-7-2021    TSO Table I
960      4-21-2021   TSO Table I
961      4-21-2021   TSO Table I
962      5-5-2021    TSO Table I
964      5-19-2021   TSO Table VIII
965      5-19-2021   TSO Table I
966      5-19-2021   TSO Table I
968      6-16-2021   TSO Table I
969      7-20-2021   TSO Table XI
970      7-21-2021   TSO Table IX
971      8-18-2021   TSO Table I
963      9-1-2021    TSO Table VI
972      9-15-2021   TSO Table I
973      10-6-2021   TSO Table VIII
974      10-6-2021   TSO Table I
975      10-20-2021  TSO Table I
976      11-3-2021   TSO Table X
977      11-3-2021   TSO Table I
978      11-17-2021  Ch. 73, Schd. I
979      12-1-2021   TSO Table VIII
                     71.01—
980      12-15-2021  71.04;
                     71.99
981      12-15-2021  31.080;
                     31.081
982      1-5-2022    TSO Table I
983      1-19-2022   TSO Table I
984      2-2-2022    TSO Table I
985      4-6-2022    32.07
986      4-6-2022    TSO Table VI
987      5-4-2022    TSO Table VIII
988      5-18-2022   TSO Table VIII
989      6-1-2022    TSO Table VI
990      6-15-2022   TSO Table III
991      7-20-2022   TSO Table IX
993      9-21-2022   TSO Table I
994      9-21-2022   TSO Table XI
995      9-21-2022   71.02
996      9-21-2022   TSO Table VI
997      10-19-2022  TSO Table X
999      12-21-2022  71.03
1000     2-1-2023    TSO Table III
1001     4-5-2023    154.004
1002     5-3-2023    TSO Table VIII
1003     5-3-2023    TSO Table I
1004     5-17-2023   TSO Table I
1005     6-7-2023    TSO Table IX
1006     6-7-2023    TSO Table I
1007     6-7-2023    TSO Table I
                     155.01—
                     155.10;
                     155.25—
                     155.28;
1008     6-21-2023   155.40—
                     155.42;
                     155.55—
                     155.66;
                     155.99
1009     6-21-2023   154.004;
                     154.032
1009     8-6-2025    TSO Table XI
                     154.004;
1010     6-21-2023   154.031;
                     154.148
1011     7-5-2023    155.59
1012     7-19-2023   70.19
1014     7-19-2023   TSO Table I
1015     9-6-2023    TSO Table VIII
1016     9-6-2023    TSO Table I
1017     9-6-2023    TSO Table XI
                     92.070—
1013     9-20-2023   92.074;
                     92.999
1019     9-20-2023   TSO Table VII
1020     10-18-2023  154.004;
                     154.033
1021     10-18-2023  TSO Table VI
1023     11-15-2023  31.023;
                     31.024
1024     11-15-2023  TSO Table X
1025     12-6-2023   TSO Table I
1026     12-20-2023  TSO Table III
1027     12-20-2023  32.09
1028     2-7-2024    TSO Table VIII
1029     2-7-2024    TSO Table VII
1030     2-7-2024    TSO Table III
1031     2-21-2024   TSO Table III
1032     2-21-2024   TSO Table III
1033     2-21-2024   TSO Table XI
1034     3-6-2024    TSO Table III
1035     3-6-2024    TSO Table III
1036     3-20-2024   33.09
1037     3-20-2024   154.004;
                     154.034
1038     3-20-2024   154.046
1039     3-20-2024   TSO Table III
1040     3-20-2024   TSO Table III
1041     3-20-2024   TSO Table III
1042     4-3-2024    TSO Table III
1043     4-3-2024    TSO Table III
1044     4-3-2024    TSO Table I
1045     4-3-2024    TSO Table I
1046     4-17-2024   111.16
1047     4-17-2024   TSO Table VIII
1049     5-1-2024    TSO Table III
1050     5-1-2024    TSO Table III
1051     5-1-2024    TSO Table III
1052     5-15-2024   TSO Table I
1053     6-5-2024    TSO Table III
1056     7-8-2024    TSO Table I
1058     8-7-2024    TSO Table III
1059     8-7-2024    TSO Table I
1061     8-21-2024   TSO Table III
1062     9-4-2024    TSO Table I
1063     9-4-2024    TSO Table III
1064     10-2-2024   TSO Table X
                     151.01—
1066     11-6-2024   151.12;
                     151.99
                     115.01—
1067     11-20-2024  115.04;
                     115.99
1068     11-20-2024  Ch. 73, Schd. I
1069     11-20-2024  TSO Table III
1070     11-20-2024  TSO Table III
1071     12-4-2024   TSO Table III
1072     12-18-2024  TSO Table III
1073     1-15-2025   TSO Table III
1074     1-15-2025   TSO Table I
1075     2-5-2025    111.19
1076     2-19-2025   TSO Table III
1077     2-19-2025   TSO Table III
1078     2-19-2025   TSO Table I
1080     3-19-2025   TSO Table III
1081     3-19-2025   TSO Table III
1082     4-2-2025    TSO Table III
1083     4-16-2025   TSO Table I
1084     4-16-2025   TSO Table VIII
1086     5-7-2025    TSO Table I
1087     5-7-2025    TSO Table I
1089     6-18-2025   32.10
1090     6-18-2025   TSO Table IX
1091     6-18-2025   TSO Table III
1092     6-18-2025   TSO Table III
1093     6-18-2025   TSO Table III
1094     6-18-2025   TSO Table III
1095     6-18-2025   TSO Table I
1097     7-16-2025   TSO Table III
1098     7-2-2025    TSO Table III
1099     7-2-2025    TSO Table III
1100     7-2-2025    TSO Table III
1101     7-2-2025    TSO Table III
1102     7-2-2025    TSO Table III
1103     8-6-2025    32.01
1104     7-16-2025   TSO Table III
1105     7-16-2025   TSO Table I
1106     8-6-2025    TSO Table III
1107     8-6-2025    TSO Table I
1108     8-6-2025    32.11;
                     32.12
1110     8-6-2025    TSO Table I
1111     9-17-2025   TSO Table X
1112     9-17-2025   TSO Table III
1113     11-5-2025   TSO Table I
1115     12-3-2025   TSO Table III
                    
 
 
