CITY OF VILLA GROVE, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-MC12, passed 5-12-2025; and
State legislation current through Illinois Legislative Service, 2025 Acts,
Pamphlet No. 1
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCE NO. 092704A
September 27, 2004
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF VILLA GROVE,
ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Villa
Grove, Illinois, are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient
in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper
conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Illinois empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois,
has authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the
ordinances of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publication Corporation has compiled, edited and
published a codification of the permanent and general ordinances of the City of
Villa Grove, Illinois, in book form; and
   WHEREAS, there is now on file in the office of the City Clerk, for public
inspection a document entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Villa Grove,
Illinois".
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
VILLA GROVE, DOUGLAS COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois, as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Villa
Grove, Illinois", which may also be referred to as the "Villa Grove Municipal
Code".
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:
See Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, no shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day after its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and City Council and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk on that date.
   Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.   Reference applies to all amendments. Whenever a reference is
made to this code as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Villa Grove,
Illinois", or as the "Villa Grove Municipal Code", or to any portion thereof,
or to any ordinance of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois, codified herein, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore,
now and hereafter made.
   Section 7.   Title, chapter and section headings. Title, chapter and section
headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title,
chapter or section hereof.
   Section 8.   Reference to specific ordinances. The provisions of this code
shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are
otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated
by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such
reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained
within this Code.
   Section 9.   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. The last
ordinances included in this code was Ordinance 092203A, passed September 22,
2003.
   The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 092203A, but prior
to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code:
      101403A:   An Ordinance amending Section 150.17(B) of the Municipal Code
of the City of Villa Grove regarding fees for building permits
      122203A:   An Ordinance levying taxes for all corporate purposes for the
City of Villa Grove, Douglas County, Illinois, for the fiscal year beginning
May 1, 2003 and ending April 30, 2004
      020904A:   Ordinance amending Section 53.01 of Title 5, Chapter 53 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Villa Grove (regarding water and sewer rates)
      032204A:   An Ordinance amending Section 8.05 of the City of Villa Grove
Personnel Code
      041204A:   An Ordinance amending Section 7.03 (B) of the City of Villa
Grove Personnel Code
      042604A:   An Ordinance approving the City of Villa Grove annual budget
for the fiscal year Ending April 30, 2005
      042604B:   An Ordinance authorizing the appointment of special assistant
city attorneys and authorizing a fee arrangement in connection therewith
      042604C:   An Ordinance authorizing the sale of municipally-owned real
estate
      042604D:   An Ordinance establishing Chapter 160 of Title XV: "Land
Usage", with the same chapter being titled "Pollution Control Facilities",
which shall establish the rules of procedure for local siting approval requests
on property located within the City of Villa Grove, Illinois
      061004A:   An Ordinance implementing the provisions of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/11-1 et seq.) in the City of
Villa Grove
      061404A:   An Ordinance amending Schedule I of Chapter 78 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Villa Grove designating a handicapped parking
space
      062804A:   An Ordinance ascertaining the prevailing rate for wages of
laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in the construction of Public
Works coming under the jurisdiction of the City of Villa Grove
      080904A:   Ordinance vacating public park in Pheasant Pointe Subdivision
Second Phase
      082304A:   Ordinance regarding the purchase of real estate from David
McGhee
      082304B:   Approving a redevelopment loan agreement to Terri Lee Wegeng,
d/b/a Thyme ‘N Time Again Vintage Resale & Consignment Shoppe
   Section 10.   Effect of code on past actions and obligations. The adoption
of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed
prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due
and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity
of any bond or cash deposited posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the
requirements of any ordinance.
   Section 11.   Severability of Provisions. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this code.
   Section 12.   Effective Date. This ordinance shall be effective upon its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
   PRESENTED AND PASSED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Villa
Grove, Illinois at its regular meeting on this twenty-seventh day of September
2004, by a roll call vote as follows:
M. Wayne Brackett  yea                Phillip Jones  yea
Edward Carleton  yea                   Michael Leon  absent
Terrance Harbin  absent                Robert Wright  yea
Ronald Hunt  yea
                              APPROVED:
                               /s
                              Robert H. Hunt
                              Mayor
ATTEST:
    /s/
Glenda Millsap
City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
11.   CITY STANDARDS
   
12.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Regulations saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the City of Villa Grove shall be designated as
the Code of Villa Grove and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning, or unless a
specific code section, chapter or division specifies that for the purpose of
that section, chapter or division, a different definition is applicable.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CITY. The City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   COUNTY. Douglas County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Douglas County, Illinois.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.   
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the City of
Villa Grove. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the
employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as police officers.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
city, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof, or
any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The city code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law. (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70,
§ 1.15)
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other gender.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and
City Council may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re- adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the City Council.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 REGULATIONS SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the City
Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional regulations
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of
a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and
not inconsistent thereto shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the city. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am.
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-85). An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Chapter 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code the doing of any act or the omission to do any
act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there
shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person, firm or
corporation who shall be convicted of any such breach shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   (1)   All actions for violations of the provisions of this code shall
be commenced by the issuance of a citation by the enforcing officer to the
person committing such violation, hereinafter called the defendant. The
citation shall be on a form provided by the city and shall set forth the
offense, the name of the defendant, the location, date and time of the offense,
the place, date and time for the defendant to appear in Circuit Court and the
penalty for the violation. A copy of the citation shall be kept with the
records of the Police Department.
      (2)   The citation form utilized for this purpose shall include the
following statements on the complaint or bond form:
“In the event you fail to appear in court at the time and place specified in
this citation, or on any date to which the case may be continued, the court may
enter an ex parte judgment against you assessing fines, penalties and costs in
an amount not to exceed the sum of $750, the maximum fine authorized for the
violation charged in this citation.”
      (3)   If the defendant does not appear on the date set for appearance or
any date to which the case may be continued, the court may enter an ex parte
judgment against the defendant assessing fines, penalties and costs in an
amount determined by the court not to exceed the amount set forth in the notice
in division (B)(2) above.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever a defendant who has been issued a citation to appear in
Circuit Court in accordance with the provisions of §§
10.20,
10.99,
130.01 through
130.05, or any other provisions herein so providing, fails to appear at the
place, date and time set forth in the citation and ex parte monetary judgment
in an amount provided in the Code of Villa Grove as determined by the Court may
be requested by the City Attorney and entered by the Court as it determines
appropriate.
      (2)   After such an ex parte judgement has been entered by the Court, a
citation to discover assets can be furnished to such defendant in compliance
with applicable law. If a defendant fails to appear in court pursuant to such a
citation to discover assets, a warrant can be issued for his or her arrest.
   (D)   In case of amendment of any section of this code, containing the
provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so
provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the amended section
or the amending section, whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not,
unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
   (E)   In addition to the monetary fines provided for in the foregoing
divisions of this section, the violator shall also pay the costs incurred by
the city as a result of such violations, including the towing costs for any
vehicle or property and the storage costs for any towed or impounded vehicle or
property resulting from such violations. Such costs may be paid in any non-
judicial voluntary payment or adjudication of such ordinance violations and, in
the event of judicial prosecution for such violation, the court may order that
such costs be paid by the violator.
(1992 Code, § 10.99) (Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-2002; Am. Ord. 112502A,
passed 11-25-2002; Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   City seal
   
11.02   Base or datum line established; grades
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
   There shall be a seal of the city, which shall be designated the corporate
seal and shall be kept by the City Clerk, and used by him officially, as
directed by law. The seal shall have engraved upon it the words “City of Villa
Grove, Douglas County, Illinois,” encircling the words “Corporate Seal.”
(1992 Code, § 11.01)
§ 11.02 BASE OR DATUM LINE ESTABLISHED; GRADES.
   (A)   A base or datum for the levels of the city, be and same is hereby
fixed in the place passing horizontally through a lead plate set in the top
part of the first or lower concrete step leading to the front door at the
southeast corner of the First National Bank building in the city, the elevation
of the datum or base being 649.61 feet above mean sea level at the City of
Biloxi, in the State of Mississippi.
   (B)   All grades and levels in the city which do not have reference to the
base established in division (A) herein may be changed and all grades which may
be hereafter established shall have reference to and be established according
to the base or datum line of this section.
(1992 Code, § 11.02)
CHAPTER 12: WARD BOUNDARIES
ection
   
12.01   Boundaries of wards
§ 12.01 BOUNDARIES OF WARDS.
   The boundaries of the wards of the city are hereby established as follows.
   (A)   Ward I. All that portion of the city lying north and west of the
following boundary: beginning at the intersection of Monroe Street and the
western city limit line; thence east along the center of Monroe Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Sycamore Street; thence north along the
center of Sycamore Street to the centerline of Harrison Avenue; thence east
along the center of Harrison Avenue to the center of the Embarrass River;
thence north and west along the center of the Embarrass River to its
intersection with State Route 130; thence north along the center of State Route
130 to the northern city limit line.
   (B)   Ward II. All that portion of the city lying east of the following
boundary: beginning at the intersection of State Route 130 with the northern
city limit line; thence south along the center of State Route 130 to the center
of the Embarrass River; thence south and east along the center of the Embarrass
River to the intersection of the Embarrass River with the southern city limit
line.
   (C)   Ward III. All that portion of the city lying south of Monroe Street
and west of the Embarrass River and also that portion of the city lying north
of Monroe Street and bounded on the west by Sycamore Street, on the north by
Harrison Avenue, and on the east by the Embarrass River.
(1992 Code, § 12.01) (Am. Ord. 22679A, passed 2-26-1979)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   CITY COUNCIL
   
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
   
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
35.   TAXATION
   
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; PURCHASING
   
37.   PERSONNEL CODE
   
38.   CIVIL DEFENSE
   
39.   CITY POLICIES
   
40.   EMERGENCY POWERS
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Governing body
   
30.02   City Council; functions
   
30.03   Mayor; functions
   
30.04   Absence of Mayor
   
30.05   Committee of the Whole
Meetings; Rules of Procedure
   
30.15   Regular meetings
   
30.16   Special meetings
   
30.17   Notice of meetings
   
30.18   Attendance at meetings
   
30.19   Quorum; votes required
   
30.20   Reconsideration of actions
   
30.21   When Mayor to vote
   
30.22   Order of business
   
30.23   Rules of procedure
   
30.24   Public meeting speaking rules
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.35   Approval; veto of ordinances, resolutions and motions; override of veto
   
30.36   Failure of Mayor to act on an ordinance, resolution or motion
   
30.37   Record of ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   The corporate authorities of the city shall consist of the Mayor and the
City Council. The City Council shall consist of 6 Aldermen, 2 elected from each
of 3 wards as provided by state statutes.
(1992, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 CITY COUNCIL; FUNCTIONS.
   The City Council shall be the legislative department of the city government
and shall perform the duties and have the powers as may be authorized by state
statute or ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 MAYOR; FUNCTIONS.
   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the city and shall perform
all the duties as may be required of him by state statute or ordinance. He or
she shall have supervision over all of the executive officers of the city and
shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any
officer of the city at any reasonable time.
(1992 Code, § 30.03)
§ 30.04 ABSENCE OF MAYOR.
   (A)   If a vacancy in the office of the Mayor occurs, the City Council shall
elect 1 of its members to be Acting Mayor to hold office until a new mayor is
elected and qualified, as provided by ILCS § 3-4-6.
   (B)   If the Mayor is unable to perform his duties because of temporary
absence from the city or disability, the City Council shall elect 1 of its
members to be Mayor Pro Tem in accordance with ILCS § 3-11-7.
   (C)   If a majority of the Aldermen present at a City Council meeting agree
that an emergency exists during the temporary absence of the Mayor, they may
appoint an Alderman to act as Temporary Mayor in accordance with ILCS § 3-4-
6.1.
   (D)   If the Mayor is not present at a meeting of the City Council, the
senior Alderman shall act as presiding officer of the meeting during the
absence.
   (E)   An Acting Mayor, a Mayor Pro Tem, a Temporary Mayor, and an Aldermen
acting as presiding officer may vote in his capacity as Alderman but may not be
entitled to a second vote on any single matter.
(1992 Code, § 30.04)
§ 30.05 COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Aldermen shall participate in and be equal members
of the Committee of the Whole.
   (B)   Such Committee meetings shall be held regularly per § 30.15 and shall
be chaired by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
   (C)   When the need to conduct a special Committee meeting arises, notice
shall be given to City Clerk who shall be responsible for the posting of legal
notices as required by law and for keeping of the minutes.
   (D)   The Mayor may create special temporary committees for specific
projects, as needed, which shall consist of all Council Members and/or city
personnel and/or community members at large.
(Ord. 2019-MC07, passed 6-10-2019)
MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 30.15 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   A regular meeting of the City Council (with voting rights) shall be
held on the second Monday in each calendar month of each year at 6:00 p.m.
   (B)   A regular meeting of the Committee of the Whole (non-voting rights)
shall be held on the fourth Monday in each calendar month of each year at 6:00
p.m.
   (C)   All meetings shall be at the City Building in Council Chambers,
located at 612 East Harrison Street. Upon completion of the Community Center at
Richman Park in late 2023/early 2024, Council Chambers shall be relocated to
the Conference Room located at 900 South Sycamore Street. The location shall be
changed from time to time to accommodate large crowds with proper notice and
signs posted clearly stating the place of the relocated meeting.
   (D)   Any meeting falling upon a legal holiday, or a holiday observed by the
City of Villa Grove, shall be held on the following day at the place above-
mentioned.
(Ord. 2011-MC10, passee 12-27-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-MC07, passed 6-10-2019; Am.
Ord. 2023-MC13, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 30.16 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor or any 3 Aldermen may call a special meeting of the City Council
by notifying the City Clerk of such a meeting. The Clerk shall notify the
Mayor, Aldermen, and appropriate officers at least 24 hours in advance of the
special meeting, either personally or by leaving a message at his usual place
of abode, stating the purpose for which the meeting is called. No business
shall be transacted at a special meeting except that mentioned in the Clerk’s
notice unless the entire City Council is present and all members agree to the
transaction of other business. The Clerk shall enter into the minutes of a
special meeting proof that all members were notified. The Clerk shall give
public notice of a special meeting in the manner provided by state statute.
(1992 Code, § 30.16)
§ 30.17 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   A schedule of regular meetings shall be prepared by the City Clerk at the
beginning of each calendar year. The schedule shall be posted in the Community
Building. A copy of the schedule and a copy of every notice of a special
meeting shall be provided to any representative of the news media who has
requested the notices.
(1992 Code, § 30.17)
§ 30.18 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the Corporate Authorities to be
present on time at every meeting of the City Council unless unavoidably
prevented; nor shall any member absent himself during the session unless
excused by a majority of the members present.
(1992 Code, § 30.18)
§ 30.19 QUORUM; VOTES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No business of the Corporate Authorities shall be conducted without a
quorum present. A quorum shall consist of at least 4 Aldermen or of the Mayor
and at least 3 Aldermen.
   (B)   All ordinances for whatever purpose, and any resolution or motion to
create any liability against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation
of money, shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members of the
Corporate Authorities then holding office. All ordinances, resolutions or
motions to sell property, or to vacate streets and alleys shall require the
concurrence of ¾ of the Aldermen then holding office.
(1992 Code, § 30.19)
§ 30.20 RECONSIDERATION OF ACTIONS.
   The City Council may reconsider its votes and actions upon questions before
it and may rescind its previous action as provided by state statute.
(1992 Code, § 30.21)
§ 30.21 WHEN MAYOR TO VOTE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and at all
times when the City Council meets as a committee of the whole. Except as
otherwise provided by law, he or she shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution or motion except:
      (1)   Where the vote of the Aldermen has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where ½ of the Aldermen elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the Corporate Authorities
is required by statute to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
   (B)   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote.
(1992 Code, § 30.21)
§ 30.22 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order of business of all regular meetings of the City Council at which a
quorum is present shall be as follows:
   (A)   Roll call;
   (B)   Reading and approval or disapproval of the minutes of the proceedings
of the last meeting;
   (C)   Petitions and communications to the City Council;
   (D)   Reports of standing committees;
   (E)   Reports of special committees;
   (F)   Reports of officers;
   (G)   Presentations of claims and accounts;
   (H)   Unfinished business; and
   (I)   New and miscellaneous business.
(1992 Code, § 30.22)
§ 30.23 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of
order, subject to an appeal to the City Council. Appeals to the City Council
shall be decided without debate. On all points of order not herein specifically
provided for, Robert’s Rules of Order is adopted and made the law governing the
deliberations of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 30.23)
§ 30.24 PUBLIC MEETING SPEAKING RULES.
   Public comment. Pursuant to the city's rule-making authority set forth in
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, the rules governing public comment at all
Council meetings of the Mayor and Council Members of the city shall be as
follows:
   (A)   There shall be a public comment period listed as a "Public Comments"
item on each meeting agenda for all Council meetings of the Mayor and Council
Members of the city.
   (B)   The public comment portion of the agenda shall be limited to a total
of 30 minutes but may be extended by an additional 5 minutes at the discretion
of the Mayor.
   (C)   All persons wishing to address the Council and comment upon city
business during that public comment period at such meetings shall complete the
sign-in sheet available at the meeting.
   (D)   Only those persons who have filled out such a speaker's sign-in sheet
will thereafter be called to the podium, or other location as designated by the
Mayor, during the public comment period to address the Council and comment upon
city business although the Mayor may call on others as he/she deems
appropriate.
   (E)   All those speakers called to speak shall first identify themselves,
and if they chose, give their residential address by street, town, village or
city, before they offer any comment to the Council.
   (F)   Speakers shall limit their commentary to 5 minutes. Should any speaker
wish to offer further comment to the Council beyond the time allotted, they may
tender such further comments in written form to the City Administrator.
   (G)   The Mayor shall have the authority, in his/her sole discretion, to
extend the time to speak.
   (H)   The City Council, upon motion, second and approval, shall have the
authority to extend the time to speak as provided in said motion.
   (I)   Speakers shall relate their commentary to matters of city business
only.
   (J)   Speakers shall at all times address the Council, not the audience,
media or others in attendance.
   (K)   Speakers shall offer their commentary only from the podium.
   (L)   Speakers shall confine their remarks to relevant commentary.
   (M)   Speakers shall return to their seat or leave the meeting room at the
end of their remarks.
   (N)   Speakers shall not employ profane or threatening language.
   (O)   Speakers shall respect both the decorum of the public meeting and the
authority of the Mayor as the Council's presiding officer.
   (P)   These rules may be suspended and/or modified upon motion and approval
by the City Council.
   (Q)   Speakers whose behavior disrupts the conduct of the public meeting or
threatens the public safety are subject to removal from the meeting by any such
individual(s) designated by the Mayor upon a finding by the Mayor that the
speaker's behavior has violated this rule.
(Ord. 2018-MC11, passed 10-9-2018)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.35 APPROVAL; VETO OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS; OVERRIDE OF
VETO.
   (A)   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the
city or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of money and all
ordinances passed by the City Council are subject to the approval of the Mayor.
If the Mayor approves of them, he or she shall sign them.
   (B)   The Mayor may disapprove of any 1 or more terms appropriated in any
ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove entirely of an
ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. Those of which he or
she disapproves, he or she shall return to the City Council with his written
objections at the next regular meeting of the City Council occurring not less
than 5 days after their passage.
   (C)   If the Mayor disapproves of an ordinance or specified resolution or
motion, the City Council, upon receipt of the Mayor’s written objections, shall
reconsider the same, and if, after the reconsideration, of all the Aldermen
then holding office agree to pass the ordinance, resolution, or motion over the
Mayor’s veto, then it shall be effective.
(1992 Code, § 30.35)
§ 30.36 FAILURE OF MAYOR TO ACT ON AN ORDINANCE, RESOLUTION OR MOTION.
   If the Mayor fails to return an ordinance or any specified resolution or
motion with his written objections by the next regular meeting of the City
Council occurring not less than 5 days after its passage, it shall become
effective despite the absence of his signature.
(1992 Code, § 30.36)
§ 30.37 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   The City Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the City Council. Immediately following each
ordinance, the Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and the
publication, where required, of the ordinance. The record and memorandum, or a
certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage
and the publication or posting of ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 30.37)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Requirements for eligibility for office
   
31.02   Bonds of officers
   
31.03   Surrender of city property
   
31.04   Money received by officers and employees
   
31.05   Records kept by officers open to inspection
   
31.06   Liability of officers and employees
   
31.07   State officials and employees ethics act
   
31.08   Policy governing access to public records
   
31.09   Prevailing wage rate for laborers, mechanics and other workers
Elected City Officials
   
31.15   Elected officials; term; duties
   
31.16   Salaries of elected officials
   
31.17   City Clerk
Nonelected City Officials
   
31.30   Appointed officials
   
31.31   Reserved
   
31.32   City Administrator
   
31.33   Deputy Clerk
   
31.34   City Treasurer
   
31.35   City Comptroller
   
31.36   Budget Officer
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE.
   No person shall be eligible for any city office or employment unless he or
she is a qualified elector of the city and has resided therein at least 1 year
next preceding this election or appointment. However, these requirements shall
not apply to those appointive officers who require technical training or
knowledge. No person shall be eligible to any office who is a defaulter to the
city.
(1992 Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 BONDS OF OFFICERS.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers,
except Aldermen, shall execute a bond with security, to be approved by the City
Council. The bond shall be payable to the city in whatever penal sum may be
directed by statute or resolution, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of the office and the payment of all money received by the officer,
according to law and also the ordinances of the city. These bonds shall be
filed with the City Clerk, except the bond of the Clerk, which shall be filed
with the City Treasurer.
(1992 Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.03 SURRENDER OF CITY PROPERTY.
   Within 5 days after notification and request, any person who has been an
officer, or employee, shall deliver to his successor in office all property,
books and effects in his possession, belonging to the city, or appertaining to
the position he or she has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he or she shall be
liable for all the damages caused thereby and shall be deemed in violation of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 MONEY RECEIVED BY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every officer and employee shall turn over all money received by him on
behalf of the city to the treasury promptly on receipt of the money. He or she
shall keep account showing all money received by him and the source and
disposition thereof, and shall keep the other accounts as may be required by
the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 RECORDS KEPT BY OFFICERS OPEN TO INSPECTION.
   All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection by
the Mayor or any Alderman at all reasonable times, whether or not the records
are required to be kept by state statute or ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 31.05)
§ 31.06 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be construed as to make the officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform the duty, unless the
intention of the Corporate Authorities to impose a fine or penalty on the
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.
(1992 Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.07 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 5-15 and Article 10 ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40 of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the
“Act” in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the city to the extent required by ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 430 § 70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer employee of the city under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430 § 50-5 for similar violations
of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city.
(Ord. 051004A, passed 5-10-2004)
31.08 POLICY GOVERNING ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The Policy Governing Access to Public Records under the Freedom of
Information Act, in the manner and form which is attached to Ordinance No.
2006-MC05, passed August 14, 2006, is hereby adopted and approved for use by
the city.
(Ord. 2006-MC05, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 31.09 PREVAILING WAGE RATE FOR LABORERS, MECHANICS AND OTHER WORKERS.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by the State, county,
city of public body or any political subdivision or by any one under contract
for public works,” approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing
rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics, and other workers
engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the
City Council is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of
wages for construction work in the Douglas County area, as determined by the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 1, 2014, a copy of that
determination being attached to Ordinance 2014-MC05 and incorporated herein by
reference. As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate
of wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall supersede
the Department’s June determination and apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the City Council. The definition of any terms
appearing in this section which are also used in the aforesaid Act shall be the
same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the City Council to the extent required by the
aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by
any interested party in the main office of the City Council this determination
or any revision of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination
or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in
effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
(Ord. 2008-MC06, passed 6-23-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-MC08, passed 6-22-2009; Am.
Ord. 2011-MC06, passed 6-27-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-MC02, passed 6-25-2012; Am.
Ord. 2013-MC02, passed 6-24-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-MC05, passed 6-9-2014; Am. Ord.
2015- MC06, passed 6-22-2015; 2016-MC05, passed 6- 27-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-MC07,
passed 6-12-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-MC04, passed 6-11-2018)
ELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 ELECTED OFFICIALS; TERM; DUTIES.
   The elected officers of the city shall consist of the Mayor, the Aldermen,
and the City Clerk. All the officers shall take office at the first regular
meeting in May following receipt of certified election results for the local
election authority, and shall serve for a term of 4 years or until their
successors are elected and qualified as provided by state statute. The duties
of the officers are as described in the appropriate sections of this code.
(1992 Code, § 31.15) (Am. Ord. 070896A, passed 7-8-1996; Am. Ord. 2007-MC05,
passed 2-26-2007)
§ 31.16 SALARIES OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Salaries of Aldermen.  
      (1)   The salary of each Alderman of the city shall be fixed at $150 for
each regular or special meeting the Alderman shall attend. Regular meetings
shall be designated as either a Committee-of-the-Whole meeting where no binding
vote shall take place or a general meeting of the Council where voting shall
take place. Alderman shall not be paid for attending more than one Committee-
of-the-Whole per month.Effective the first regular meeting in May following the
April 2019 election, the salary of each Alderman, as to any Alderman whose term
of office commences on or after May 13, 2019, shall be fixed at $150 for each
regular meeting or special meeting of the Council. At any point in the future
that such regular general meetings be reduced in quantity to one meeting per
month, the salary of each Alderman shall be fixed at $150 for one Committee-of-
the-Whole meeting per month. The salaries shall be paid in accordance with
state statutes.
      (2)   Provided, however, that each Alderman elected or appointed after
the April 2017 election shall be paid his or her per meeting salary for up to 3
regular, special or Committee-of-the- Whole meetings cumulatively each fiscal
year even though he or she did not attend the meetings. If an Alderman serves
less than the entire fiscal year, his or her salary for non-attended meetings
shall be prorated.
   (B)   Salary of Mayor. The salary of the Mayor of the city shall be fixed at
$3,500 per fiscal year. Effective the first meeting in May following the April
2017 election, the salary of the Mayor of the city, as to a Mayor elected or
appointed after May 8, 2017, shall be fixed at $5,000 per year. The increased
salary shall be paid in accordance with state statutes.
   (C)   Salary of City Clerk. The salary of the City Clerk shall be fixed at
$275 per month, for a total of $3,300 per year.
   (D)   Allocation of funds. The salaries herein provided shall be paid on a
monthly basis. Any salary paid to an incoming or outgoing Mayor or City Clerk
shall be prorated according to the number of days served in the month affected.
All salaries will be paid from the General Fund of the city.
(1992 Code, § 31.16) (Am. Ord. 012681A, passed 1-26-1981; Am. Ord. 111395B,
passed 11-13-1995; Am. Ord. 070896B, passed 7-8-1996; Am. Ord. 051198A, passed
5-11-1998; Am. Ord. 072400B, passed 7-24-2000; Am. Ord. 101502B, passed 10-15-
2002; Am. Ord. 2008-MC07, passed 9-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2016-MC08, passed 9-12-
2016; Am. Ord. 2018-MC12, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 31.17 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   General duties.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to attend the special and
stated meetings of the City Council, and keep full record of its proceedings in
the minutes, and to record, in a book to be kept for that purpose, all
ordinances which may be passed from time to time by the City Council, and at
the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded to make a memorandum of
the date of the passage and of the publishing or posting of the ordinance.
      (2)   He or she shall keep and preserve safely all papers pertaining to
his or her office, prepare and deliver all licenses, bonds and certificates of
sale and redemption, on the receipt of the proper sums of money therefor,
countersign all vouchers and deliver the same when called for, taking a receipt
for the same.
      (3)   He or she shall notify all officers appointed by the Mayor, or
elected, of their selection. He or she shall exercise a general supervision
over all the officers of the city charged in any manner with the receipt,
collection or disbursement of corporate revenues and the collection and return
of the revenues into the treasury.
      (4)   He or she shall have the charge, custody and control of all deeds,
leases, warrants, vouchers, books and papers of any kind; the custody and
control of which is not herein given to any other officer. He or she shall seal
and attest all contracts of the city and all licenses, permits and other
documents as shall require this formality.
   (B)   Records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other records
which the Clerk is required by statute to keep, he or she shall keep a register
of all licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon; a record showing
all of the officers and regular employees of the city, and other records as may
be required by the City Council.
   (C)   City Collector duties. The City Clerk shall, as an additional duty and
for additional compensation which may be determined from time to time by the
City Council, act and perform the duties of the office of City Collector.
   (D)   Additional duties. The Clerk shall perform the other duties and
functions as may be required by statute, by this Code, or by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 31.17) (Am. Ord. 091492A, passed 9-14-1992)
NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.30 APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   The appointed officers of the city shall consist of the City Administrator,
the City Comptroller, the City Collector, the Budget Officer, the Deputy Clerk,
the Superintendent of Public Works, the Director of Community Programs and
Services, the Fire Chief, the Building Official/Inspector, the Chief of Police
and all sworn officers of the Police Department. All other personnel shall be
considered board or commission members or employees and shall not be subject to
the provisions of this subchapter as they apply to officers.
(1992 Code, § 31.30) (Am. Ord. passed 9-14-1992; Am. Ord. 070896D, passed 7-8-
1996; Am. Ord. 022398D, passed 2-23-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-MC10, passed 10-24-
2005; Am. Ord. 2025-MC01, passed 1-14-2025)
§ 31.31 RESERVED.
§ 31.32 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office created. There is hereby created the office of City
Administrator.
   (B)   Appointment. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor by
and with the advice and consent of the majority of the Aldermen then holding
office.
   (C)   Removal. The City Administrator may be removed by the Mayor by and
with the advice and consent of the majority of the Aldermen then holding
office. The Mayor and Aldermen shall not be required to give cause for the
removal. Upon receiving notice of his removal from office, the City
Administrator shall be entitled to the equivalent of 2 weeks pay.
   (D)   Requirements of the office. The City Administrator shall have
qualifications substantially equivalent to those of a city manager, including
educational and professional training and/or experience in administrative and
management principles and procedures. At the time of his appointment he or she
need not be a resident of the city but during his tenure of office he or she
shall reside within the city. No Alderman or Mayor shall receive the
appointment during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, nor
within 1 year after the expiration of his term. The City Administrator shall
comply with all applicable provisions herein.
   (E)   General duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the Mayor and to
the City Council for the administration and operation of all of the affairs and
the departments of the city. As such, he or she shall have the administration
and control of all matters and things pertaining to the operation and
maintenance of the properties of the city and of all of the departments of the
city. The City Administrator shall be responsible for effectuating all action
of the Corporate Authorities which require administrative implementation or
where the Corporate Authorities have directed him to act.
   (F)   Policy. The policy of the city shall be as specified by the Corporate
Authorities. The City Administrator shall implement all of the policy. Whenever
possible, all questions of policy will be forwarded to the City Administrator
so that he or she may make policy recommendations to the Corporate Authorities.
   (G)   City Council meetings. The City Administrator shall attend all
meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the Corporate
Authorities. He or she shall have the privilege of taking part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the City Council. He or she shall
prepare the agenda for all City Council meetings.
   (H)   Financial duties. The City Administrator shall be responsible for
developing budgeting procedures and preparing the annual and capital budgets.
He or she shall be responsible for the preparation of all budget and financial
reports. He or she shall be responsible for developing and implementing a
standardized purchasing policy for the city in accordance with division (F)
above.
   (I)   Personnel duties. The City Administrator shall serve as personnel
officer for the city and shall prepare and implement a standardized personnel
policy in accordance with division (F) above. He or she shall recommend to the
Mayor all appointments, discharges, promotions, and disciplinary actions except
for those personnel actions specifically delegated to someone else by this code
or by state statute.
   (J)   External relations. The City Administrator shall keep informed of
current developments in the field of municipal administration, proposed and
pending state and federal regulations and legislation, and the availability of
state and federal funds for local purposes. He or she shall attend the meetings
and represent the city in the relations as approved by the Mayor. He or she
shall have no powers to enter the city into any binding agreement with any
person, firm, corporation, agency or organization of any kind.
   (K)   Investigations and recommendations. The City Administrator shall make
investigations into the affairs of the city or any department thereof and shall
investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning city services and
city administration. He or she shall submit as he or she deems necessary
recommendations and suggestions for improving the health, safety, or welfare of
the city to the Corporate Authorities. He or she shall submit as he or she
deems necessary recommendations for the amendments and/or additions to the
city’s policy.
   (L)   Other officers. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove
powers or duties vested in any elected office by this code or by state statute.
   (M)    Additional duties. The City Administrator shall perform the other
duties as may be explicitly assigned to him by the Corporate Authorities or as
may be implicitly assigned to him by ordinance or city policy.
(1992 Code, § 31.32) (Am. Ord. 080877, passed 8-8-77)
§ 31.33 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   Office created. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to appoint 1
Deputy Clerk by and with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Deputy
Clerk shall have the power and duties to execute all documents required by any
law to be executed by the City Clerk and affix the seal of the city thereto
whenever required and the Deputy Clerk to act at the times as hereinafter
provided. In signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the
City Clerk followed with the word “by” and the Deputy Clerk's own name and the
words “Deputy Clerk.”
   (B)   Duties. The powers and duties hereinabove described shall be exercised
by the Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the City Clerk from the City Clerk's
office, and only when either written direction has been given by the City Clerk
to the Deputy to exercise the power or when the Corporate Authorities have
determined by resolution hat the City Clerk is temporarily or permanently
incapacitated to perform the functions.
   (C)   Salary of Deputy Clerk. In such occasions that the Deputy Clerk
attends a City Council meeting
in the Clerk's absence to record minutes, such meeting shall be paid to the
Deputy at the amount of one-half of the fixed monthly salary per § 31.16(C).
   (E)   Residency of Deputy Clerk. As the position is intended to provide
coverage for and exercise the powers of the City Clerk, residency within the
city is hereby required.
(1992 Code, § 31.33) (Am. Ord. 2025-MC01, passed 1-14-2025)
§ 31.34 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Duties. The Treasurer shall receive all money paid into the city
either directly from the person paying or from the hands of other officer or
employee as may receive it. He or she shall pay out money only on warrants
properly signed in accordance with the provisions of §
36.05. He or she shall keep the deposit of the city money only in the
designated depositories, and he or she shall keep the money separate and
distinct from his own money and shall not make private or personal use of any
city money.
   (B)   Records. The Treasurer shall keep the records showing all money
received by him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose
for which it is paid, and he or she shall keep records at all times showing the
financial status of the city and the books and accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance, and he or she shall keep them in the manner required by
the City Council. He or she shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or
orders filed with him or paid by him and all vouchers as is required by state
statute. These records/accounts shall always be subject to inspection by the
Corporate Authorities.
   (C)   Monthly report. At the end of every month, the Treasurer shall render
an account to the City Council showing the state of the Treasury. This monthly
financial report shall include statements of moneys received, moneys expended
and the balance of money in the Treasury for each fund.
   (D)   Annual Treasurer’s report. Each fiscal year, as required by state
statute, the Treasurer shall make out and file with the City Clerk a full and
detailed account of all city receipts and expenditures and of all his
transactions as Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, and he or she shall
show in that account the state of the Treasury at the close of the fiscal year.
The Clerk shall publish the account at least once, within 10 days, in 1 or more
newspapers with a general circulation within the city.
   (E)   Additional duties. The Treasurer shall perform the other duties as may
be prescribed by state statute or by the City Council.
   (F)   Salary of Treasurer. The salary of Treasurer shall be fixed at $225
per month, for a total of $2,700 per fiscal year, and shall be paid monthly
from the General Fund of the city. Effective the first Council meeting
following the April 2009 election, the salary of Treasurer shall be fixed at
$275 per month, for a total of $3,300 per fiscal year.
(Ord. 070896E, passed 7-8-1996; Am. Ord. 2008-MC07, passed 9-22-2008)
§ 31.35 CITY COMPTROLLER.
   (A)   Office created. There is hereby created the office of City
Comptroller.
   (B)   Appointment. The City Comptroller shall be appointed by the Mayor by
and with the advice and consent of the majority of the Alderman then holding
office. The term of such office shall be determined on an annual basis.
   (C)   Duties. The City Comptroller shall exercise general supervision over
all officers responsible for the collection or disbursement of municipal
revenue and compile and report all information needed for the preparation of
the appropriation ordinance, or the budget, if the Comptroller has been
designated the budget officer, and shall perform the other duties as the City
Council deems necessary and proper and by
ordinance or resolution may confer upon the Comptroller. The powers and duties
of the City Comptroller shall also include the statutory duties established by
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-100 through 3.1-35-115.
   (D)   Salary of City Comptroller. The salary of the City Comptroller shall
be paid at the same rate and frequency as the City Clerk and City Treasurer.
   (E)   Residency of City Comptroller. As the position is intended to provide
oversight of other city officials who are statutorily required to be legal
residents of the city, residency of the City Comptroller shall be strongly
encouraged but not required.
(Ord. 021201B, passed 2-12-2001; Am. Ord. 2025-MC01, passed 1-14-2025)
§ 31.36 BUDGET OFFICER.
   (A)   Office created. There is created and established in and for the city
the office of Budget Officer. The Budget Officer shall be appointed annually by
the Mayor, with approval by the City Council.
   (B)   Oath and bond. The Budget Officer shall, within 5 days after
appointment and notice thereof, take and subscribe the oath of office and shall
enter into a bond payable to the city with sureties to be approved by the City
Council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties imposed by the ordinances of the city and the state statutes. The cost
of the bond shall be borne by the city.
   (C)   Duties. The Budget Officer shall perform the duties which may from
time to time be requested by law and by ordinance of the city. In addition, the
Budget Officer shall coordinate and participate in the following activities.
      (1)   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments and boards.
      (2)   Compile the annual budget. The budget shall contain estimates of
revenues available to the city for the fiscal year in which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures of the city and the departments
and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be
presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management
practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts, now or in the future
recommended by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting, or the
Illinois Auditor of Public Accounts, or the Division of Local Governmental
Affairs and Property Taxes of the Illinois Department of Revenue or successor
agencies, shall be deemed proof of the conformity. The budget shall contain
actual revenues and expenditures for the second and third years immediately
preceding the year for which the budge is prepared and project/estimated
revenues and expenditures for the current year. So far as possible, the fiscal
data for the preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in
conformity with the year’s chart of accounts approved above. Each budget shall
show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.
      (3)   Examine all books and records of all city departments and boards
which relate to monies received by the city, departments and boards, debts and
accounts receivable and amounts owned by or to the city, departments or boards.
      (4)   Obtain the additional information from the city, departments and
boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for purposes of compiling a
municipal budget, the information to be furnished by the city, departments or
boards in a form required by the Budget Officer. Any department or board which
refuses to make the information as is requested of it available to the Budget
Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the city until the department or board shall comply in full with the
request of the Budget Officer.
      (5)   Establish and maintain the procedures as shall insure that no
expenditures are made by the city, departments or boards, except as authorized
by the budget.
   (D)   Budget changes.  
      (1)   The Budget Officer shall have the power to increase/decrease or
establish new line item budgets within departments so long as there is no
increase in total budget for the department. The Budget Officer shall consult
with the department head before changes are made and shall notify the City
Council in writing of the changes.
      (2)   The Budget Officer shall notify the City Council in writing of the
need to increase a departments’ total budget. The increases shall require a
vote of the City Council. As in compliance with the state statute, no revision
of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event the funds are
not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision.
   (E)   Capital improvement, repair or replacement fund. In the preparation by
the Budget Officer of the annual budget, an amount not to exceed 3% of the
equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the municipality
may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific
capital improvements, repairs, and/or replacements of specific types of
municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be
designated as the “Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund.”
Expenditures shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital
improvement, repair or replacement will occur. Upon the completion or
abandonment of any object or should any surplus monies remain after the
completion or abandonment of any monies for which the fund was inaugurated,
then the funds no longer necessary shall be transferred into the General
Corporate Fund of the municipality on the first day of the fiscal year
following the abandonment, completion or discovery of surplus funds.
   (F)   Contingencies. The annual budget may contain money set aside for
contingency purposes not to exceed 10% of the total budget, less the amount set
aside for contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies
upon a majority vote of the City Council then holding office.
   (G)   Budget presentation. Before the close of each fiscal year the budget
for the coming fiscal year shall be presented to the Mayor and City Council for
approval, as required by ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1 and ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.2 through 8-2-9.10.
   (H)   Public inspection, notice and hearing.  
      (1)   The City Council authorities shall make the tentative annual budget
conveniently available to public inspection for at least 10 days prior to the
passage of the annual budget, by announcement at a regular meeting of the City
Council.
      (2)   Not less than 1 week after the tentative annual budget is available
to public inspection, and prior to the final action on the budget, the City
Council shall hold at least 1 public hearing on the tentative annual budget,
after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and
passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing.
      (3)   Notice of the budget hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at 1 week prior to the time
of the hearing.
   (I)   Balanced budget. Each annual budget shall be balanced. Expenditures
for a given fiscal year shall not exceed estimated revenues and reserves for
that fiscal year less amounts devoted to the Operating Reserve.
(Ord. 022398C, passed 2-23-1998; Am. Ord. 042699A, passed 4-26-1999)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Health
   
32.01   Establishment; composition
   
32.02   Powers and duties
   
32.03   Orders of Board of Health to be certified; enforcement
   
32.04   Inspections by Board of Health
Public Works Department
   
32.15   Establishment; composition
   
32.16   Superintendent; duties
   
32.17   Utilities operated by Department shall obtain permits
Park and Recreation Board
   
32.25   Purpose
   
32.26   Governing and operational structure
   
32.27   Duties, functions, responsibilities and authorizations
   
32.28   Violation of Board rule
Plan Commission
   
32.40   Establishment; purpose
   
32.41   Membership
   
32.42   Term of office; vacancies; compensation
   
32.43   Procedure of Plan Commission; meetings
   
32.44   Powers and duties
   
32.45   Subdivision regulations
   
32.46   Public improvements
   
32.47   Expenditures
Economic Development Department
   
32.75   Department created
   
32.76   Employees
   
32.77   Duties of the Coordinator
 
   
32.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   City Tree Board, see
Chapter 97
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the Board of Health for the city. The Board of
Health shall consist of 5 members: the Mayor, the City Clerk and 3 members to
be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board of Health shall exercise general supervision over the public
health of the city and shall make examinations into all matters affecting the
same.
   (B)   The Board of Health shall at any and all times cause all nuisances
which it may find to be prejudicial, obnoxious or dangerous to the public
health to be abated, removed or remedied.
(1992 Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 ORDERS OF BOARD OF HEALTH TO BE CERTIFIED; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All orders of the Board of Health shall be certified by the City Clerk
and the Mayor, who shall cause them to be executed by delivering the same to
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   All persons shall obey the orders and directions of the Board of
Health, and any occupant of any premises in the city who shall, after a notice
in writing, refuse or neglect to obey any order of the Board of Health for a
period of 10 hours shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
32.99.
(1992 Code, § 32.03)
Penalty, see § 32.99
§ 32.04 INSPECTIONS BY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   The Board of Health shall establish reasonable standards for
conducting inspection of all premises within the corporate limits of the city.
All the premises shall be classified by the Board of Health according to use,
age, condition, composition of construction, location and other factors the
Board of Health may find to be appropriate.
   (B)   Any member of the Board of Health, at any time between the hours of 8:
00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., may enter any premises within the corporate limits of
the city and inspect all parts thereof when the member:
      (1)   Has obtained the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises
to so enter and inspect; or
      (2)   Has determined that the entry and inspection is in accordance with
the standards for inspection established by the Board of Health and has
obtained a search warrant identifying the premises to be entered and the
purpose of the inspection; or
      (3)   Has reasonable cause to believe that the condition of the premises
or some part thereof is prejudicial, obnoxious or dangerous to the public
health and has obtained a search warrant identifying the premises to be entered
and the purpose of the inspection.
(1992 Code, § 32.04)
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 32.15 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the Public Works Department of the city. The
Department shall consist of the Director of Public Works and the other
employees as the City Council may from time to time deem necessary to implement
the provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 32.15) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 32.16 DIRECTOR; DUTIES.
   The Director of the Public Works Department shall exercise general
management and control of the department.
   (A)   He or she shall supervise over and be responsible for the conduct and
performance of all employees of the Department.
   (B)   He or she shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
the following public facilities: water treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant, wastewater lift stations, water and wasterwater mains, parks, Community
Building, streets, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, drainageways, city garage,
city pole buildings, and other property as may be assigned to the Department by
the City Council.
   (C)   He or she shall be the custodian of all vehicles, equipment,
structures, and property provided by the city for the use of the Department.
   (D)   The Director shall read or cause to be read every water meter used by
the Department's customers at the times as are necessary that the bills may be
sent out at the proper time. Should any meter become inoperative during any
month or should weather conditions prevent a meter from being read, the sum the
property owner shall pay for water and sewer service for the month shall be the
same as that paid for the average amount of use over the previous three months.
   (E)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of Chapters
51,
52,
95 and
96, and §
131.01, and make inspections, measurements, and tests necessary for the
purpose.
   (F)   He or she shall perform the other duties as may be assigned to him or
her by the provisions of this code or by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 32.16) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC10, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 32.17 UTILITIES OPERATED BY DEPARTMENT SHALL OBTAIN PERMITS.
   The utilities owned by the city, and operated by the Public Works
Department, shall not be furnished to any individual, or furnished, installed
or hooked up to any premises, or any lot of record, unless the owner of the
premises or lot of record shall have first obtained either an occupancy permit
or a building permit for the use of the premises or the lot in accordance with
Chapter 155 of this Code.
(Ord. 2005-MC10, passed 10-24-2005)
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 32.25 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to use existing public and private
resources and combine them into a coordinated park and recreation program for
the use and benefit of the residents of the city. The city realizes there is
growing demand for recreational facilities and programs, but it is also aware
that the present financial and human resources available through the city
system are limited. Therefore, until the time as the city’s own resources are
expanded and improved, the system of delivery of park and recreation programs
set out in §§
32.26 and
32.27 is hereby established to provide city residents with what is hopefully an
adequate and effective system.
(1992 Code, § 32.25) (Am. Ord. 111477, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 070979,
passed 7-9-1979; Am. Ord. 052781, passed 5-27-1981)
§ 32.26 GOVERNING AND OPERATIONAL STRUCTURE.
   The city park and recreation program and the services, facilities and
activities thereof, shall be governed and operated as follows.
   (A)   City Council. The City Council shall have exclusive control of and
authority over all park and recreation services, facilities and activities in
the city, and, except as expressly and specifically delegated to some other
body or entity by this subchapter, shall establish all fees, rules and
regulations and enter into all agreements necessary to adequately and properly
perform and fulfill its duties and responsibilities hereunder.
   (B)   Park and Recreation Board. There is hereby established and created a
Park and Recreation Board (hereinafter referred to as “Board”). Six members
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, for
overlapping 5 year terms. The remaining members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council, from the nominees of recognized private
recreational organizations, for 1-year terms. Private recreational
organizations may each submit the name of 1 nominee, who must be a resident of
the city, to the Mayor prior to the second City Council meeting in April of
each year. (All members’ terms shall begin and expire on the general dates
established for appointed city officials on other boards and committees.) All
members shall have equal voting power. A chairperson shall be elected from the
members and shall serve for a 1-year term. No member may act as chairperson for
more than two consecutive years. Other offices may be established by the Board
as they require or deem appropriate and necessary.
   (C)   Recognized private recreational organizations. The City Council may,
after a review and affirmative recommendation by the Board of the petition of a
private recreational organization, recognize the organization as a deliverer of
a specific recreational program. Recognition shall be formally approved by a
majority of the City Council which may set forth the conditions, duties and
authorizations granted therewith. All recognized private recreational
organizations shall submit quarterly reports of all receipts and disbursements
and account for all revenues obtained through the use of city facilities.
(1992 Code, § 32.26) (Am. Ord. 111477, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 070979,
passed 7-9-1979; Am. Ord. 052781, passed 5-27-1981; Am. Ord. 120991-1, passed
12-9-1991; Am. Ord. 2005-MC10, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 32.27 DUTIES, FUNCTIONS, RESPONSIBILI- TIES AND AUTHORIZATIONS.
   (A)   City Council. All duties, functions, responsibilities and
authorizations not hereinafter expressly and specifically delegated relating to
delivery of park and recreation programs and use of facilities associated
therewith, are retained by the City Council.
   (B)   Park and Recreation Board.
      (1)   The Park and Recreation Board shall evaluate the city’s current and
future needs for park and recreational facilities and programs, develop a plan
for the orderly growth and development thereof and present recommendations
therefor to the City Council and city administrative officials.
      (2)   Requests for use of the picnic facilities and community building
shall be received, reviewed and granted by the city at City Hall. The Board
shall receive and review all requests for the use of all other park and
recreational facilities and present any requests which may cause permanent
changes or additions to park and recreational facility use, along with its
recommendations to the City Council for its approval. The Board shall draft,
update and maintain a master schedule of the annual use or proposed use of the
city park and recreational facilities and shall file the schedule with the City
Clerk.
      (3)   Upon authorization by the City Council, the Board may directly
operate, sponsor or present recreational activities or programs for the benefit
of the residents of the city which are not currently being provided by
recognized private recreational organizations. All revenues received from the
activities or programs shall be subject to the same collecting, disbursing and
audit procedures governing other city revenue.
      (4)   The Board shall review, within 30 days of the receipt thereof, all
petitions for recognition of unrecognized private recreational organizations.
After review, the Board shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to
whether the organization should receive formal recognition by the city and
shall suggest the conditions it believes should be attached to the formal
recognition.
      (5)   The Board shall meet at least once a month.
      (6)   The Board shall review the established fee schedules for park and
recreation facility use annually. After a public hearing, with at least 24
hours prior notice thereof published in a local newspaper, regarding any
proposed changes in the use fees, the Board shall make recommendations to the
City Council regarding use fee changes. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in the local newspaper no less than 1 day prior to the hearing.
      (7)   The Board shall submit quarterly reports of its activities to the
City Council for review. The City Council may request more frequent reports,
such as they deem necessary.
      (8)   The Board shall be considered as an operating department of the
city with the Chairperson serving as a department head. The Board shall prepare
and submit an annual operating and capital improvements budgets to the City
Administrator for review and inclusion in the city’s annual budget. The
Chairperson of the Board shall receive a salary as set by the Board with the
approval of the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council and administrative officials of the city shall review
all other Board requests and recommendations for appropriate actions and
authorizations.
(1992 Code, § 32.27) (Am. Ord. 111477, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 070979,
passed 7-9-2979; Am. Ord. 052781, passed 5-27-1981; Am. Ord. 120991-1, passed
12-9-1991)
§ 32.28 VIOLATION OF BOARD RULE.
   Violation of a Board rule which has been approved by the City Council and
either posted or publicized may be cause for denial of use of a facility or
participation in a program, but the denial which extends more than 1 day may be
appealed to the Board or to the City Council for a hearing or the act may be
prosecuted as a misdemeanor if a serious offense.
(1992 Code, § 32.28) (Am. Ord. 111477, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 070979,
passed 7-9-1979; Am. Ord. 052781, passed 5-27-1981)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 32.40 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive city plan for the guidance, direction, and control of the growth
and development of the city, a Plan Commission, which shall be a department of
the city government, is hereby created pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-
12-4.
(1992 Code, § 32.40) (Am. Ord. 022398B, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 32.41 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of 7 members to include the following: the
Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the Commission, with power to vote; a
Chairperson; and 5 other members who are citizens of the zoning district
appointed by the Mayor, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty
on the Commission, and subject to the approval of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 32.41) (Am. Ord. 022398B, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 32.42 TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.
   Ex officio members shall serve for the term of their elective office. The
Chairperson and the 5 appointed citizen members shall each serve for a period
of 1 year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only.
All members of the Plan Commission shall serve without compensation. A
Secretary shall also be appointed to record minutes of Plan Commission
meetings; the Secretary shall receive compensation in the amount of $30 per
meeting.
(1992 Code, § 32.42) (Am. Ord. 022398B, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 32.43 PROCEDURE OF PLAN COMMISSION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   Immediately following their appointment the members of the Plan
Commission shall meet, organize, elect the officers as it may deem necessary,
and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws.
   (B)   The Commission shall meet on the first Wednesday of each calendar
month of the year at 6:00 p.m. Meetings shall take place at the City Hall, but
shall be changed from time to time to accommodate large crowds with proper
notice and signs posted clearly stating the place of the relocated meeting. Any
meeting falling upon a legal holiday, or a holiday observed by the city, shall
be held on the following day. Publication of the Commission’s annual meeting
schedule shall be provided to the City Clerk for publication with the City
Council annual meeting notice for public posting as required by law.
   (C)   Meetings shall be deferred if there is no pending business to be
discussed; however, business which comes up after the regularly scheduled
meeting date which was cancelled shall be placed on the agenda for the
following month’s meeting whenever possible unless an issue of some emergent
need requires a special meeting to be set.
   (D)   Public hearings shall be conducted at various times and in such a
manner as required by regulations under Title XV: Land Usage of this code, and
as required by state law.
   (E)   The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
shall be open at all times to public inspection. The Commission shall also file
an annual report with the Mayor and City Council, setting forth its
transactions and recommendations if not done previously.
(1992 Code, § 32.43) (Am. Ord. 2016-MC04, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 32.44 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan of
public improvements, looking to the present and future development and growth
of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the City Council, will be known
as the official plan of the city. The plan shall include reasonable
requirements with reference to streets, alleys, and public grounds within the
corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more
than 1½ miles from the limits and not included in any municipality, the
requirements to be effective whenever the lands shall be subdivided after the
adoption of the plan;
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time, the
changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council or by the Commission;
   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time, plans
and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
plan;
   (D)   To give aid to the officials of the city, charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of the improvements and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan;
   (E)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;
   (F)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area; and
   (G)   To exercise the other powers germane to the powers granted under the
Illinois Municipal Code as may be conferred by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 32.44)
§ 32.45 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed in this
subchapter, no map or plan of any subdivision presented for record, affecting
land within the corporate limits of the city, or in contiguous territory
outside of and distant not more than 1½ miles from the limits and not included
in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless
the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, storm or floodwater runoff channels and basins, and public
grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of the official
plan.
(1992 Code, § 32.45)
§ 32.46 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report
necessary or advisable for the consideration of the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 32.46)
§ 32.47 EXPENDITURES.
   The Plan Commission may at the discretion of the City Council employ
necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be
provided for by adequate appropriations made by the City Council from the
public funds. If the Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the City Council and
appropriations by the City Council therefor.
(1992 Code, § 32.47)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.75 DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There is created the Economic Development Department. The Department shall
consist of the Economic Development Coordinator and the other employees as the
City Council may from time to time deem necessary to implement the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 120991-3, passed 12-9-1991)
§ 32.76 EMPLOYEES.
   The Coordinator and any and all employees shall be appointed in accordance
with the provisions of §
31.30 of this code. This position may be combined with any already existing
position as the City Council deems necessary.
(Ord. 120991-3, passed 12-9-1991)
§ 32.77 DUTIES OF THE COORDINATOR.
   The Coordinator shall exercise general management and control of the
Economic Development Department.
   (A)   He or she shall supervise over and be responsible for the conduct and
performance of all employees of the Department.
   (B)   He or she shall work on obtaining state, federal or private sector
grants.
   (C)   He or she shall maintain a close working relationship with local
businesses to promote maximum job retention and business expansion.
   (D)   He or she shall be the custodian of all vehicles, equipment,
structures and property provided by the city of the use of the Department.
   (E)   He or she shall perform the other duties as may be assigned to him by
the provisions of this code or by the City Council.
(Ord. 120991-3, passed 12-9-1991)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §
32.03 shall be found, upon conviction thereof, guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(1992 Code, § 32.99) (Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Establishment; composition
   
33.02   Appointment; oath; bond
   
33.03   Chief of Police; duties
   
33.04   Members of Police Department; duties
   
33.05   Part-time members of Police Department; hiring standards
   
33.06   Power of arrest
Auxiliary Police
   
33.15   Mayor authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers
   
33.16   Qualifications
   
33.17   Status; supervision of auxiliary police officers
   
33.18   Termination
   
33.19   Powers and duties
   
33.20   Certificate upon completion of training
   
33.21   Use of firearms
   
33.22   Compensation
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the Police Department of the city. The Police
Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and the other police officers
and employees as the City Council may from time to time deem necessary to
implement the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 38, and §§
92.35,
94.01 through
94.03,
96.20,
111.33 through
111.35,
131.02 through
131.04,
131.07,
132.01 through
132.07,
132.20,
132.21,
132.24,
132.25, and
132.35 through
132.37.
(1992 Code, § 33.01)
§ 33.02 APPOINTMENT; OATH; BOND.
   The Chief of Police and any and all police officers shall be appointed in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 31 of this Code. The Chief and all police officers shall take an oath
of office and shall execute a bond as an appointed officer of the city as
provided by §
31.02.
(1992 Code, § 33.02)
§ 33.03 CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall exercise general management and control of
the Police Department:
      (1)   He or she shall supervise over and be responsible for the conduct
and performance of all employees of the Department.
      (2)   He or she shall be the custodian of all vehicles, equipment,
structures and property provided by the city for the use of the Department.
      (3)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this Code.
      (4)   He or she shall perform the other duties as may be assigned to him
by the provisions of this code or by the City Council.
      (5)   He or she shall be the custodian of all stolen goods or other
property received and retained under police authority.
   (B)   The Chief shall make to the Mayor, at the second regular City Council
meeting of each month, and also at the end of each municipal year thereof, a
report in writing of the doings of his Department since the last report. The
report shall be in a form as prescribed by the Fire and Police Committee.
   (C)   The Chief shall provide a suitable police record which shall be kept
at the police station and in which each officer making an arrest shall enter
the name of the person arrested, where arrested, on what charge, what property,
if any, was taken or found on the person, and how disposed of, and shall also
record his own name as the officer making the arrest. The disposition of all
cases arising out of the arrests shall be shown on the record.
(1992 Code, § 33.03)
§ 33.04 MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTIES.
   The members of the Police Department when on duty shall devote their time
and attention to the discharge of the duties of their office according to the
provisions of the ordinances of the city and rules and regulations of the
Police Department. They shall, to the best of their ability, preserve order,
quiet, and peace throughout the city, and enforce the provisions of this Code,
of the ordinances of the city, of the ordinances of the county, of the state
statutes and of the laws of the United States. When it shall come to the
knowledge of any police officer that any provision of the ordinances and laws
have been violated, the police officer shall immediately cause a complaint to
be made before a court and the proper witnesses to be subpoenaed and evidence
procured for the successful prosecution of the offender. All police officers
shall render prompt and efficient aid to each other in the discharge of their
duties.
(1992 Code, § 33.04)
§ 33.05 PART-TIME MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; HIRING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Part-time police officers of the Villa Grove Police Department shall
meet the following requirements prior to being hired:
      (1)   Must be at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   Must be a high school graduate or equivalent;
      (3)   Must have a current and valid motor vehicle operator’s license;
      (4)   Must not have been convicted of a felony or any other crime
involving moral turpitude;
      (5)   Must submit fingerprints to the Chief of Police for background
check by Illinois State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation;
      (6)   Must be legally eligible to possess and carry firearms and
ammunition and not restricted from possession of a firearm under the
Misdemeanor Domestic Violence Amendment to the Gun Control Act of 1968;
      (7)   All police officers, other than those officers who shall be
employed on a full-time basis, shall be qualified to enter and successfully
complete any training mandated by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training
Standards Board;
      (8)   Must be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound
health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;
      (9)   Must pass a medical examination;
      (10)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (B)   In addition, the part-time police officers shall not be assigned to
supervise or direct full-time police officers and shall not be used as
permanent replacements for permanent full-time police officers.
   (C)   A part-time police officer shall have all the responsibilities of a
full-time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the General
Orders of the Village Grove Police Department, but the number of hours a part-
time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted.
(Am. Ord. 072897D, passed 7-28-1997; Am. Ord. 2010-MC03, passed 8-23-2010; Am.
Ord. 2012-MC03, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 33.06 POWER OF ARREST.
   The Mayor and Aldermen, as well as every member of the Police Department,
are hereby declared to be peace officers with the powers to make arrests as are
given to peace officers by state statute.
(1992 Code, § 33.05)
AUXILIARY POLICE
§ 33.15 MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO APPOINT AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers subject
to the advice and consent of the City Council. The number of auxiliary police
officers shall be as from time to time determined by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 33.15) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
§ 33.16 QUALIFICATIONS.
   All the appointments must be made from a list of employees certified to by
the Chief of Police and the City Administrator as having satisfactorily
completed a course of training by the Chief. Prior to the appointments, all
proposed auxiliary police officers shall be fingerprinted and their
fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification,
Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record. No person shall be
appointed as an auxiliary police officer if he or she has been convicted of a
felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.
(1992 Code, § 33.16) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
§ 33.17 STATUS; SUPERVISION OF AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular Police
Department. Identification symbols worn by the auxiliary police officers shall
be different and distinct from those used by the regular Police Department.
Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times during the performance of their
duties, be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police and
shall, at all times, be subordinate to all regular members of the regular
Police Department.
(1992 Code, § 33.17) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
§ 33.18 TERMINATION.
   The appointment of any or all auxiliary police officers may be terminated in
accordance with the Uniform Personnel Rules and Regulations, City of Villa
Grove (Chapter 37 of this Code); however, if an auxiliary police officer does
not receive certification by the Chief of Police for 6-month intervals
beginning 6 months from the date of employment, the police officer will be
automatically terminated.
(1992 Code, § 33.18) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
§ 33.19 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties, when
properly assigned and on duty as directed by the Chief of Police:
   (A)   To aid or direct traffic in the municipality;
   (B)   To aid in the control of natural or man-made disasters;
   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorder;
   (D)   To perform normal and regular police duties when so assigned by the
Chief on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular Police
Department to perform the normal and regular police duties;
   (E)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
other criminal law of the state;
   (F)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
   (G)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody in any safe place,
overnight, through Sunday or until they can be brought before the proper judge;
   (H)   To exercise all other powers, as conservators of the peace, that the
Corporate Authorities may prescribe;
   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal
ordinances or the State Criminal Law, within the corporate limits of the city.
(1992 Code, § 33.19) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
§ 33.20 CERTIFICATE UPON COMPLETION OF TRAINING.
   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall
receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures
from the Chief of Police or other persons designated by the Chief to instruct
the auxiliary police officers. Upon completion of the course of training, the
Chief of Police shall file a certificate, attesting to an auxiliary police
officer’s completion of the course, with the City Clerk.
(1992 Code, § 33.20) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-1978)
§ 33.21 USE OF FIREARMS.
   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with the
permission of the Chief of Police, and then only when in uniform and in the
performance of their duties.
(1992 Code, § 33.21) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-1978)
§ 33.22 COMPENSATION.
   Auxiliary police officers shall be paid at the rate of $1 per year.
(1992 Code, § 33.22) (Ord. 72478B, passed 7-24-78)
CHAPTER 34: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Establishment; composition
   
34.02   Function and duties
   
34.03   Bylaws
   
34.04   Fire Chief; selection; duties
   
34.05   Chain of command at fires
   
34.06   Use of fire apparatus
   
34.07   Assistance from police officers
   
34.08   Firefighters authorized to direct traffic at scene of fire
   
34.09   Destruction; removal of buildings
   
34.10   Mayor may order review
Fire Protection Outside City
   
34.20   Agreements
   
34.21   Minimum rate for use of firefighting equipment
   
34.22   Determination of what fire equipment will respond
   
34.23   Mutual aid agreements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the fire department of the city. The Fire Department
shall consist of a Fire Chief and the other officers and firefighters as the
Department may from time to time deem necessary to implement the provisions of
this Code.
(1992 Code, § 34.01)
§ 34.02 FUNCTION AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every member
thereof to extinguish fires, to prevent the occurrence or spread of fires, to
maintain the property and equipment of the Fire Department and to undertake
fire prevention work.
(1992 Code, § 34.02)
§ 34.03 BYLAWS.
   The members of the Fire Department shall prepare the bylaws as they deem
necessary to designate their officers and to administer the Department. The
bylaws and any amendments thereto shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council. Whenever the provisions of the bylaws may conflict with the provisions
of this Code, state statute or city ordinance, the provisions of this Code,
state statute or city ordinance shall prevail.
(1992 Code, § 34.03)
§ 34.04 FIRE CHIEF; SELECTION; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be selected in the manner prescribed by the
Department’s bylaws. He or she shall take the oath of office and execute a bond
the same as other appointed officers of the city, as provided by
Chapter 31 of this Code. He or she shall be the commanding officer of the Fire
Department and all the members thereof, subject only to the orders of the
Mayor, and also the orders of the City Council, when in session, and shall have
charge of all the fire apparatus of the city.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the
cause of all fires occurring within the city.
(1992 Code, § 34.04)
§ 34.05 CHAIN OF COMMAND AT FIRES.
   In case of fire, the Fire Chief and members of the Department shall rank in
the order prescribed by the bylaws of the Department, and the officer of the
highest rank at the fire shall take command of the Fire Department and direct
the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner
possible.
(1992 Code, § 34.05)
§ 34.06 USE OF FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful to remove any fire apparatus belonging to the Fire
Department from the place of storage thereof, except under the order of some
duly authorized officer of the Department, or to use the apparatus, or any
property belonging thereto, for any purpose other than the suppression of
fires, or for the drill of the company to which it may be assigned.
(1992 Code, § 34.06)
§ 34.07 ASSISTANCE FROM POLICE OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of each and every police officer on duty to respond to
all fire alarms. When not needed to control traffic or preserve property or the
public peace, each police officer shall report to the officer commanding the
Fire Department and be assigned to duty by him.
(1992 Code, § 34.07)
§ 34.08 FIREFIGHTERS AUTHORIZED TO DIRECT TRAFFIC AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him
may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing traffic
at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to any
emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in the
absence of or in assisting the police.
(1992 Code, § 34.08)
§ 34.09 DESTRUCTION; REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.
   The Mayor or the officer in command at any fire may direct the tearing down,
removal or destruction by any proper means of any building, fence or erection
when it is deemed necessary for the purpose of checking the progress of the
fire.
(1992 Code, § 34.09)
§ 34.10 MAYOR MAY ORDER REVIEW.
   The Mayor may at the time as he or she thinks necessary order a general
review or exercise the review and issue his orders therefor to the Fire Chief.
(1992 Code, § 34.10)
FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE CITY
§ 34.20 AGREEMENTS.
   The Corporate Authorities are hereby authorized to make and enter into
agreements with corporations or organizations outside of the city limits, under
the terms of which compensation in the amounts fixed by this subchapter shall
be paid for services rendered by the Fire Department. The agreements shall be
subject to the terms of this subchapter and shall contain a clause that the
city shall in no way and under no circumstances be held liable for any loss or
damage by reason of its failure to extinguish fires within the territory
described in any agreement. All the agreements shall contain a clause
permitting the termination of the agreement upon 6 months notice.
(1992 Code, § 34.20)
§ 34.21 MINIMUM RATE FOR USE OF FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   The minimum rate for making fire calls requiring attendance of city
firefighting equipment outside the city limits shall be $200 for the first
piece of firefighting equipment responding to the alarm, and $100 for each
additional item of firefighting equipment so responding.
(1992 Code, § 34.21)
§ 34.22 DETERMINATION OF WHAT FIRE EQUIPMENT WILL RESPOND.
   In responding to a fire call outside the city limits, the Fire Chief, or the
officer in charge, shall determine what item, or items, of firefighting
equipment will respond to the fire. All damage caused to firefighting equipment
while in attendance at fires outside the city shall be borne by the property
owner being assisted.
(1992 Code, § 34.22)
§ 34.23 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   This section shall not be construed to include fire calls requiring the
attendance of city fire trucks and equipment going outside the city limits in
aid and assistance of other municipalities in the area, nor shall this section
be construed as to abrogate or supersede any agreements heretofore entered into
by the city with other municipalities, fire protection districts, corporations
or organizations outside the city limits.
(1992 Code, § 34.23)   
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   Tax levy ordinance
Garbage Tax
   
35.015   Imposition of tax
Police Protection Tax
   
35.030   Imposition of tax
Band Tax
   
35.045   Imposition of tax
Fire Protection Tax
   
35.060   Imposition of tax
Park Tax
   
35.075   Imposition of tax
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies Tax
   
35.090   Compliance to provisions required
   
35.091   Compliance prerequisite to doing business
   
35.092   Imposition of tax
   
35.093   Report required; payment
   
35.094   Recovery of money
Municipal Utility Tax
   
35.105   Definitions
   
35.106   Imposition of tax
   
35.107   Transactions in interstate commerce
   
35.108   Tax to be in addition to payment for products or services
   
35.109   Returns
   
35.110   Credit
   
35.111   Recovery of tax due
Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
   
35.120   Imposition of tax
   
35.121   Report required
   
35.122   Payment
   
35.123   Certified copy of provisions to be sent to State Department of Revenue
Electricity Tax
   
35.135   Definitions
   
35.136   Tax imposed
   
35.137   Collection of tax
   
35.138   Tax remittance and return
   
35.139   Resales
   
35.140   Books and records
   
35.141   Credits and refunds
   
35.142   Remedies
Municipal Sales Tax
   
35.200   Intent of subchapter
   
35.201   Definitions
   
35.202   Imposition of 1% Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
35.203   Imposition of 1% Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
35.204   Limitations of taxes imposed by subchapter
   
35.205   Collection and administration of taxes
   
35.206   Applicable date of subchapter
   
35.207   Filing of ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue
   
35.208   Statutory authority
Tax Increment Finance Interested Parties Registry Registration Rules
   
35.210   Definitions
   
35.211   Establishment of registry
   
35.212   Maintenance of registry
   
35.213   Registration by residents
   
35.214   Registration by organizations
   
35.215   Determination of eligibility
   
35.216   Renewal and termination
   
35.217   Amendment to registration
   
35.218   Registries available for public inspection
   
35.219   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
35.220   Non interference
   
35.221   Amendment of registration rules
   
35.222   TIF Interested Parties Registration Form
Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax
   
35.235   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed
   
32.236   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
   
32.237   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
 
   
35.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 TAX LEVY ORDINANCE.
   Not sooner than 10 days after the publication of the appropriation ordinance
and on or before the second Tuesday in December in each year, a tax levy
ordinance shall be enacted as required by law levying the taxes as may be
needed to meet the anticipated expenses of the coming year, together with the
taxes as may be required to meet outstanding bond issues or for purposes
payable from special taxes properly authorized. A certified copy of the tax
levy ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk not later than the second
Tuesday in September. The ordinance shall show the total appropriated for each
item and the amount of tax levied therefor.
(1992 Code, § 35.001)
GARBAGE TAX
§ 35.015 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of collection and disposal of
garbage, refuse and ashes in this city at a rate not to exceed .20% of the
value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Local Government Affairs
for all taxable property therein, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-19-4.
(1992 Code, § 35.015)
POLICE PROTECTION TAX
§ 35.030 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection in this city at
a rate not to exceed .075% of the value as equalized or assessed by the
Department of Local Government Affairs for all taxable property therein, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 11-1-3 of the Illinois Municipal
Code.
(1992 Code, § 35.030)
BAND TAX
§ 35.045 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed for the maintenance and employment of a municipal
band for musical purposes in this city at a rate not to exceed .04% of the
value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Local Government Affairs
for all taxable property therein, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS §
11-45-6 and as authorized by the voters of the city at an election held on
April 15, 1930.
(1992 Code, § 35.045)
FIRE PROTECTION TAX
§ 35.060 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed for fire protection purposes in this city at a rate
not to exceed .20% of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department of
Local Government Affairs for all taxable property therein, in accordance with
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-17-3 and as authorized by the voters of the city
at an election held on April 21, 1953.
(1992 Code, § 35.060)
Cross reference:
   For provisions on fire prevention, see
Chapter 92
PARK TAX
§ 35.075 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of maintaining public parks in this
city at a rate not to exceed .10% of the value as equalized or assessed by the
Department of Local Government Affairs for all taxable property therein, in
accordance with the provisions of ILCS § 11-98-4 and as authorized by the
voters of the city at an election held on May 21, 1946.
(1992 Code, § 35.075)
Cross reference:
   For provisions on parks and recreation, see
Chapter 95
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES TAX
§ 35.090 COMPLIANCE TO PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association not incorporated
under the laws of this state to engage in the city in effecting fire insurance,
or to transact any business of fire insurance in the city, while in default by
not fully complying with any of the requirements of this subchapter and until
the requirements shall have been fully complied with, but this provision shall
not relieve any company, corporation or association from the payment of any
risk that may be undertaken in violation of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35.090)
§ 35.091 COMPLIANCE PREREQUISITE TO DOING BUSINESS.
   No insurance agent in the city shall have any insurance business or dealings
with any company, association or corporation not incorporated under the laws of
this state which shall be in default for not reporting or making payments as
herein provided until it shall have complied with all the requirements of this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35.091)
§ 35.092 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of
this state, which is engaged in the city in effecting fire insurance, shall pay
the City Treasurer for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department
a sum of money equal in amount to 2% per annum of the gross receipts received
as premiums upon fire insurance policies by any and all agents of the
corporation, company, or association, during the year ending on the first day
of July in each year, for any insurance effected, or agreed to be effected on
property located in the city, by or with the corporation, company or
association during the year.
(1992 Code, § 35.092)
§ 35.093 REPORT REQUIRED; PAYMENT.
   Every person acting in the city as agent, for or on behalf of any
corporation, company or association, shall, on or before the July 15 of each
and every year, render the City Clerk a full, true and just account verified by
his oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies which, during the year
ending July 1 preceding the report, shall have been received by him, or by some
other person for him, in his behalf, of any corporation, company, or
association on property located in the city. The agent shall also at the time
of rendering the aforesaid report, pay to the City Treasurer the sum of money
for which company, corporation or association, represented by him, is
chargeable, by virtue of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35.093)
§ 35.094 RECOVERY OF MONEY.
   The sum of money for which the company, corporation or association is so
chargeable may be recovered of it, or its agents or agent, by an action in the
name of and for the use of the city as for money had and received. Nothing in
this section shall be held to exempt any person, corporation, company or
association from indictment and conviction under the provisions of the act
entitled “An Act to enable cities, towns, and villages, organized under any
general or special law, to levy and collect tax of license fee from foreign
insurance companies for the benefit of organized fire departments,” in force
July 1, 1895.
(1992 Code, § 35.094)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
§ 35.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, electricity or water
for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be, except for that
consideration received from the city; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of transmitting the messages without any
deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied,
the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expenses
whatsoever.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. In addition to the usual and popular meaning of
person-to-person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where the persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not
include the furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the
transmission of messages to the extent that any services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by the persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages.
(1992 Code, § 35.105) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979; Am. Ord. 090985, passed
9-9-1985)
§ 35.106 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts from the business
originating within the corporate limits of the city. The 5% rate includes .146%
to cover administrative costs of the taxpayers, with the balance, or net, of
4.864% to be paid to the city;
   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the city,
and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. The 5%
rate includes .146% to cover administrative costs of the taxpayers, with the
balance, or net, of 4.854% to be paid to the city;
   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom. The 5% rate includes .146% to cover administrative costs of the
taxpayers, with the balance, or net, of 4.854% to be paid to the city.
   (D)   The tax imposed under this section shall not apply with respect to
gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or
sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject
to the tax imposed under this section.
(1992 Code, § 35.106) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979; Am. Ord. 11480, passed
1-14-1980; Am. Ord. 021086, passed 1-13-1986; Am. Ord. 012599B, passed 1-25-
1999)
§ 35.107 TRANSACTIONS IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for the
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the “Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act” authorized by ILCS § 8-11-1.
(1992 Code, § 35.107) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979)
§ 35.108 TAX TO BE IN ADDITION TO PAYMENT FOR PRODUCTS OR SERVICES.
   The tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this city by the taxpayers as compensation for the use
of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.
(1992 Code, § 35.108) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979)
§ 35.109 RETURNS.
   (A)   On or before the last day of April, 1980, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the City Clerk for the months of January, February and March, 1980,
stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax;
      (5)   The other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
Authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Clerk for a corresponding 3-month
period.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making the return, pay to the Clerk the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between the billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(1992 Code, § 35.109) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979)
§ 35.110 CREDIT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (B)   If a taxpayer under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized
by this section solely because the tax imposed by this chapter has been
replaced by the tax imposed under §§
35.110 et seq. then the taxpayer may apply the credit against any tax due under
§§
35.110 et seq.
(1992 Code, § 35.110) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979; Am. Ord. 012599C,
passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.111 RECOVERY OF TAX DUE.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of the
amount.
(1992 Code, § 35.111) (Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979)
MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX
§ 35.120 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in this city at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from the
rentals made in the course of the business while this subchapter is in effect,
in accordance with the provisions of ILCS § 8-11-7.
(1992 Code, § 35.120) (Ord. 011182A, passed 1-11-1982; Am. Ord. 011182B, passed
1-11-1982)
§ 35.121 REPORT REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged in the business in the city shall file on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue
required by §§ 2 and 3 of “An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in
the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or
Consumption,” approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
(1992 Code, § 35.121) (Ord. 011182A, passed 1-11-1982; Am. Ord. 011182B, passed
1-11-1982)
§ 35.122 PAYMENT.
   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
(1992 Code, § 35.122) (Ord. 011182A, passed 1-11-1982; Am. Ord. 011182B, passed
1-11-1982)
§ 35.123 CERTIFIED COPY OF PROVISIONS TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF
REVENUE.
   The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this subchapter not later than 5 days after the
effective date of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35.123) (Ord. 011182A, passed 1-11-1982; Am. Ord. 011182B, passed
1-11-1982)
ELECTRICITY TAX
§ 35.135 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivsions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether the place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,§
8-11-2, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale
of electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.136 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.412 cents per kilowatt- hour;
      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.270 cents per kilowatt- hour;
      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.243 cents per kilowatt- hour;
      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.236 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.230 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.216 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.213 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.209 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.206 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 in
a month: 0.203 cents per kilowatt-hour.
   (B)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the city, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision
of the state.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the Constitution
of the State of Illinois.
   (D)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after August 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to the
customers for delivery services in accordance with the Public Utilities Act,
ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-104, or the first bill issued to the customers on
or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.137 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §
35.139 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed
under this chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining
a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to the purchasers.
This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers
the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the person delivering
the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for the tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges
for which are written off as uncollectable, and provided further, that if the
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit the tax.
   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to the gross
charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for
their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request.
For purposes of this subchapter, any partial payment of a billed amount not
specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery
of electricity.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.138 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.
   (A)   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the city. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on
or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is
collected or is required to be collected under §
35.137.
   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under §
35.139, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the city
and pay the tax directly to the city on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.139 RESALES.
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the city shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the city and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
   (B)   If a person who received electricity in the city claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the city for a
resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for
the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish the additional information as the city may reasonably require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application the city shall assign a resale number
to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   The city may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number:
      (1)   Was obtained by the person through misrepresentation; or
      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the seller shall pay the tax imposed by this
chapter directly to the city pursuant to §
35.137(B) on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes and
shall collect the tax pursuant to §
35.136 and remit the tax pursuant to §
35.137(A) on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a
purchaser.
      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of the section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the city the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and the other
information that the city may reasonably require.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.140 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this
chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection
at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.141 CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, in order to permit sound
fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to a
refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this subchapter unless the person
files a claim for refund or credit within 1 year after the date on which the
tax was paid or remitted to the city.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
§ 35.142 REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 012599A, passed 1-25-1999)
MUNICIPAL SALES TAX
§ 35.200 INTENT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to impose a 1% Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax and a 1% Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax, as authorized by and pursuant to Illinois statutes, specifically ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1 et seq.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.201 DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of words used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning
and definitions as provided in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1 et seq.,
including especially ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.202 IMPOSITION OF 1% NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed in the city a Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax, pursuant to and as provided in ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 8-11-1.3, upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than on an item of tangible personal property that is
titled and registered by an agency of Illinois government, at retail in the
city, in the amount of 1% of gross receipts from such sales made in the course
of such business.
   (B)   The Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax imposed by this
section shall not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that is
to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption), prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances, and insulin, urine-testing materials, syringes and needles used by
diabetics, as provided in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3.
   (C)   The proceeds from said Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation
Tax Act shall be used only for expenditure on public infrastructure or for
property tax relief, or both, as defined in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.203 IMPOSITION OF 1% NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed in the city a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax, pursuant to and as provided in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-
1.4, upon all persons engaged, in the city in the business of making sales of
service in the amount of 1%, of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such servicemen, either in the form of tangible
personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of
service.
   (B)   The Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax imposed by this
section shall not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that is
to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption), prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances, and insulin, urine-testing materials, syringes and needles used by
diabetics, as provided in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4.
   (C)   The proceeds from said Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
Act shall be used only for expenditure on public infrastructure or for property
tax relief, or both, as defined in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009; Am. Ord. 2009- MC09, passed 9-28-2009)
§ 35.204 LIMITATIONS OF TAXES IMPOSED BY SUBCHAPTER.
   With respect to the provisions of this subchapter imposing a Non-Home Rule
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax (§
35.202) and a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax (§
35.203), nothing in either section should be construed to impose a tax upon the
privilege of engaging in any business that, under the Constitution of the
United States, may not be made the subject of taxation by the state or the
city.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.205 COLLECTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF TAXES.
   Pursuant to state statute, the Illinois Department of Revenue shall enforce
the provisions of this subchapter by collecting the taxes pursuant to the
statute, payment of which it shall transmit to the city pursuant to the
statute.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.206 APPLICABLE DATE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall apply to taxable sales on and after January 1, 2010,
pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1 et seq.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.207 FILING OF ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The City Clerk is directed to file a certified copy of Ordinance 2009-MC05
and any other required documentation with the Illinois Department of Revenue,
in accordance with its requirements before July 1, 2009, so that the tax may
commence on January 1, 2010.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
§ 35.208 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter and the taxes imposed by Ordinance 2009-MC05 are authorized
by Illinois statutes, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1 et seq., and
subsequent relevant amendments thereto shall also apply to this subchapter, to
the extent required by or permitted by law.
(Ord. 2009-MC05, passed 4-27-2009)
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY REGISTRATION RULES
§ 35.210 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the definitions
set forth below.
   ACT. The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-74.4-1, et seq.), as amended from time to time.
   INTERESTED PARTY(S). Shall mean:
      (1)   Any organization(s) active within the city;
      (2)   Any resident(s) of the city; and
      (3)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the Act to
register in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with this subchapter.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Villa Grove, Douglas County, Illinois, a non-home
rule unit of local government under Section 7 (Counties and Municipalities
Other Than Home Rule Units) of Article VII (Local Government) of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A redevelopment project area that:
      (1)   Is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the “interested parties” registry requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to these registration rules or such
revised form as may be approved by the city consistent with the requirements of
the Act.
   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the City pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 11-74.4-4.2 of the Act for the Redevelopment Project Area.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.211 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.
   The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established. The city shall establish a new registry
whenever it has identified an area for study and possible designation as a
redevelopment project area. In any event the process of establishing the new
registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices
required by §
35.219 of these rules or any other notices required by the Act with respect to
the proposed redevelopment project area.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.212 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   The registries shall be maintained by the City Clerk or his or her designee.
In the event the city determines that someone other than the Clerk should
maintain the registries, the city may transfer the responsibility for
maintaining the registries to such other department provided that the city:
   (A)   Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than 30
days prior to such transfer; and
   (B)   Publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.213 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.
   An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
City Clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver's
license, lease, utility bill, financial statement or such other evidence as may
be acceptable to the Clerk to establish the individual's current city
residency.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.214 REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.
   An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to
a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to
the City Clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a 1-page statement
describing the organization's current operations in the city.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.215 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation comply with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within 10 business days of the City Clerk's receipt of all
such documents. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the Act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the City Clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with these registration rules, the Clerk shall give written
notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and
supporting documentation.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.216 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of 3
years. At any time after such 3 year period the City Clerk may provide written
notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that such registration
shall terminate unless the interested person renews such registration within 30
days of the Clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the
interested person shall, within such 30 day period, complete and submit the
same registration form and supporting documentation then required of initial
registrants in order to permit the Clerk to confirm such person's residency or
such organization's operations in the city. The registration of all individuals
and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation is
submitted in a timely manner and complies with these regulation rules shall be
renewed for an additional, consecutive of all individuals and organizations
whose registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely
manner and complies with these regulation rules shall be renewed for an
additional, consecutive registrant's renewal registration form and/or
supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these
registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant at
the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such
registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation within 30 days of receipt of the Clerk's notice. If all defects
are not corrected within 30 days of the interested person's receipt of the City
Clerk's notice, the interested person's registration shall be terminated. Any
interested person whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to
register again as if a first-time registrant.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.217 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to
the City Clerk by certified mail of any of the following:
   (A)   A change in address for notice purposes;
   (B)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
   (C)   A termination of registration. Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk
shall revise the applicable registry accordingly.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.218 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal city
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.219 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of
the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report,
including how to obtain this information, such notice shall be sent by mail
within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing
the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan:
   (B)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of
changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment
project area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or
      (4)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed 10; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than 10
days following the city's adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act, 5, § 1-7 4.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of
amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project
area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project;
      (4)   Increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in
the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the
date the plan was adopted;
      (5)   Add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or
      (6)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed 10; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than 10
days following the city's adoption by ordinance of any such amendment.
   (D)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act for
redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of
residents from tem or more inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or
more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual
report described by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d), including how to obtain
the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after completion of the certified audit report.
   (E)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of
the preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a proposed
redevelopment project area that will result in the displacement of 10 or more
inhabited residential units or which will contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units, such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than 15
days before the date of such preliminary public meeting.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.220 NON INTERFERENCE.
   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.221 AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES.
   These registration rules may be amended by the city subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 35.222 TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION FORM.
   The TIF Interested Parties Registration Form can be found attached to Ord.
2024-MC05.
(Ord. 2018-MC07, passed 8-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024- MC05, passed 7-8-2024)
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
§ 35.235 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 2025-MC06, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 35.236 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in § 35.235, above. The imposition
of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 2025-MC06, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 35.237 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2025-MC06, passed 3-10-2025)
§ 35.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter, where another
penalty is not declared, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
35.105 through
35.111 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 9-24-79A, passed 9-24-1979; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUE; PURCHASING
Section
Financing
   
36.01   Organization of city financing
   
36.02   Fiscal year
   
36.03   Depositories
   
36.04   Indebtedness
   
36.05   Checks and warrants
   
36.06   Bills, claims or expenditures
   
36.07   Contracts; authority vote required
   
36.08   Audit
Revenues
   
36.20   Sources of revenues
   
36.21   Moneys received to be turned over to City Treasurer
Purchasing
   
36.30   Purchasing Agent; Deputy Purchasing Agent
   
36.31   Purchase of services, materials and supplies to be in accordance with
provisions; exceptions
   
36.32   Procedure for purchases
FINANCING
§ 36.01 ORGANIZATION OF CITY FINANCING.
   The city moneys shall be kept by the City Treasurer in the funds as are from
time to time required by law or determined by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 36.01)
§ 36.02 FISCAL YEAR.
   The city financial planning and reporting procedures shall be based on a
fiscal year that commences on May 1 in each calendar year and ends on April 30
in the following year.
(1992 Code, § 36.02)
§ 36.03 DEPOSITORIES.
   (A)   The followings banks are hereby designated as depositories in which
the funds and moneys of the city may be deposited:
      (1)   Villa Grove State Bank, Villa Grove, Illinois;
      (2)   Villa Grove First or Longview State Bank, Villa Grove, Illinois;
      (3)   Any depositories designated by the Treasurer of the State of
Illinois participating with the IPTIP (Illinois Public Treasurer’s Investment
Pool) Program, so long as the moneys are deposited with the city as a
participant of that same program.
   (B)   Each bank designated as depository for the funds or moneys shall
furnish the City Treasurer with a copy of all bank statements, which it is
required to furnish to the appropriate state officer, while acting as the
depository. If the funds or moneys are deposited in a bank herein designated as
a depository, the amounts of the deposits shall not exceed 75% of the capital
stock and surplus of the bank, and the City Treasurer shall not be discharged
from responsibility for any funds or moneys deposited in any bank in excess of
the limitation.
(1992 Code, § 36.03) (Am. Ord. 082800A, passed 8-28-2000)
§ 36.04 INDEBTEDNESS.
   No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting the indebtedness as may be
payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which
the indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute. The city shall not
become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount in the aggregate
exceeding those limitations prescribed by statute.
(1992 Code, § 36.04)
§ 36.05 CHECKS AND WARRANTS.
   (A)   All checks and warrants properly authorized to be drawn on the City
Treasurer shall bear the signatures of any 2 of the following: the Mayor, the
City Clerk, the City Treasurer, or the City Administrator. No such check or
warrant shall be valid unless the signatures of such officers appear thereon.
   (B)   When the office of City Comptroller is not vacant and such person is
duly appointed and bonded, then city checks or warrants shall also be valid
with the signature of the Comptroller.
(1992 Code, § 36.05) (Am. Ord. 021201A, passed 2-12-2001; Am. Ord. 2015-MC07,
passed 8-10-2015; Am. Ord. 2024-MC07, passed 9-12-2024)
§ 36.06 BILLS, CLAIMS OR EXPENDITURES.
   No bills, claims or expenditures of any kind or nature shall be paid and no
order drawn on the City Treasurer therefor, unless the bill or claim shall have
been passed on and allowed by the City Council, specifying upon which fund and
account the order shall be drawn. All bills, claims, expenditures, orders and
transfers from 1 fund to another shall be done only with warrants properly
signed, stating the particular fund and account to which the same are
chargeable.
(1992 Code, § 36.06)
§ 36.07 CONTRACTS; AUTHORITY VOTE REQUIRED.
   The Mayor, or any other person designated by the City Council, may sign on
behalf of the city any contract authorized by the City Council. No contract may
be entered into without the majority vote of the Corporate Authorities.
(1992 Code, § 36.07)
§ 36.08 AUDIT.
   As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than 6
months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the city made by
a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under state law, to be
designated by the City Council. Copies of the audit report shall be filed with
the State Comptroller and in the other places as may be required by law.
(1992 Code, § 36.08)
REVENUES
§ 36.20 SOURCES OF REVENUES.
   The city may receive moneys from taxes, payments for services and sales,
fees, fines, grants, interest on investments, donations and other sources as
the City Council may from time to time prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 36.20)
§ 36.21 MONEYS RECEIVED TO BE TURNED OVER TO CITY TREASURER.
   Every officer and employee of the city shall on or before the twenty-eighth
day of each month turn over all money received by him in his official capacity
to the City Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same
was received.
(1992 Code, § 36.21)
PURCHASING
§ 36.30 PURCHASING AGENT; DEPUTY PURCHASING AGENT.
   There is hereby created the position of purchasing agent. The position shall
be filled by appointment by the Mayor with a majority approval of City Council.
With the City Council’s approval, the Purchasing Agent may appoint a Deputy
Purchasing Agent to perform the duties of the position during the Purchasing
Agent’s absence.
(1992 Code, § 36.30) (Ord. 21180, passed 2-11-80)
§ 36.31 PURCHASE OF SERVICES, MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   Purchasing of services, materials and supplies for the city shall be
according to the provisions contained herein. However, contracts awarded by the
City Council, recurring utility services and those fees or wages of employees
and elected or appointed officials established from time to time by the City
Council shall not be affected or controlled by this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 36.31) (Ord. 21180, passed 2-11-80)
§ 36.32 PROCEDURE FOR PURCHASES.
   Purchases by city employees, officers or elected officials, except as
hereinabove exempted by the provisions of §
36.31, shall be pursuant to the following procedures.
   (A)   Those services, materials or supplies not exceeding $100 per order
shall be purchased by obtaining the written approval of the duly appointed,
acting and applicable department heads. No further authorization shall be
necessary.
   (B)   Subject to the provisions of division (C) below, those services,
materials or supplies exceeding $100 per order shall be purchased by first
obtaining a duly completed and signed purchase order issued by the Purchasing
Agent.
   (C)   Subject to the provisions of divisions (E) and (F) below, those
services, materials or supplies exceeding $500 per order, but less than $1,500
per order shall require prior to purchase, where possible, at least 3
telephonic or written quotes. The Purchasing Agent shall document telephonic
quotes not thereafter received in writing and when 3 quotes are not obtainable,
he or she shall document these facts in writing, along with what efforts were
made in attempting to obtain quotes.
   (D)   Subject to the provisions of divisions (E) and (F) below, those
services, materials or supplies exceeding $1,500 per order shall be made
through sealed bid and accepted by a majority of the City Council. A public
notice of sealed bid solicitation shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation at least 15 days prior to the scheduled public opening of bids. Bid
award shall be scheduled for the earliest City Council meeting practicable
after public opening of bids.
   (E)   Upon the declaration of an emergency by the Mayor or a City Council
member when it is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
the city, the Purchasing Agent shall be authorized to purchase services,
materials or supplies in excess of $100 without formal bidding. In such an
event, the Purchasing Agent shall certify in writing to the City Council within
15 calendar days after purchase or award, the causes leading to the emergency
and the measures taken to ensure competition among the vendors dealing in the
services, materials or supplies purchased.
   (F)   Where practical, the Purchasing Agent shall follow all generally
accepted practices of public purchasing, including joint and/or cooperative
purchasing arrangements with other local, state or national governments or
their agencies. Where other governmental units have competitively bid for goods
or services and the specifications of the bid award meet or exceed the
standards established by the city, the Purchasing Agent may forego the quote
process required for purchases or awards under $1,500, and may present the bids
exceeding $1,500 to the City Council for award without advertising for bids for
the matters under consideration.
(1992 Code, § 36.32) (Ord. 21180, passed 2-11-1980; Am. Ord. 120991-2, passed
12-9-1991)
CHAPTER 37: PERSONNEL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
37.010   Purpose
   
37.011   Equal opportunity statement of policy
   
37.012   Definitions
   
37.013   Personnel files
   
37.014   Additional policies and regulations
Hiring and Firing Authority
   
37.020   Employees
   
37.021   Appointed officers
Lines of Authority
   
37.030   Department and department heads
   
37.031   Committees of the Board
   
37.032   Chief of Police
   
37.033   Deputy Clerk
   
37.034   Supervisors other than department heads
Attendance and Hours of Work
   
37.040   City Hall
   
37.041   Public works
   
37.042   Police Department
   
37.043   Basic work week
   
37.044   Attendance
   
37.045   Lunch period
   
37.046   Ten-hour shifts
   
37.047   Breaks
Compensation and Timekeeping
   
37.050   New hires
   
37.051   Annual salary review
   
37.052   Time records
   
37.053   Overtime
   
37.054   Pay period
   
37.055   Hours of pay
   
37.056   On-call pay
Benefits
   
37.060   Paid vacation
   
37.061   Paid holidays
   
37.062   Sick leave
   
37.063   Leaves of absence
   
37.064   Tuition reimbursement program
   
37.065   Other benefits
   
37.066   Paid leave
Employee Relations
   
37.070   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment
   
37.071   Changes in personal status
   
37.072   Dress code
   
37.073   Nepotism
   
37.074   Outside employment
   
37.075   Political activity
   
37.076   Annual evaluations
Probationary and Temporary Employees
   
37.080   Probationary employees
   
37.081   Temporary employees
Disciplinary Actions
   
37.090   Generally
   
37.091   Verbal warning
   
37.092   Written warning
   
37.093   Suspension without pay
   
37.094   Dismissal
   
37.095   Demotions
   
37.096   Disciplinary rules
   
37.097   Hearing rights
   
37.098   Performance improvement plans
Terminations
   
37.100   Resignations
   
37.101   Layoffs
   
37.102   Return of city property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Personnel Code is to establish, policies, procedures and
plans relating to employees of the city. The city reserves the right in the
sole discretion of the City Council to add, change, or eliminate its policies,
procedures, or plans, or to make special allowances for situations not
specifically addressed in this code. This code governs all city employees, but
should not be considered as a contract of employment or a guarantee of
employment. This code does not apply to officers of the city except where
specifically indicated.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.011 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to provide equal opportunity to all
employees and applicants for employment in accordance with all applicable laws,
directives and regulations of federal, state and local legislative bodies and
administrative agencies. Therefore, it is the policy of the city to announce
and advertise all position open for employment.
   (B)   The city will recruit, hire, train and promote persons in all job
classifications without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
age, handicap or political affiliation; provided, however, that nothing in this
section will impair the right of the city to establish bona fide occupational
qualifications for any job category.
   (C)   The city will insure that all personnel actions, including
compensation, benefits, transfers, terminations, reductions in work force,
rehires, education, tuition assistance, and the like, will be administered
without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability
or political affiliation.
   (D)   It is the policy of the city to fill promotions from within the
organizational structure. The city will, however, recruit from outside the city
service when necessary for the purpose of selecting the best available
candidate for the position.
   (E)   When a vacancy is to be filled by promotion, the department head will
advertise the vacancy in such a manner that all eligible employees in the city
service will have an opportunity to request consideration.
   (F)   All promotions will be recommended by the Mayor and have the final
approval of the City Council. If the recommendation is not approved,
recommendation from the Committee Chairperson will be considered with final
approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.012 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
   APPOINTED OFFICERS. The appointed officers of the City of Villa Grove will
consist of the Director of Public Works, the Office Manager, the Comptroller,
the City Treasurer, the Deputy Clerk, the Chief of Police and all members of
the Police Department. Appointed officers of the city will be subject to the
same policies governing employees, with respect to the city's policy on
attendance, compensation, benefits, disciplinary action, and terminations, as
outlined in this Personnel Code.
   CITY OF VILLA GROVE. The City of Villa Grove meaning of the City Council.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Villa Grove.
   COMPENSATION. All forms of valuable consideration including salary, wages,
benefits, and allowances earned by or paid to any employee by reason of service
in a position with the city.
   ELECTED OFFICER. A person designated by the Municipal Code as an officer of
the city: The Mayor, Aldermen, and the City Clerk.
   EMPLOYEE. A person other than elected or appointed officer, or an
independent contractor who regularly performs remunerative work for the city.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee who is not a part-time employee or a
temporary employee.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Includes and is limited to parents, spouses, brothers,
sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-
law, sisters-in-law, legal guardians, and stepchildren.
   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. A person who performs remunerative work for the city
of a contractual basis. Examples of independent contractors include vendors of
goods and services, and engineers, attorneys and consultants for the city.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city.
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, Illinois Revised Statutes,
Chapter 24.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee other than a temporary employee who works
for the city or is reasonably expected to work for the city less than 600 hours
in a calendar year.
   PERMANENT PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee other than a temporary employee
who works for the city for more than 50% time on a consistent weekly basis in a
calendar year.
   PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE. A part-time or full-time employee who has worked for
the city less than 6 continuous calendar months.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. An employee who is hired temporarily, for a period of
less than 6 months, or who is hired only to work during particular seasons of
the year (for example, a person hired to work in the Public Works Department
during the summer).
   WORKING DAY. For employees working 8-hour shifts, a working day is 8 hours.
For employees working 10-hour shifts, a working day is 10 hours.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.013 PERSONNEL FILES.
   (A)   The City Clerk will maintain a personnel file on each employee. The
file will contain the employee's employment application, a copy of every annual
review, copies of all letters of commendation or awards deemed relevant by the
City Council, copies of verbal and written disciplinary warnings, records
pertaining to suspensions and discharge, and any other information deemed
relevant by the City Council.
   (B)   The personnel files are confidential and are not subject to disclosure
to the public without a legitimate subpoena or other judicial order. An
employee will have the right, upon written request and at reasonable times and
places, to inspect and copy all or part of his or her personnel file and to
request the City Council to make legitimate additions thereto or deletions
therefrom. The personnel files will be maintained in a secure file cabinet,
which will be kept locked when not in use. The Mayor and City Council will have
free access to the personnel files.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2005-MC16, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 37.014 ADDITIONAL POLICIES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Changes in regulations. The regulations may be changed, amended, or
supplemented at any time by the City Council.
   (B)   Solicitations. Solicitation of funds of any character or for any
purpose whatsoever will be permitted by and of city employees on the job only
with expressed approval of the department head or Mayor.
   (C)   Purchasing. All purchases in excess of $300 must be approved by City
Council. Department heads will be responsible for enforcing the city's
purchasing policy.
   (D)   Energy conservation.
      (1)   All department heads will be responsible for coordinating their
work and conducting the affairs of their department in an energy-conscious
manner.
      (2)   The Mayor, with approval of the City Council will, from time to
time, implement energy conservation programs.
   (E)   Validity. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision will not
affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than
the part so declared to be invalid.
   (F)   Seat belt policy. In accordance with Public Act 83-1507 (Illinois Seat
Belt Law), the city requires all employees to use the appropriate occupant
restraint protection devices as provided in any vehicle being driven while on
official business.
   (G)   Repealing clause. All ordinances or policies which conflict with
provisions set out in this chapter are hereby declared to be repealed.
   (H)   Use of computers.
      (1)   The use of computers in the work place shall be used solely in the
performance of the employee's job, concerning the operation of the city.
      (2)   The playing of games on the computer will not be allowed at any
time.
      (3)   No personal e-mail will be allowed at any time.
      (4)   Any use of the computers other than in the performance of the
employee's duties as stated this division (H) will be subject to disciplinary
action according to city policy.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
HIRING AND FIRING AUTHORITY
§ 37.020 EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   All hiring authority for employees is vested in the Council. Employees
shall be hired upon motion duly made, seconded and passed by the Council,
subject to the Mayor's veto and the Council's right of override as in the case
of ordinances as set forth in this municipal code. No personnel shall be hired,
and no motion to hire a person shall be made, unless that person has been
evaluated by the specific department's committee, and a report, either oral or
written, rendered to the Council. Recommendations may be made by the Mayor and
if not approved, may be made by the Committee Chairperson.
   (B)   Firing authority for employees is vested in the City Council and shall
be exercised as set forth in the sections of this Personnel Code relating to
discipline.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.021 APPOINTED OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointed officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council as set forth in provisions relating to appointment of
officers in this municipal code.
   (B)   Firing authority for appointed officers is vested in the Mayor,
subject to the Council's right of override in the manner set forth in this
municipal code relating to removal of appointed officers.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
LINES OF AUTHORITY
§ 37.030 DEPARTMENT AND DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   Each employee of the city is assigned to a department, and his or her
supervisor shall be the head of that department. For purposes of the Personnel
Code, the departments of the city are as follows: City Hall, Fire, Police and
Public Works. Department heads may lend department employees to other
departments; in such cases, the supervisor of the employee shall be the
department head of the receiving department for the duration of the assignment.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.031 COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD.
   The department heads are supervised by the various committees of the board,
as follows:
 
Department   Committee
City Hall    Administration and Risk Management Committee
Fire         Emergency Services Committee
Police       Emergency Services Committee
Public Works Public Works Committee
 
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.032 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police is the head of the Police Department. The Chief of
Police reports monthly to the City Council regarding the activities of the
Police Department, by providing to the Council a copy of the same report he or
she gives to the media.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.033 DEPUTY CLERK.
   The Deputy Clerk reports to the Clerk insofar as the Deputy Clerk's
clerkship duties are concerned and to such employee's department head insofar
as all of the employee's duties are concerned. The Deputy Clerk does not lose
his or her status as employee by virtue of appointment to the position of
Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.034 SUPERVISORS OTHER THAN DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   For administrative convenience department heads may designate 1 or more
employees to assist them with their supervision of other employees; however,
while authority is delegated, responsibility is not. Department heads are
always responsible as supervisors for all employees within their departments.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
ATTENDANCE AND HOURS OF WORK
§ 37.040 CITY HALL.
   The City Hall will be open for business from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. Normal working hours for City Hall employees will be 8:
00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on days that City Hall is open for business.
(Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.041 PUBLIC WORKS.
   The City Shops will be open for Public Works business from 7:00 a.m. until
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. These will be the normal working hours for
all employees in the Public Works Departments.
(Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.042 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The office of the Police Department will be open for business from 8:00 a.m.
until 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, subject to the availability of the
department's secretary. The secretary's normal working hours shall be 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m. on days that the office is open for business. Hours for police
officers are subject to scheduling by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.043 BASIC WORK WEEK.
   The basic work week is 40 hours, consisting of 5 working days, each of 8
hours in duration, but all employees are expected and required to work overtime
as instructed by their department heads.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.044 ATTENDANCE.
   Reliable attendance of all employees is essential. Continual unauthorized or
unexplained absences, tardiness, and unsatisfactory attendance will be dealt
with under provisions of this Code pertaining to disciplinary actions.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.045 LUNCH PERIOD.
   All city employees will receive an unpaid 60-minute lunch period daily.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.046 TEN-HOUR SHIFTS.
   The Council may designate certain employees (for example, police officers)
as 10-hour shift employees. The normal work week for such employees will be 4
working days, each of 10 hours in duration.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.047 BREAKS.
   All city employees are entitled to 1 15-minute break for each 4 hours
worked. Breaks may not be taken in conjunction with the lunch period or to
leave early at the end of the workday.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
COMPENSATION AND TIMEKEEPING
§ 37.050 NEW HIRES.
   (A)   The salary of a newly-hired employee will be established when the
employee is hired.
   (B)   The salary of a new employee, other than temporary employees, will be
reviewed at the end of that employee's 6-month probationary period, and the
Council may in its discretion decide to raise or keep in force the employee's
initial salary.
   (C)   The salaries of temporary employees may be reviewed by the Council at
any time or not at all.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.051 ANNUAL SALARY REVIEW.
   Salaries will be reviewed each March by the City Council for possible salary
increases during the forthcoming fiscal year.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.052 TIME RECORDS.
   Employees will keep accurate time records. Each employee will daily record
his or her time worked and absences on time sheet forms approved by the
Council. Time sheets will be signed by the employee upon completion of each pay
period's entries and reviewed and signed by the department head (or in the
absence of a department head, by a person designated by the department head).
Department head's time sheets will be signed by the department head and
reviewed by the committee chairperson. In no event will any employee be paid
for time not recorded on a time sheet and approved by his or her department
head, or, in the case of a department head, by his or her committee
chairperson, or other person so designated. No department head or other
supervisor will permit or encourage any employee to work but not record his or
her time. Time sheets are important legal documents and are the source
documents for the city payroll system. Their accuracy is an absolute must.
Completed time sheets will be turned in to City Hall on the day after the pay
period ends, by 4:00 p.m.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.053 OVERTIME.
   All hourly employees are entitled to time and one-half for actual hours
worked and any paid time off in excess of 40 hours in a 7-day pay period,
including police officers. Police officers will not be paid for "shift-change"
hours worked in excess of their regular schedule. All overtime must be
approved, in advance, by the Mayor or committee chairperson except in emergency
situations.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2005-MC16, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 37.054 PAY PERIOD.
   City employees will be paid on Fridays of alternating weeks. The pay period
for each paycheck covers a 2-week period, ending the Thursday 8 days before
payday.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2005-MC16, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 37.055 HOURS OF PAY.
   Employees will not be compensated for absences other than paid absences as
set forth in the sections of this Code pertaining to paid vacations and leave.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2014-MC07, passed 6-23-2014)
§ 37.056 ON-CALL PAY.
   (A)   Hourly employees who are required to remain in the city "on call" on
weekends will be entitled to pay for 4 hours per day (or for the actual hours
worked if more than 4) and will be required to take a day off during the
regular work week, to be determined by the director of the department, to
ensure hours do not exceed 40 hours per week.
   (B)   Hourly employees who are required to remain in the city "on call" on
city holidays will be entitled to pay for 8 hours per day (or the actual hours
worked if more than 8), in addition to their regular holiday pay.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2005-MC16, passed 12-12-2005)
BENEFITS
§ 37.060 PAID VACATIONS.
   Only full-time and permanent part-time employees are entitled to paid
vacations. The length of an employee's paid vacation is based upon years of
continuous service completed as of their anniversary date each year. Vacation
hours are accrued by pay period and available for use on an ongoing basis, with
the exception of division (A) below. The following rules will govern paid
vacations.
   (A)   New hires. New employees are not entitled to use any vacation leave
until 1 year of service is completed. An employee will accrue 1.54 hours paid
vacation per pay period during the first year of service.
   (B)   Employees with more than 1 year of service.
      (1)   An employee with 1 full year of service but less than 5 full years
of service as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 3.08 hours paid
vacation per pay period.
      (2)   An employee with 5 full years of service but less than 9 full years
of service as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 4.62 hours paid
vacation per pay period.
      (3)   An employee with 9 full years of service but less than 10 full
years of service as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 6.16 hours of
paid vacation per pay period.
      (4)   An employee with 10 full years of service but less than 11 full
years as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 6.46 hours of paid vacation
per pay period.
      (5)   An employee with 11 full years of service but less than 12 full
years as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 6.77 hours of paid vacation
per pay period.
      (6)   An employee with 12 full years of service but less than 13 full
years of service as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 7.08 hours of
paid vacation per pay period.
      (7)   An employee with 13 full years of service but less than 14 full
years of service as of his or her anniversary date will accrue 7.38 hours of
paid vacation per pay period.
      (8)   An employee with 14 full years of service as of his or her
anniversary date will accrue 7.69 hours of paid vacation per pay period.
   (C)   Limitations on vacation length. No employee may take more than 10
consecutive working days of vacation (exclusive of holidays) without the prior
consent of the appropriate committee.
   (D)   Limitations on vacation accrual. No employee shall accrue more than 2
year's total accumulated hours, as follows:
1 to less than years service     160 hours
5 to less than years service     240 hours
9 to less than 10 years service  320 hours
10 to less than 11 years service 336 hours
11 to less than 12 years service 352 hours
12 to less than 13 years service 368 hours
13 to less than 14 years service 384 hours
14 or more years of service      400 hours
 
   (E)   Accumulation of prorated vacation hours. A non-probationary employee
who is receiving disability leave pay directly from the city will be entitled
to earn prorated vacation leave at the same rate of compensation as he or she
is being paid (for example, if he or she draws 33% salary, he or she will be
entitled to earn 33% of the vacation leave normally entitled to).
   (F)   Payment of vacation credits upon termination. An employee whose
employment is terminated will receive payment at the then current straight time
rate of pay for all vacation time accrued and unused. If an employee dies, the
employee's estate will be entitled to such payment.
   (G)   Requests for vacations.
      (1)   Full-time police officers will, in writing notify the Chief of
Police no less than 30 days prior of a request for use of vacation leave. Full-
time police officers will not be granted vacation leave during Douglas County
jury trials.
      (2)   All other employees will request vacation time in writing according
to the following:
 
Leave Amount Requested Required Advance Notice
Up to 4 days           1 day
5 or more days         5 days
 
      (3)   Employees shall use the form designated by the City Council for
this purpose, and shall submit the notice to their respective department head
for approval or denial. Department heads shall give notice to their respective
committee chair, to any other committee member if the chair is not available,
or to the Mayor if the committee chair and members are not available.
   (H)   Minimum increments of vacation. Employees will take paid vacations in
0.25 hour increments.
   (I)   Paid vacation for permanent part-time employees. The earning rate for
permanent part-time employees is based on the average number of hours worked
(for example, an employee working 75% time earns 75% of the vacation leave as a
full-time employee with the same length of service). Part-time employees
working less than 50% time are not entitled to vacation leave.
   (J)   Unpaid vacations for part-time and temporary employees. A part-time
employee is entitled to vacation to the same extent as a full-time employee
with equivalent lengths of service. However, a part-time employee will receive
no pay during vacation. Temporary employees are entitled to no vacation but may
take unpaid vacations at the discretion of their respective department heads.
   (K)   Vacation pay. Vacation hours will be turned in on regular time sheets
and will be paid on regular pay rates.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.061 PAID HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Only permanent employees are entitled to paid holidays. Temporary
employees will not report to work for city holidays, and will not be paid for
such holidays.
   (B)   The city has 9 holidays per year. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, the
following Monday is observed as a holiday. If a holiday falls on a Saturday,
the preceding Friday is observed as a holiday. The official holidays of the
city are as follows:
      (1)   New Year's Day;
      (2)   Memorial Day;
      (3)   Independence Day;
      (4)   Labor Day;
      (5)   Veteran's Day;
      (6)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (7)   The day after Thanksgiving Day;
      (8)   Christmas Day; and
      (9)   One floating holiday to be approved by each employee's supervisor
during the calendar year (January 1 - December 31).
   (C)   A paid holiday will be considered an 8-hour day regardless of whether
the employee is an 8-hour shift employee or 10-hour shift employee.
   (D)   An employee who is absent without leave or without making advance
arrangements, on the working day immediately preceding or following a holiday
will lose pay for the holiday, as well as for the other day or days off.
   (E)   Employees wishing to observe religious holidays not listed herein
will, at their option to be given time off without pay or have the time charged
to their vacation.
   (F)   Holiday pay for permanent part-time employees will be prorated based
on the number of hours worked (i.e., an employee working 75% time will be paid
for 75% of a day [6 hours]).
   (G)   Appointed officers will be paid for holidays as follows: Department
heads will not work on holidays except for emergency situations as approved by
Committee Chairmen. If the department head does work, they will be paid at
their regular rate of pay for actual hours on the job (no payment to be made
for on call time) in addition to their regular holiday pay. Employees required
to work on holidays due to an emergency situation, in addition to their holiday
pay, will be paid for the number of hours worked.
   (H)   An employee who is receiving short-term disability benefits and/or
worker's compensation benefits will be entitled to holiday pay in the amount
necessary to bring his or her salary for the holiday to 100% of the normal
rate.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 041204A, passed 4-12-2004; Am. Ord.
2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-MC16, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 37.062 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Sick leave will be accrued by all full-time employees except temporary
and seasonal employees as outlined below.
   (B)   Employees will accrue sick leave at the rate of 3.7 hours per pay
period.
   (C)   Sick leave will accumulate but not be granted to any employee during
his or her probationary period.
   (D)   There is no maximum accumulation for sick leave.
   (E)   Sick leave can be used in 0.25-hour increments.
   (F)   After an employee's sick leave has been exhausted, unused vacation may
be used as sick leave. When absence due to illness exceeds the amount of paid
leave earned and authorized, the pay of an employee will be discontinued until
he or she returns to work.
   (G)   When an employee terminates his or her employment to begin retirement
from the city per Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund and Medicare age
requirements, the employee shall be paid an amount equal to the current value
of ½ of his or her accumulated sick leave.
   (H)   An employee may take sick leave for illnesses and/or medical
appointments of the employee and/or the employee's immediate family.
   (I)   For sick leave in excess of 2 consecutive days, a department head may
require a signed statement from a physician or dentist verifying the employee's
inability to perform his or her assigned duties because of the illness.
   (J)   (1)   To be eligible for paid sick leave, an employee will notify his
or her supervisor no later than 1 hour after the beginning of the first work
day for which sick leave is taken.
      (2)   Full-time police officers must notify the Chief of Police by phone
or by page of the need to take sick leave no less than 4 hours prior to the
beginning of their assigned shift. If the officer becomes ill during the 4
hours preceding his or her shift, he or she shall, by all reasonable means,
contact the Chief by phone or by page as soon as possible. If an officer
becomes ill during his or her shift, he or she will immediately notify the
Chief by phone or by page. In any case, if the Chief has so designated the
Sergeant to be in charge, he or she shall notify the Sergeant by phone or by
page. Either the Chief or the Sergeant, whichever applies, will then be
responsible for either covering the shift himself or herself or arranging/
assigning other officer(s) to cover the shift.
   (K)   Permanent part-time employees are entitled to earn sick leave at the
same rate as vacation pay and paid holidays.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.063 LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   All department heads must notify City Hall upon leaving the city limits for
any reason during working hours. Additionally, department heads must notify
City Hall when they are out due to vacation, sick, personal or other leave.
Notice will consist of personally recording absences in the sign-out book
located in City Hall.
   (A)   Unpaid leave. Unpaid leave may be granted only after all paid leave
benefits have been exhausted, except as specifically sent forth in the sections
below.
   (B)   Injury leave. An employee suffering from an injury that is job related
under the Workers Compensation Laws will be entitled to leave for such injury
strictly and exclusively in accordance with those laws. Subject to the
qualifications below, an employee injured on the job will be eligible for
injury leave which will not be charged against his or her sick and/or vacation
leave.
      (1)   All employees, while on injury leave, will continue to earn
vacation and sick leave at the regular rate, but will be required to return to
work after the approval of a certified physician.
      (2)   When an employee is injured on the job, the department head should
be notified immediately and should report to the City Hall to fill out an
injury report form. The department head should be informed as to the
circumstances surrounding the injury, time and place of occurrence, and
condition of the employee. The department head should also secure information
regarding the injured employee's condition, duration, and corrective measures
from the employee's physician and report this information to the City Council.
      (3)   An employee who is able to but fails to report immediately any
injury incurred in the line of duty to his or her department head and take such
first aid treatment as may be necessary, may be declared ineligible for
occupational disability or injury leave.
   (C)   Medical leave. An employee who has no sick leave entitlement and
reasonably anticipates illness, disability or convalescence for more than 10
working days will apply to the Council for an unpaid medical leave of absence.
Applications will be filed at least 2 weeks prior to the requested leave. The
employee will inform the City Council in writing of the nature of the medical
reason and approximate time needed for leave, and will accompany the
application with a statement from the attending physician. In case of emergency
or incapacitation of the employee, the Council will waive these requirements.
The Council may, in its sole discretion, allow or deny the request for medical
leave; no employee is entitled to medical leave.
   (D)   Bereavement leave. A maximum of 3 days leave may be taken by an
employee who has a death in his or her immediate family. Full-time employees
are entitled to paid bereavement leave; part-time and temporary employees are
entitled to bereavement leave without pay. In addition to the foregoing
bereavement leave, a department head may grant any employee an unpaid day of
leave to participate in the funeral of an aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, cousin,
or friend; or the employee may at his or her discretion take a paid vacation
day.
   (E)   Military leave. Any employee called to active duty in or drafted in
the Armed Services of the United States or ordered to training with the Army,
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard Reserves, or National Guard, will be
entitled to unpaid leave for the duration of his or her service. Such an
employee will present his or her orders in advance of taking leave, and will
report back to work within 10 business days after return from active duty.
Military leave will not be granted to an employee who voluntarily joins the
active Armed Services of the United States in a national emergency.
   (F)   Jury leave. An employee called for jury duty will be given leave to
attend jury duty. The employee, upon receiving a summons, will immediately
provide a copy to his or her department head, or if the employee is a
department head, to his or her committee chairperson. An employee taking jury
leave has the following options regarding pay:
      (1)   The employee may continue to receive pay from the city and pay over
to the City Treasurer all compensation paid by the court;
      (2)   The employee may take an unpaid leave of absence from the city and
retain all compensation paid by the court; or
      (3)   The employee may take paid vacation days and retain all
compensation paid by the court.
   (G)   Maternity leave.
      (1)   A pregnant employee is entitled to an unpaid maternity leave of
absence. An employee who becomes pregnant will notify her department head (or,
if the employee is a department head, her committee chairperson) of her
condition by the beginning of the fifth month of the pregnancy and submit to
her department head a written statement from her personal physician specifying
the estimated delivery date and the estimated date that the employee should
cease working. From time to time, the employee will provide written statements
from her personal physician if the initial estimated dates change. The
department head will forward all such statements to the Council.
      (2)   A maternity leave of absence will commence when the employee's
physician certifies that she is no longer able to perform work safely and
efficiently. Maternity leave will continue until such time as the employee's
physician certifies that the employee is able to return to work, but not later
than 10 weeks after commencement of maternity leave, or 8 weeks after the birth
of the child, whichever is later. An employee on maternity leave is required to
contact City Hall and report her return to work plans within 30 days of the
birth of her child.
      (3)   An employee may submit a request for an extended maternity leave in
excess of the above time periods to her department head (or, if the employee is
a department head, to her committee chairperson) at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the leave or of any extension. The department head or committee
chairperson will forward the request, with recommendations, to the Council. The
Council, in its sole discretion, may approve or disapprove the extension or
approve the extension in part.
      (4)   An employee who returns to work at the conclusion of maternity
leave will be restored to her former position or to a comparable position at
the same rate of pay unless circumstances have changed or made it impossible or
unreasonable to reinstate the employee.
      (5)   A pregnant employee may, consecutively with her unpaid maternity
leave, take any accrued sick days or her then allowable vacation days.
      (6)   Accrual of sick and vacation credit, will stop effective the date
that such leave begins.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.064 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM.
   The city encourages its employees to further their education and, therefore,
will reimburse tuition as set forth in this section.
   (A)   Only full-time employees are entitled to participate in the tuition
reimbursement program. An employee must make application for reimbursement to
the Council in time for the Council to rule on the application prior to
commencement of the course work.
   (B)   An employee who takes a course to obtain a license or certification
required to perform his or her job responsibilities shall have the tuition paid
up-front by the city.
   (C)   An employee electing to take course work not required for but related
to the employee's job responsibilities is eligible to partial tuition
reimbursement according to the grade received by the employee from a suitable
institution, as follows:
 
Course Grade Percent of Reimbursement
A, B or C    100%
D or F       0%
Pass         100%
Fail         0%
 
   (D)   The City Council will, in its sole discretion, determine whether or
not course work meets the criteria of this section and whether the institution
selected by the employee is suitable. The Council will notify the employee of
its findings in writing prior to the employee commencing the course work.
   (E)   (1)   On completion of an approved course, the employee will submit to
the Council:
         (a)   An official grade notice;
         (b)   A copy of the official fee schedule;
         (c)   A copy of a canceled check or other proof of payment; and
         (d)   Prior written authorization from the City Council.
      (2)   The Council will approve reimbursement of any properly submitted
application. Reimbursement is not limited to tuition only and does include
other costs such as books, travel, health fees, late fees, application fees,
and the like.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.065 OTHER BENEFITS.
   (A)   Medical benefits.
      (1)   The city provides a full-time employee and his or her dependents
with medical insurance as set forth in the governing medical insurance policy
at a cost to be determined from time to time by the Council. Under the city's
medical insurance policy, medical benefits are available on the first day of
the employee's employment. Employees terminating employment with the city are
entitled to participate in the city's medical insurance program at their own
cost as set forth in the city's governing medical insurance policy, and by the
COBRA laws. The city's medical insurance program is subject to change without
notice.
      (2)   Life and disability insurance will be provided by the city for the
employee, after the employee has been employed for 90 days.
      (3)   The city will continue to pay the city portion of the premium for
those employees who are on an approved medical/injury leave with pay. Employees
on leave without pay are responsible for payment of 100% of premium due in
order to continue their coverage.
      (4)   The city may provide an opt-out cash benefit for employees who
chose not to enroll in the medical insurance plan.
   (B)   Retirement benefits. All permanent employees who are eligible are
required to join the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF). Four and one-
half percent of an employee's taxable wages will be withheld from each paycheck
for contribution to the fund. This plan is governed solely by IMRF.
   (C)   Clothing.
      (1)   The city will provide shirts, steel-toed boots, gloves, and rain
gear used by full-time employees, other than police officers, as needed for the
performance of their duties.
      (2)   The Chief of Police and police officers are entitled to replacement
uniform items purchased by the city in an amount up to $400 each year,
beginning with the anniversary of the police officer's first full year of
employment.
      (3)   All other non-police employees are entitled to a replacement
uniform amount of $400 each year.
      (4)   For each newly-hired police officer, the city will purchase, from
vendors selected by the Chief of Police, the uniform items set forth in
Appendix A to this Personnel Code Ordinance. A newly-hired police officer will,
within 10 days of being hired, provide, at his or her own expense, the uniform
items set forth in Appendix B to this Personnel Code Ordinance. Upon
termination, a police officer is expected to return to the city all items
purchased by the city.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.066 PAID LEAVE.
   Pursuant to § 15(p) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 820, Act 192, § 1 et seq), the city
hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all city employees as set forth
in the city's Code of Ordinances, employee handbook, annual salary ordinances,
existing employment policies adopted in its minutes and/or practice, any
collective bargaining agreements to which the city is a party and all other
binding legislative actions governing paid leave adopted by the Mayor and City
Council, as the same may be amended from time to time. However, in no event
shall the city, as an employer, provide less than 1 day of paid leave per
calendar year to any city employee.
(Ord. 2023-MC18, passed 11-27-2023)
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
§ 37.070 POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   Prohibition on sexual harassment. It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment
free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
the City of Villa Grove to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal
officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof.
   (B)   Definition of sexual harassment.
      (1)   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in
the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines SEXUAL HARASSMENT as any
unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a
sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      (2)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal. Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
         (b)   Non-verbal. Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls,” “smacking”
or “kissing” noises.
         (c)   Visual. Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
         (d)   Physical. Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
         (e)   Textual/electronic. “Sexting” (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/online
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
      (3)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person.”
   (C)   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment.
      (1)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his
position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not
necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
      (2)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
         (a)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact with supervisory personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the City Manager or
Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of the municipality.
         (c)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
         (d)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is
to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 300 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
also be filed within 300 days.
      (3)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report
(what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
      (4)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment
allegations. 
      (1)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
         (b)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
      (3)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
      (4)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein,
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 15-10)
provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs
in retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, state
agency, or other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, rule, or regulation;
         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      (5)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (ILCS Chapter 740, Act 174, § 15
(a)), an employer may not take retaliatory action against an employee for
disclosing or threatening to disclose information to a government or law
enforcement agency information related to an activity, policy, or practice of
the employer, where the employee has a good faith belief that the activity,
policy, or practice of the employer (i) violates a state or federal law, rule,
or regulation or (ii) poses a substantial and specific danger to employees,
public health, or safety. (ILCS Chapter 740, Act 174, § 15(b)).
      (6)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (ILCS Chapter 775, Act
5, § 6-101), it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for 2 or more
people to conspire to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed
that which he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment
in employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
      (7)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge, either due within 300 days of the alleged
retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 5-65,
may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each
violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.
      (1)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge
pursuant to applicable municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures,
employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.
      (2)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005; Am.
Ord. 2017-MC13, passed 12-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-MC13, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 37.071 CHANGES IN PERSONAL STATUS.
   An employee will report immediately any change of name, address, telephone
number or marital status to his or her department head and the Office Manager.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.072 DRESS CODE.
   An employee will wear attire appropriate to his or her job functions. An
employee working out of the shop is not expected to be neat and clean at all
times because of the demanding nature of the job; however, the employee will
report to work in clean clothes in good repair. Office personnel will wear
designated shirts provided by the city. Shorts or skirts are permitted, so long
as they are no shorter than the mid-point of his or her inseam length from
groin to knee. If an employee is in question as to what is appropriate, he or
she may inquire of his or her supervisor. Police officers will, unless called
out on an emergency, wear their complete uniforms at all times while on duty.
Employees in the Public Works Department will wear designated shirts provided
by the city during their working hours. Items provided to any employee shall
remain city property and shall not be altered in any way.
Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.073 NEPOTISM.
   The city will not employ a member of the immediate family of a city
employee, alderman, or other city officer unless specifically approved by the
City Council after full disclosure of the relationship. However, no employee
will be fired solely because an immediate family member becomes an official of
the city.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.074 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   Since city service is the primary responsibility of each employee, outside
employment is discouraged. However, an employee may accept occasional or part-
time jobs if:
   (A)   There is no conflict with the city's working hours.
   (B)   The employees efficiency is maintained.
   (C)   There is no conflict of interest.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.075 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   It is the right and the responsibility of every employee to register and
vote on all political issues. Employees are permitted to join political
organizations, civic associations or civic betterment groups subject to the
following conditions:
   (A)   Employees are not permitted to engage in any political activity
involving the election of candidates for any city office.
   (B)   Employees are not permitted to hold an organizational office in any
organization set forth in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Any employee desiring to become a candidate for any elective national,
state, county or city office will first take a leave of absence without pay or
resign.
   (D)   Employees are not permitted to solicit, sell, or handle political
badges, buttons or signs on their person or on city property during on-duty
hours.
   (E)   Employees are not permitted to be a member of councils, boards, or
commissions that are advisory or administrative to the city except where such
membership is specifically authorized by City Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.076 ANNUAL EVALUATIONS.
   Evaluations will be completed annually in January on all permanent non-
probationary employees using a "Performance Evaluation for Non-Probationary
Employees" form available at City Hall. Employees will be evaluated by
department heads; department heads will be evaluated by their respective
committee. Upon completion, forms will be submitted to the Office Manager for
inclusion in the employee's personnel file and for review by the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
PROBATIONARY AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES
§ 37.080 PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Permanent employees will be subject to a probationary period of 6
months. During the probationary period, an employee may be terminated by the
City Council without notice or hearing.
   (B)   During the middle of the third month of an employee's probationary
period, the employee's department head will complete a written 3-month
evaluation of the employee on the "Performance Evaluation for Probationary
Employees" form, available at City Hall. During the middle of the fifth month
of an employee's probationary period, the employee's department head will
complete a 5-month evaluation and a recommendation for retention or dismissal
on the same "Performance Evaluation for Probationary Employees" form. The
department head will then submit the completed form to the City Clerk for
inclusion in the employee's file and for review by the Mayor and City Council.
The Council will decide on or before the end of the sixth month of the
employee's probationary period whether or not to retain the employee.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.081 TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees may be terminated at any time by the City Council
without notice or hearing.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
§ 37.090 GENERALLY.
   Any city employee may be subject to disciplinary action because of the
employee's failure or refusal to perform assigned duties in a manner acceptable
to the Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.091 VERBAL WARNING.
   One method of disciplinary action is a verbal warning by the employee's
department head or committee chairperson. The department head or committee
chairperson will document such verbal warning as to date, time, place, who is
present, the reason for the verbal warning and the substance of the verbal
warning. A copy of the documentation will be submitted to the Office Manager
for inclusion in the employee's file and for review by the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.092 WRITTEN WARNING.
   Another method of disciplinary action is a written warning by the department
head or committee chairperson. Written warnings will be prepared on an
"Employee Warning Report" form available at City Hall. The completed form will
be submitted to the Office Manager for inclusion in the employee's file, and
for review by the Mayor and City Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.093 SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY.
   (A)   Suspension without pay is another method of disciplinary action, to be
used only for serious infractions or where the employee has not rectified
deficiencies noted in verbal or written warnings. However, neither a verbal
warning nor a written warning is a condition precedent for a suspension. The
authority to suspend for 24 hours is vested in the department head with
immediate notification to the committee chairperson (or Mayor or other Council
member). Suspension by a department head is limited to incidents of employee
insubordination or malicious bodily contact. The authority to suspend for 24
hours may also be exercised by the Mayor or committee chairperson, with
immediate notification to the Council.
   (B)   Suspension without pay are limited to 10 working days for any
infraction. The authority to suspend for 10 days must be with Council approval,
subject to hearing rights set forth in §
37.097.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 111202B, passed 11-12-2002; Am. Ord.
2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.094 DISMISSAL.
   Dismissal is another method of disciplinary action for serious offenses or
for failure to correct problems or deficiencies which have resulted in written
warnings or in suspension. Dismissal will only be after a hearing with the
approval of the Council.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.095 DEMOTIONS.
   Demotions are, strictly speaking, not a disciplinary action, but the Council
may demote any employee whose work in his or her job has not been satisfactory,
but who, in the opinion of the Council, can satisfactorily perform less
difficult work.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.096 DISCIPLINARY RULES.
   The following actions may result in disciplinary action up to and including
discharge:
   (A)   Conviction of any felony, or of any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or dishonesty.
   (B)   Use of the employee's official position for personal gain.
   (C)   Falsification of the city's records or time sheets.
   (D)   Sexual harassment or discrimination based on race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, or handicap.
   (E)   Carelessness in handling city equipment.
   (F)   Illegal or abusive use of sick or other leave.
   (G)   Incompetence or inefficiency in the performance of assigned duties or
inattention to duties.
   (H)   Insubordination by disobedience to any order or directive.
   (I)   Misuse or abuse of city working time for personal gain or for any
reason other than performing the employee's assigned duties.
   (J)   Excessive absenteeism or tardiness, including leaving work early and
overstaying meal periods.
   (K)   Solicitation or acceptance of any gratuity, gift, present, reward or
other thing of value in return for the performance of the employee's official
duties, or as a condition for not performing those duties.
   (L)   Failure to pay promptly any indebtedness owed to the city, including,
but not limited to, taxes and utility bills.
   (M)   Habitual discourtesy or disrespect to the public or to fellow
employees.
   (N)   Theft, destruction, loss or unauthorized use of city property,
equipment and materials, either willfully for personal gain, through
unnecessary carelessness or for any reason other than the performance of the
employee's assigned duties.
   (O)   Violation of the city's stated seat belt policy.
   (P)   Unauthorized dissemination of information protected from disclosure
under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   (Q)   The doing of any other act which brings disrepute upon the city or the
City Council.
   (R)   Use of, or being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs as
defined by the Illinois Criminal Code while on the job.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.097 HEARING RIGHTS.
   Any full or part-time non-probationary employee will have the right to a
hearing and appeal of the disciplinary action, as follows:
   (A)   Verbal and written warnings may be appealed by presentation of a
grievance in writing to the employee's department head (or, in the case of
discipline of a department head, to the committee chairperson) who, if
possible, will resolve the grievance. If the aggrieved employee is not
satisfied with the disposition of the written or verbal warning, the employee
will submit his or her case in writing to the City Council within 5 working
days. The City Council will require in writing the action taken and
justification therefore against the aggrieved employee. The City Council may
conduct a hearing allowing witnesses for both or either side to testify, or it
may call witnesses of its own, before deciding on the issue. The Council will
render its decision within 10 days of the receipt of the appeal of the
aggrieved employee and advise the aggrieved employee of its decision in
writing; the decision will be placed in the personnel file if the verbal or
written warning is sustained. The verbal or written warning will be removed
from the personnel file if the verbal or written warning is overruled by the
City Council.
   (B)   In cases of suspension, the employee is entitled to a hearing before
the Council. The hearing will be pre-suspension unless in the judgment of the
committee chairperson, department head, or in the absence of the committee
chairperson, the Mayor, circumstances require immediate suspension and a post-
suspension hearing. At the hearing, the employee may present witnesses, may be
represented by counsel, and may, at the employee's own expense, have a court
reporter present. The notice of hearing will explain these rights and identify
any complainants. The Mayor will preside at any such hearing, and the City
Attorney will be present to advise the Council. After such hearing, the Council
may elect to affirm the suspension without pay, shorten or lengthen the
suspension without pay, or if it determines in a post-suspension hearing that
the suspension was improper, terminate the suspension and award back pay.
   (C)   Any employee faced with discharge is entitled to a statement of
reasons for the discharge and a pre-discharge hearing, which will be held by
the Council in the same manner as a suspension hearing and as to which the
employee has the same rights as in a suspension hearing. The pre-discharge
hearing will, in the case of an employee suspended without pay pending
discharge, be held in conjunction with the post-suspension hearing.
   (D)   The Council will make its decison in a suspension or pre-discharge
hearing by majority vote of those present. The Mayor is entitled to vote at
such hearing and will be counted in determining the decision.
   (E)   In addition to the rights set forth in this section, police officers
are entitled to rights set forth in the Uniform Peace Officers' Disciplinary
Act, ILCS, Chapter 85, §§ 2551, et seq.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.098 PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   If the Mayor believes that an employee of the city is not performing
consistent with the efficient performance of city business or needs improvement
in some areas of service to the community, the Mayor may institute a
performance improvement plan. These performance improvement plans shall include
specific goals for improvement and shall provide a specific time period within
which improvement is expected. Additional evaluations may be completed during
the course of the performance improvement plan. Failure to meet the goals of
the performance improvement plan may result in a reduction in duties, hours
and/or pay. Failure to meet the goals established may also result in
termination of employment.
   (B)   Terminations for poor performance under this section are not
considered disciplinary action and do not grant any of the hearing rights
provided in §
37.097 for employees appealing disciplinary actions.
(Ord. 2014-MC07, passed 6-23-2014)
TERMINATIONS
§ 37.100 RESIGNATIONS.
   An employee will give at least 10 working days written notice prior to the
effective date of resignation. The resignation will be filed with the
employee's supervisor, who, in turn, will notify the City Council. The Council
will determine the proper termination pay and see to it that any city property
is either returned or charged as a deduction from termination pay.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.101 LAYOFFS.
   When it is necessary in the judgment of the Council to reduce the number of
employees on the city payroll or on the payroll of any department, the Council
may lay off employees in its sole discretion. An employee thus separated is
eligible for re- employment and, if re-employed, will retain seniority rights
as of the date of separation for purposes of this section.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 37.102 RETURN OF CITY PROPERTY.
   An employee leaving the city's service, whether through resignation, layoff
or dismissal, will return any property of the city which the employee has in
his or her possession. The property must be returned to the employee's
supervisor, before the employee receives his or her final check.
(Ord. 062402A, passed 6-24-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC12, passed 10-24-2005)
CHAPTER 38: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
   
38.01   State law incorporated by reference
   
38.02   National Incident Management System (NIMS)
§ 38.01 STATE LAW INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of ILCS Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1et seq. are hereby
incorporated by reference as they are specifically applicable to the City of
Villa Grove, and made a part of this code as if set out in full herein.
§ 38.02 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
   The city hereby endorses and adopts the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) as the incident command standard for day-to-day operations, large-
scale, multi-agency, multi-discipline and multi- complicated incidents.
(Ord. 2005-MC06, passed 8-22-2005)
CHAPTER 39: CITY POLICIES
Section
Identity Theft Prevention Program
   
39.01   Objective
   
39.02   Scope
   
39.03   Definitions
   
39.04   Policy
   
39.05   Program management and accountability
   
39.06   Responsibility
Equal Employment Policy
   
39.20   Equal employment policy
Travel Expenses
   
39.30   Expenses; reimbursement
Employee Appreciation Policy
   
39.40   Purpose
   
39.41   Definition
   
39.42   Policy
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
§ 39.01 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The purpose of this Identity Theft Prevention Program (herein referred
to as “Program”) is to protect customers of the city's utility services from
identity theft.
   (B)   The Program is intended to establish reasonable policies and
procedures to facilitate the detection, prevention and mitigation of identity
theft in connection with opening new covered accounts and activity on existing
covered accounts.
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 39.02 SCOPE. 
   (A)   This Program applies to the creation, modification and access to
identifying information of a customer of 1 or more of the utilities operated by
the municipality (water and sewer) by any and all personnel of the
municipality, including management personnel.
   (B)   This Program does not replace or repeal any previously existing
policies or programs addressing some or all of the activities that are the
subject of this Program, but rather it is intended to supplement any such
existing policies and programs.
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 39.03 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this Program, each of the following terms have the meaning set
forth opposite its name, unless the context clearly requires that the term be
given a different meaning:
   COVERED ACCOUNT. An account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments of transactions (16 C.F.R. § 681.2(b)(3)(i)). A utility
account is a “covered account.” The term COVERED ACCOUNT also includes other
accounts offered or maintained by the municipality for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to the municipality or its customers from identity
theft (16 C.F.R. 681.2(b)(3)(ii)).
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority (16 C.F.R. § 681.2(b)(8) and 16
C.F.R. § 603.2(a)).
   IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including any name, Social Security number, date of birth, official state- or
government-issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration
number, government passport number, employer or  taxpayer identification
number. Additional examples of “identifying information” are set forth in 16
C.F.R. § 603.2(a).
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   Certain terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
given to them in the Federal Trade Commission's Identity Theft Rules (16 C.F.R.
pt. 681) or the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970 (15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq.),
as amended by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, enacted
into law on December 4, 2003 (Public Law 108-159).
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 39.04 POLICY.
   (A)   Administration of the Program. Issues to be addressed in the annual
Identity Theft Prevention Report include:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the
risk of identity theft in connection with opening new covered accounts and
activity with respect to existing covered accounts.
      (2)   Service provider arrangements.
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's
response.
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the Program, if needed for
improvement.
   (B)   Identity theft prevention elements.
      (1)   Identification of relevant red flags. The city has considered the
guidelines and the illustrative examples of possible red flags from the Federal
Trade Commission's Identity Theft Rules and has reviewed the municipality's
past history with instances of identity theft, if any. The municipality hereby
determines that the following are the relevant red flags for purposes of this
Program, given the relative size of the municipality and the limited nature and
scope of the services that it provides to its citizens:
         (a)   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers.
            1.   A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer
report or an identity verification response from a credit reporting agency.
            2.   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze
in response to a request for a consumer report.
            3.   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address
discrepancy, as defined in § 681.1(b) of the Federal Trade Commission's
Identity Theft Rules.
            4.   A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is
inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or
customer, such as:
               a.   A recent and significant increase in the volume of
inquiries;
               b.   An unusual number of recently established credit
relationships;
               c.   A material change in the use of credit, especially with
respect to recently established credit relationships; or
               d.   An account that was closed for cause or identified for
abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
         (b)   The presentation of suspicious documents.
            1.   Documents provided for identification appear to have been
altered or forged.
            2.   The photograph or physical description on the identification
is not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting
the identification.
            3.   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification.
            4.   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the municipality, such as a
signature card or a recent check.
            5.   An application appears to have been altered or forged, or
gives the appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
         (c)   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information,
such as a suspicious address change.
            1.   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the municipality. For
example:
               a.   The address does not match any address in the consumer
report or CRA ID Check response; or
               b.   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is
listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File.
            2.   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is
not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and
date of birth.
            3.   Personal identifying information provided is associated with
known fraudulent activity, as indicated by internal or third-party sources used
by the municipality. For example:
               a.   The address on an application is the same as the address
provided on a fraudulent application; or
               b.   The phone number on an application is the same as the
number provided on a fraudulent application.
            4.   Personal identifying information provided is of a type
commonly associated with fraudulent activity, as indicated by internal or
third-party sources used by the municipality. For example:
               a.   The billing address on an application is fictitious, a mail
drop or a prison; or
               b.   The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager
or answering service.
            5.   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other
persons opening an account or other customers.
            6.   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually
large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers.
            7.   The person opening the covered account or the customer fails
to provide all required personal identifying information on an application, or
in response to notification that the application is incomplete.
            8.   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent
with personal identifying information that is on file with the municipality.
            9.   If the municipality uses challenge questions, the person
opening the covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating
information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or
consumer report.
         (d)   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a
covered account.
            1.   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a
covered account, the municipality receives a request for the addition of
authorized users on the account.
            2.   A new utility account is used in a manner commonly associated
with known patterns of fraud. For example, the customer fails to make the first
payment, or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments.
            3.   A covered account with a stable history shows irregularities.
            4.   A covered account, which had been inactive for a reasonably
lengthy period of time (taking into consideration the type of account, the
expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors), is used.
            5.   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable, although usage of utility products or services continues in
connection with the customer's covered account.
            6.   The municipality is notified that the customer is not
receiving paper account statements.
            7.   The municipality is notified of unauthorized usage of utility
products or services in connection with a customer's covered account.
         (e)   Notice of possible identity theft. The municipality is notified,
by a customer, a victim of identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any
other person, that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft.
      (2)   Detection of red flags.
         (a)   City employees that interact directly with customers on a day-
to-day basis shall have the initial responsibility of monitoring the
information and documentation provided by the customer and any third-party
service provider in connection with opening new accounts, modifying or
accessing existing accounts, and detecting any red flags that might arise.
            1.   Management shall see to it that all employees who might be
called upon to assist a customer with opening a new account, or with modifying
or otherwise accessing an existing account, are properly trained so that they
have a working familiarity with the relevant red flags identified in this
Program so as to be able to recognize any red flags that might surface in
connection with the transaction.
            2.   An employee who is not sufficiently trained to recognize the
red flags identified in this Program shall not open a new account for any
customer, modify any existing account, or otherwise provide any customer with
access to information in an existing account without the direct supervision and
specific approval of a management employee.
            3.   Management employees shall be properly trained so that they
can recognize the relevant red flags identified in this Program, and exercise
sound judgment in connection with the response to any unresolved red flags that
may present themselves in connection with opening a new account, or with
modifying or accessing an existing account.
            4.   Management employees shall be responsible for making the final
decision on any such unresolved Red Flags.
         (b)   The Program Administrator shall establish, from time to time, a
written policy setting forth the manner in which a prospective new customer may
apply for service, the information and documentation to be provided by the
prospective customer in connection with an application for a new utility
service account, the steps to be taken by the employee assisting the customer
with the application in verifying the customer's identity, and the manner in
which the information and documentation provided by the customer and any third-
party service provider shall be maintained.
            1.   Such policy shall be generally consistent with the spirit of
the Customer Identification Program rules (31 C.F.R. § 103.121) implementing §
326(a) of the U.S. Patriot Act, but need not be as detailed.
            2.   The Program Administrator shall establish, from time to time,
a written policy setting forth the manner in which customers with existing
accounts shall establish their identity before being allowed to make
modifications to or otherwise gain access to existing accounts.
      (3)   Response to detected red flags.
         (a)   If the responsible city employees, as set forth in division (B)
(2) above, are unable, after making a good faith effort, to form a reasonable
belief that they know the true identity of a customer attempting to open a new
account or to modify or otherwise access an existing account, based on the
information and documentation provided by the customer and any third-party
service provider, the municipality shall not open the new account or modify or
otherwise provide access to the existing account as the case may be.
         (b)   Discrimination by city employees with respect to opening new
accounts or modifying or accessing existing accounts will not be tolerated, and
shall be grounds for immediate dismissal.
         (c)   The Program Administrator shall establish, from time to time, a
written policy setting forth the steps to be taken in the event of an
unresolved red flag situation.
            1.   Consideration should be given to aggravating factors that may
heighten the risk of identity theft, such as a data security incident that
results in unauthorized access to a customer's account, or a notice that a
customer has provided account information to a fraudulent individual or
website.
            2.   Appropriate responses to prevent or mitigate identity theft
when a red flag is detected include:
               a.   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity
theft.
               b.   Contacting the customer.
               c.   Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security
devices that permit access to a covered account.
               d.   Reopening a covered account with a new account number.
               e.   Not opening a new covered account.
               f.   Closing an existing covered account.
               g.   Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not
selling a covered account to a debt collector.
               h.   Notifying law enforcement.
               i.   Determining that no response is warranted under the
particular circumstances.
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 39.05 PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
   (A)   Initial risk assessment – covered accounts.
      (1)   Utility accounts for personal, family and household purposes are
specifically included within the definition of “covered account” in the Federal
Trade Commission's Identity Theft Rules. Therefore, the city determines that,
with respect to its residential utility accounts, it offers and/or maintains
covered accounts.
      (2)   The municipality also performed an initial risk assessment to
determine whether the utility offers or maintains any other accounts for which
there are reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or the utility from
identity theft.
         (a)   In making this determination, the municipality considered:
            1.   The methods it uses to open its accounts;
            2.   The methods it uses to access its accounts; and
            3.   Its previous experience with identity theft.
         (b)   The municipality concluded that it does not offer or maintain
any such other covered accounts.
   (B)   Program updates – risk assessment.  
      (1)   The Program, including relevant red flags, is to be updated as
often as necessary, but at least annually, to reflect changes in risks to
customers from identity theft.
      (2)   Factors to consider in the Program update include:
         (a)   An assessment of the risk factors identified above.
         (b)   Any identified red flag weaknesses in associated account systems
or procedures.
         (c)   Changes in methods of identity theft.
         (d)   Changes in methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity
theft.
         (e)   Changes in business arrangements, including mergers,
acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and service provider arrangements.
   (C)   Training and oversight. All staff and third-party service providers
performing any activity in connection with one or more covered accounts are to
be provided appropriate training and to receive effective oversight to ensure
that the activity is conducted in accordance with policies and procedures
designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
   (D)   Other legal requirements. Awareness of the following related legal
requirements should be maintained:
      (1)   31 U.S.C. § 5318 (g) – Reporting of Suspicious Activities.
      (2)   15 U.S.C. § 1681 c-1(h) – Identity Theft Prevention; Fraud Alerts
and Active Duty Alerts – Limitations on Use of Information for Credit
Extensions.
      (3)   15 U.S.C. § 1681 s-2 – Responsibilities of Furnishers of
Information to Consumer Reporting Agencies.
      (4)   15 U.S.C. 1681 m – Requirements on Use of Consumer Reports.
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
§ 39.06 RESPONSIBILITY. 
   (A)   The initial adoption and approval of the Identity Theft Prevention
Program shall be by ordinance of the City Council.
      (1)   Thereafter, changes to the Program of a day-to-day operational
character and decisions relating to the interpretation and implementation of
the Program may be made by the Office Manager (Program Administrator).
      (2)   Major changes or shifts of policy positions under the Program shall
only be made by the City Council.
   (B)   Development, implementation, administration and oversight of the
Program will be the responsibility of the Program Administrator.
      (1)   The Program Administrator may, but shall not be required to,
appoint a committee to administer the Program.
      (2)   The Program Administrator shall be the head of any such committee.
      (3)   The Program Administrator will report at least annually to the City
Council regarding compliance with this Program.
(Ord. 2008-MC08, passed 10-27-2008)
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
§ 39.20 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term MINORITY
will refer to American Indians, Asians, Blacks, or Hispanics, or to such
protected classes as youth, elderly, women, or persons with disabilities.
   (B)   Equal employment opportunity; scope. The city hereby declares to
uphold, defend, enforce, and advocate for all laws related to equal employment
opportunity including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or national
origin.
      (2)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment.
      (3)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.
      (4)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963 which covers all employees who are
covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Act forbids pay differentials on
the basis of sex.
      (5)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967 which prohibits discrimination
because of age against anyone between the ages of 40 and 65.
      (6)   Federal Executive Order 11246 which requires every contract with
federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
      (7)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and DOL Implementing
Regulations at 29 CFR 32 which prohibits any discrimination based on
disability.
      (8)   Section 188 of WIA and the U.S. DOL Regulations at 29 CFR Parts 31
and 32 which provide that no person in the United States shall be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination on
the basis of race, color, or national origin, under any program or activity
receiving federal financial assistance from the Department of Labor.
      (9)   Chapter 68, Article I, Section 17-19 of the Illinois Constitution
which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer.
      (10)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which with
disabilities on the basis of their disability.
      (11)   Illinois Human Rights Act (ILCS Ch. 775, Act 5) which prohibits
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry,
age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability,
military status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge from military
service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to
financial credit, and the availability of public accommodations.
   (C)   Employment. The City of Villa Grove will assure non-discriminatory
employment practices in recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment,
placement, layoff or termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay
or other forms of compensation and use of facilities.
   (D)   Contracts in general. The City of Villa Grove will not contract with
other agencies, banks, businesses, vendors, etc., who practice or establish a
pattern of discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental
disability, military status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge from
military.
   (E)   Inclusion of equal opportunity clause in contracts. The City of Villa
Grove will incorporate into any contract for construction work, or modification
thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations, and orders of the
Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remains in effect, which is
paid in whole or in part with the aid of such financial assistance, the
following “Equal Opportunity Clause”:
      (1)   In the event of the contractor’s non-compliance with the provisions
of this Equal Employment Opportunity Clause, the Act or the Rules and
Regulations of the Department, the contractor may be declared ineligible for
future contracts or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its
political subdivisions or municipal corporations, and the contract may be
cancelled or voided in whole or in part, and other sanctions or penalties may
be imposed or remedies invoked as provided by statute or regulation. During the
performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
         (a)   That he or she will not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, national origin or ancestry, citizenship status,
age, physical or mental disability unrelated to ability, sexual orientation,
military status or an unfavorable discharge from military service; and,
further, that he or she will examine all job classifications to determine if
minority persons or women are underutilized and will take appropriate
affirmative action to rectify any underutilization.
         (b)   That, if he or she hires additional employees in order to
perform this contract or any portion of this contract, he or she will determine
the availability (in accordance with the Department’s Rules and Regulations) of
minorities and women in the areas from which he or she may reasonably recruit
and he or she will hire for each job classification for which employees are
hired in a way that minorities and women are not underutilized.
         (c)   That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by him or her or on his or her behalf, he or she will state that all
applicants will be afforded equal opportunity without discrimination because of
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin
or ancestry, citizenship status, age, physical or mental disability unrelated
to ability, sexual orientation, military status or an unfavorable discharge
from military service.
         (d)   That he or she will send to each labor organization or
representative of workers with which he or she has or is bound by a collective
bargaining or other agreement or understanding, a notice advising the labor
organization or representative of the contractor’s obligations under the Act
and the Department’s Rules and Regulations. If any labor organization or
representative fails or refuses to cooperate with the contractor in his or her
efforts to comply with the Act and Rules and Regulations, the contractor will
promptly notify the Department and the contracting agency and will recruit
employees from other sources when necessary to fulfill its obligations under
the contract.
         (e)   That he or she will submit reports as required by the
Department’s Rules and Regulations, furnish all relevant information as may
from time to time be requested by the Department or the contracting agency, and
in all respects comply with the Act and the Department’s Rules and Regulations.
         (f)   That he or she will permit access to all relevant books,
records, accounts and work sites by personnel of the contracting agency and the
Department for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the Act
and the Department’s Rules and Regulations.
         (g)   That he or she will include verbatim or by reference the
provisions of this clause in every subcontract awarded under which any portion
of the contract obligations are undertaken or assumed, so that the provisions
will be binding upon the subcontractor. In the same manner as with other
provisions of this contract, the contractor will be liable for compliance with
applicable provisions of this clause by subcontractors; and further it will
promptly notify the contracting agency and the Department in the event any
subcontractor fails or refuses to comply with the provisions. In addition, the
contractor will not utilize any subcontractor declared by the Illinois Human
Rights Commission to be ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the State
of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
   (F)   Nondiscriminatory outreach. The city assures that it will actively
provide nondiscriminatory outreach, selection, and service to all individuals.
   (G)   Minority hiring. Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for
all job categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work
force will represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the city
as well as surrounding areas.
   (H)   Accommodations for disabled employees. The city will provide
accommodations to the best of its ability for employees with disabilities,
contingent on budget and structural limitations.
   (I)   Adherence to policy. All City of Villa Grove employees are expected to
adhere to the above policy and to work actively for its implementation both
internally and in carrying out city/city program activities.
   (J)   Implementation. The City Council designates the Mayor and the City
Clerk to carry out the EEO/AA plan.
(Ord. 2011-MC08, passed 9-12-2011)
TRAVEL EXPENSES
§ 39.30 EXPENSES; REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Interpretation. This section shall be interpreted to be consistent
with the Local Government Travel Expense Control Act, ILCS Chapter 50, Act 150.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words are
defined as set forth herein:
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      TRAVEL EXPENSE. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees and officers of the city or direct payment to private agencies
providing transportation or related services.
   (C)   Official business requiring expenses. Travel, meal, and lodging
expenses will only be allowed for official business of the city which is
necessary to the functioning or improvement of the city. Official business
includes: education conferences related to the duties of the employee or
officer of the city; site visits to current or potential vendors of the city;
or out-of-town meetings related to the official duties of the employee or
officer of the city.
   (D)   Entertainment expenses. No entertainment expenses incurred by any
employee or official may be reimbursed.
   (E)   Maximum allowable reimbursement. Unless otherwise excepted herein, the
maximum allowable reimbursement for an employee or officer of the city shall be
those rates set by the Federal Travel Regulation and maintained by the United
States General Services Administration for travel per diem, meals, and
incidental expense in effect at the time the expense was incurred.
   (F)   Approval of expenses. Except as otherwise, provided, the City Council
must approve the following reimbursements for travel expense, including meals,
transportation and/or lodging, by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the
City Council:
      (1)   Any expense of any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum
permitted under division (E) above;
      (2)   Any expense of any member of the corporate authorities of the city;
      (3)   The cost of travel including the allowable automobile expense
allowed by the IRS for business travel, rental car, airplane, ride share, cab,
private car, train and/or bus. In the event that there is a choice of class,
only coach or economy class or similar shall be approved. Any upgrades to the
equivalent of first and/or business class may only be done at the additional
expense of the traveler;
      (4)   The cost of lodging which shall be reasonable and customary for the
location and time of the area where the traveler is staying; and
      (5)   The customary cost of conference fees, class fees, supplies, books,
software, and computer materials for educational purposes is allowed.
   (G)   Documentation of expenses. Before any reimbursement for travel, meals
or lodging may be approved pursuant to division (F) above, a standardized form
for submission of such expenses shall first be submitted to the City Council.
This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and title of the requestor, a
cost estimate of expenses not yet incurred or a receipt if expenses have been
incurred, and the date or dates and the nature of the official business wherein
the expenses were or will be incurred.
(Ord. 2017-MC01, passed 2-27-2017)
EMPLOYEE APPRECIATION POLICY
§ 39.40 PURPOSE.
   To establish procedures and guidelines under which city funds can be
utilized for the purpose of employee appreciation on an annual basis.
(Ord. 2023-MC08, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 39.41 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, EMPLOYEE APPRECIATION means any award,
token of appreciation, prize, meal, entertainment or event that is intended
specifically to promote goodwill, foster a sense of pride in affiliation with
the city, promote safety, productivity, reliability, efficiency, dedication,
commitment to the community and/or cost savings for the city among city
employees.
(Ord. 2023-MC08, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 39.42 POLICY.
   (A)   Appreciation. The city or its individual departments, may, subject to
normal budgetary authority, expend funds for the purpose of employee
appreciation. The expenditure of funds for a token of appreciation, gift
certificate, prize plaque, award or similar item is limited to no more than
$500 per employee per year. Beginning in 2024, this amount will be increased
$10 annually.
   (B)   Length of service. Length of service awards will be offered for 5, 10,
15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40 years of service. The expenditure of funds for
recognition of longevity of employment and/or retirement shall be limited to
the amount of one hundred dollars for every year of service (i.e. 5 years
equals $500, 10 years equals $1,000, etcetera). This limit does not include
sales tax, shipping and handling, and engraving charges.
   (C)   Maximum limit. In no event shall the total of all awards/gifts
received by employees exceed the amount of all full-time equivalent employees
multiplied by $1,000 for annual budget purposes (i.e. 10 FTE equals $10,000, 20
FTE equals $20,000).
   (D)   Approval. The expenditure of funds for meals related to an employee
appreciation event must be authorized by the Mayor and/or City Administrator in
advance. The Mayor and/or City Administrator must approve the expenditure for
use of facilities, entertainment or similar costs for the purpose of employee
appreciation in advance.
   (E)   Exclusions. At no time shall city funds be used or appropriated for
alcoholic beverages as any appreciation or length of service award items or for
consumption of the same at such events.
(Ord. 2023-MC08, passed 4-10-2023)
CHAPTER 40: EMERGENCY POWERS
Section
   
40.01   Definitions
   
40.02   Declaration of state of emergency
   
40.03   Declaration of local disaster
   
40.04   Curfew; regulation of certain businesses
   
40.05   Orders authorized
   
40.06   Publication of declaration of state of emergency and/or local disaster
   
40.07   Effective period of declaration of state of emergency
   
40.08   Effective period of declaration of local disaster
   
40.09   Emergency locations; governmental powers
   
40.10   Liaison Officer
   
40.11   Emergency operations plan (EOP)
   
40.12   EMA notification
   
40.13   Mutual aid agreements; memorandums of understanding
   
40.14   Purchases and expenditures
   
40.15   Declaration of disaster by Governor
   
40.16   Mobile support team
   
40.17   Violations
§ 40.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ATTACK. Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States
causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property
or persons in the United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of
bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological
or biological means or other weapons or processes, as defined by the Illinois
Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 275 § 3(d), and as
may be hereinafter amended.
   CURFEW. A prohibition declared by the Mayor during a state of emergency or
disaster against any person or persons (except officials of any governmental
authority acting with respect to a state of emergency or disaster) being upon
any alley, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, park, playground, parking lot,
public property, other open private property, or open private land adjacent to
any of the foregoing within the hours specified by the Mayor in the
proclamation or declaration establishing such curfew.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary
action, public health emergencies, or acts of domestic terrorism, as defined by
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305 § 4, and as
may be hereinafter amended.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of the state, the city, and other
political subdivisions of the state to develop, plan, analyze, conduct,
provide, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery, as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 4, and as may be hereinafter amended.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The written plan of the city describing the
organization, mission, and functions of the city and supporting services for
responding to and recovering from disasters and shall include plans that take
into account the needs of those individuals with household pets and service
animals following a major disaster or emergency, as defined by the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 4, as amended.
   MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM. A group of individuals designated as a team by the
governor or director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency ("IEMA") to
train prior to and to be dispatched, if the Governor or Director of IEMA so
determines, to aid and reinforce the state and political subdivision emergency
management efforts in response to a disaster, as defined by the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 4, and as may be
hereinafter amended.
   PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY. An occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or
health condition that: (a) is believed to be caused by any of the following:
(i) bioterrorism; (ii) the appearance of a novel or previously controlled or
eradicated infectious agent or biological toxin; (iii) a natural disaster; (iv)
a chemical attack or accidental release; or (v) a nuclear attack or accident;
and (b) poses a high probability of any of the following harms: (i) a large
number of deaths in the affected population; (ii) a large number of serious or
long-term disabilities in the affected population; or (iii) widespread exposure
to an infectious or toxic agent that poses a significant risk of substantial
future harm to a large number of people in the affected population, as defined
by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 4,
and as may be hereinafter amended.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. Any riot, rout, affray, disorderly assembly or unlawful
assembly by three or more persons acting together which is determined by the
Mayor to be substantially characterized by the use of actual force or violence
or by a clear and present danger of the use of force and violence against
persons or property in the city or by the clear and present danger of the use
of force and violence so as to interfere with the lawful and peaceable exercise
of rights by persons within the city or the lawful and peaceable use of
property within the city, as authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2, and as may hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.02 DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor shall determine that a state of emergency exists in
accordance with the standards of the definition of "state of emergency" as set
forth in this chapter, the Mayor shall have the extraordinary power and
authority to exercise by executive order all such powers of the corporate
authorities and other officers of the city as may be reasonably necessary or
appropriate to respond to the emergency; provided, that prior to exercising any
such extraordinary power and authority, the Mayor shall have executed, under
oath, a written declaration of a state of emergency containing the following:
      (1)   A statement of certain facts known to the Mayor, either directly or
upon information and belief, which are believed by him/her to constitute a
state of emergency;
      (2)   An express declaration that a state of emergency exists; and
      (3)   Such further orders and directives as the Mayor may deem necessary
or appropriate for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public.
   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor, the same power and authority stated in
division (A) of this section shall be granted to those persons in the following
line of succession:
      (1)   City Administrator or acting City Administrator.
      (2)   Mayor pro tempore.
      (3)   Police Chief or acting Police Chief.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.03 DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER.
   As authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 11, as may be hereinafter amended:
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor shall determine that a disaster exists within the
city limits and in accordance with the standards of the definition of
"disaster" as set forth in this chapter, the Mayor shall have the extraordinary
power and authority to exercise by executive order all such powers of the
corporate authorities and other officers of the city as may be reasonably
necessary to or appropriate to eliminate or minimize the dangers arising from
the disaster and for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
public; provided that prior to exercising any such extraordinary power and
authority, the Mayor shall have executed under oath a written declaration of a
local disaster containing the following:
      (1)   A statement of certain facts known to the Mayor, either directly or
upon information and belief, which are believed by him/her to constitute a
local disaster;
      (2)   An express declaration that a local disaster exists; and
      (3)   Such further orders and directives as the Mayor may deem necessary
or appropriate for the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of
the public.
   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor, the same power and authority stated in
division (A) of this section shall be granted to those persons in the following
line of succession:
      (1)   City Administrator or acting City Administrator.
      (2)   Mayor pro tempore.
      (3)   Police Chief or acting Police Chief.
   (C)   The effect of the Mayor's declaration of a local disaster is to
activate the city's emergency operations plan and to authorize the furnishing
of aid and assistance thereunder.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.04 CURFEW; REGULATION OF CERTAIN BUSINESSES.
   As authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 11, as may be hereinafter amended, concurrently with the execution
of a declaration of a state of emergency or a declaration of a local disaster
as provided under this chapter, or at any time after such declaration but prior
to the expiration thereof, the Mayor may in his/her sole discretion and in the
interest of public safety and welfare make any one or more or all of the
following orders:
   (A)   Order the imposition of a curfew within certain hours specified by the
Mayor in the order imposing such curfew;
   (B)   Order such other safeguards and precautions as are, in the opinion of
the Mayor, necessary or appropriate for the protection of life and property in
the city and for the elimination of such state of emergency, local disaster, or
public health emergency; provided, however, that such orders shall not
supersede the regularly constituted authority of the City Administrator, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, or Public Works Director.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.05 ORDERS AUTHORIZED.
   Concurrently with the execution of a declaration of a state of emergency or
a declaration of a local disaster as provided under this chapter, or at any
time after such declaration but prior to the expiration thereof, the Mayor may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, and to address the issues
caused and threatened by the emergency, take any or all of the following
actions by executive order:
   (A)   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
   (B)   Approve payment of previously budgeted expenditures of the city for
the purpose of continuing operations of the municipality;
   (C)   In the event that the state of emergency or local disaster extends
beyond the current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the
Mayor shall be authorized to approve new spending by the city during the
existence of the emergency;
   (D)   Cancel meetings of any City Council meeting, or board or commission to
which the Mayor appoints members. Any such cancellation shall automatically
extend such deadlines for required actions by such board as specified in the
cancellation notice;
   (E)   Suspend licenses, leases or permits for special events issued by the
city which in the judgment of the Mayor could impact the public health or well-
being of residents or visitors to the community;
   (F)   Close city facilities as is reasonably required to protect the health
of the public and employees of the city;
   (G)   Authorize the extension of deadlines for payment related to any
amounts due and owing to the city; and
   (H)   Approve application for local, state and federal assistance as needed.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.06 PUBLICATION OF DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY AND/OR LOCAL DISASTER.
   (A)   As authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-1-6 and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305,
§ 11, as they may hereinafter be amended, as promptly as practicable after the
execution of any order or proclamation by the Mayor declaring, continuing, or
terminating a state of emergency or a local disaster, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, such declaration shall be filed with the City Clerk
and published by posting notices thereof at the following locations and
transmitting through the following mediums:
      (1)   On the outside of the front door of the city's administrative and
billing offices;
      (2)   On the outside of the front door of the city police and fire
stations;
      (3)   On the outside of the front door of the United States Post Office
in the city;
      (4)   On the city's website as is practicable;
      (5)   Through social media and other electronic mediums for broadcast and
publication if possible; and
      (6)   At such other place or places within the city as the Mayor may in
his/her discretion direct.
   (B)   In addition, the Mayor may direct that copies of such declaration of a
state of emergency or local disaster be delivered as soon as practicable to any
newspapers published or circulated within the city and to such radio,
television and other broadcasting stations either within or without the city as
may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to effect notice of such declaration
of a state of emergency or local disaster to persons within the city as
promptly as practicable. Nothing contained in this section shall be a condition
to any lawful arrest, prosecution or conviction of any person for a violation
of any provisions of this chapter, provided that the Mayor shall not have
arbitrarily or capriciously failed or refused to publish a declaration of a
state of emergency or a local disaster in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.07 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   As authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-6,
as may hereinafter be amended, a state of emergency may be declared terminated
at any time by the Mayor by a written declaration executed by the Mayor and
published in the manner provided by this chapter, and in any event a
declaration of a state of emergency shall expire and terminate automatically
and without any further act by the Mayor not later than the adjournment of the
first regular meeting of the City Council after execution of the declaration of
emergency; provided however, that the City Council may from time to time
thereafter, by motion, extend such state of emergency and any orders issued by
the Mayor in connection therewith until a time fixed in such motion, but not
later than:
   (A)   The adjournment of the next succeeding meeting of the City Council; or
   (B)   Forty-eight hours after the time of such extension whichever shall
first occur.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.08 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER.
   As authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 11, as may hereinafter be amended, any declaration of a local
disaster authorized by this chapter shall be effective for seven days, at which
time the City Council shall meet in regular or special session to determine
whether or not the local disaster still exists. If, in the opinion of the
majority of the City Council the local disaster still exists, the declaration
and any order of the Mayor shall continue in effect until the
next regular meeting of the City Council, unless terminated by a written
declaration of the Mayor indicating that the emergency no longer exists or
terminated by a majority vote at a special meeting called for such purpose.
Such declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of
seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.09 EMERGENCY LOCATIONS; GOVERNMENTAL POWERS.
   (A)   Whenever, due to a declaration of a state of emergency resulting from
the effects of enemy attack or the anticipated effects of a threatened enemy
attack, it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs
of local government at the regular or usual place or places thereof, the
corporate authorities may meet at any place within or outside of the city
limits on the call of the Mayor or any two members of the City Council, and
shall proceed to establish and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other
manner, alternate or substitute sites or places as the emergency temporary
location or locations of government where all, or any part of the public
business may be transacted and conducted during the emergency situation. Such
sites or places may be within or without the territorial limits of the city,
provided that the city has the consent of the public/private owner, as defined
by the Illinois Emergency Government Relocation Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 5, § 1,
and as may hereinafter be amended.
   (B)   During the period when the public business is being conducted at the
emergency temporary location or locations, the governing body and other
officers of the city shall have and possess and shall exercise at such location
or locations, all of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers and
functions conferred upon such body and officers by or under the laws of the
State of Illinois. Such powers and functions may be exercised in the light of
the exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to or compliance with
time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining
thereto, and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and binding as
if performed within the territorial limits of the city, as defined by the
Illinois Emergency Government Relocation Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 5, § 2, and as
may hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.10 LIAISON OFFICER.
   The City Administrator shall serve as the city's emergency management
coordinator and, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act,
ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10, as may hereinafter be amended, shall serve as the
City's Liaison Officer who shall facilitate the cooperation and protection of
the city in the work of disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, and
recovery with applicable governmental bodies, relief services, police and
emergency authorities, and any other organizations. In the event of the
absence, resignation, death or inability of the City Administrator to serve as
the emergency management coordinator and as the Liaison Officer, the City's
Public Information Officer shall serve as the emergency management coordinator
and as the Liaison Officer. In the absence of either the City Administrator or
the City's Public Information Officer, the same power and authority stated
above, shall be granted to those persons listed in the following line of
succession:
   (A)   Police Chief.
   (B)   Fire Chief.
   (C)   Assistant Fire Chief.
   (D)   Public Works Director.
   (E)   Person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council at its
earliest opportunity.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.11 EMERGENCY OPERATION PLAN (EOP).
   (A)   The Emergency Operations Plan of the Douglas County Emergency
Management Agency shall be followed as practicably as possible.
   (B)   In the absence of such county plan, the Liaison Officer shall prepare
for the corporate authorities of the city, an emergency operations plan which
shall conform to the tenets of the National Incident Management System and
shall serve as a link between the city, and other local municipalities and the
State of Illinois in disaster response and recovery efforts, as authorized by
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et
seq., as may hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.12 EMA NOTIFICATION.
   The Mayor or his/her designee shall annually notify the Douglas County
Emergency Management Agency and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency of the
manner in which the city is providing or securing emergency management,
identify the City's Liaison Officer and furnish such other information
requested and authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10(f), as may hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.13 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS; MEMORANDUMS OF UNDERSTANDING.
   As authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 10(j), as may hereinafter be amended, the City Liaison Officer or
the City Administrator may negotiate new mutual aid agreements, or revise
existing agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions
of the state, however, no such agreement shall be effective until it has been
approved by the City Council. However, those mutual aid agreements already in
effect shall remain in effect. The City Liaison Officer or the City
Administrator may negotiate new memorandums of understanding, or revise
existing memorandums of understanding with private entities for the provision
of shelter, goods and services for city residents during a declaration of local
disaster however, no such memorandum of understanding shall be effective until
it has been approved by the City Council. However, those memorandums of
understanding already in effect shall remain in effect.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.14 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   In the event of a declaration of a local disaster or public health
emergency, the Mayor, City Administrator, and City Liaison are authorized, on
behalf of the city, to procure such shelter, services, supplies, equipment or
material as may be necessary in view of the exigency without regard to
statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to
city contracts or obligations, provided that the Mayor, City Administrator and
City Liaison, where reasonably available, shall all agree to each act of
procurement to be made under this section, as authorized by the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10(j), as may
hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.15 DECLARATION OF DISASTER BY GOVERNOR.
   A proclamation of disaster by the Governor of Illinois pertaining to any
part of the geographic area of the city shall activate the city's emergency
operations plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces that the
emergency operations plan applies and as well as the use or distribution of any
supplies, equipment, and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled or
arranged to be made available under any mutual aid agreement, memorandum of
understanding or other lawful arrangement relating to disasters, as provided by
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 7(11),
as may hereinafter be amended.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.16 MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   As authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 8, as may hereinafter be amended, employees and officers of the
city who are called by the Governor or the director of the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency to serve on a mobile support team shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Employees of the city who are not normally paid for
their services shall receive at least one dollar per year compensation from the
State of Illinois for serving on a mobile response team when called to do so by
the Governor or the director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 40.17 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates the provisions of any curfew declared or order made
by the Mayor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the appropriate fine and/or
imprisonment as provided by local, state or federal statute.
(Ord. 2020-MC04, passed 3-20-2020)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE; LITTERING
   
51.   SEWER USE
   
52.   WATER
   
53.   WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE; LITTERING
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Placement of garbage
   
50.03   Container required
   
50.04   Removal and disposal of general refuse and garbage
Solid Waste Collection and Disposition Contractors
   
50.15   Definitions
   
50.16   Optional bid letting
   
50.17   Written agreement required before engaging in business
   
50.18   Information and documents to be submitted before obtaining agreement
   
50.19   Insurance required
   
50.20   Bond required
   
50.21   Vehicle inspection required
   
50.22   Display of safety lane test sticker
   
50.23   Equipment for hauling solid wastes, refuse and rubbish; specifications
   
50.24   Vehicles to be kept clean and sanitary
   
50.25   Parking restrictions
   
50.26   Disposal and storage of solid wastes
Littering
   
50.40   Definition
   
50.41   Littering upon streets, alleys or public places
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible matter.
   GARBAGE or RUBBISH CONTAINER. A container constructed of metal, rubber or
plastic not easily corroded, watertight, rodent-proof, and shall have a tight-
fitting cover. The container shall have a capacity of not less than 5 gallons
and not more than 55 gallons.
   RUBBISH. All non-putrescible matter, except trash as defined herein.
   TRASH.  Ashes, grass and lawn rakings.
(1992 Code, § 50.01)
§ 50.02 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit or
place any garbage, rubbish, or trash in any alley, street or other public place
within the city; nor shall any person, firm or corporation deposit or place any
garbage upon private property, whether owned by the person or not, within the
limits of the city, unless the same shall be enclosed in a suitable container.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place
trash containers or recycling bins on city easements or in front yards except
during the hours between the following times: beginning at 6:00 p.m. of the day
prior to trash pickup and 10:00 p.m. of the day of trash pickup.
(1992 Code, § 50.02) (Am. Ord. 082597A, passed 8-25-1997)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.03 CONTAINER REQUIRED.
   Every owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of every dwelling house, tenement
house, lodging house, store or restaurant, boarding house or other person,
persons, firm or corporation on whose premises garbage, rubbish or trash
collects, shall provide and at all times keep within the building or on the
premises garbage containers sufficient to hold all garbage which may accumulate
on the premises between collections and shall place the containers so as to be
readily accessible for removal and emptying and where they shall not be a
public nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 50.03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF GENERAL REFUSE AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   All persons or entities within the corporate limits of the city shall
use a means of removal and disposal of general refuse and garbage generated as
a result of their habitation of the city which is acceptable to and approved by
the City Council.
   (B)   The use of the services of the city’s exclusive franchise holder shall
be an acceptable means of removal and disposal of general refuse and garbage.
   (C)   Any reasonable alternative methods of removal and disposal of general
refuse and garbage may be used, provided the alternative means:
      (1)   Does not conflict with the general public, safety and welfare of
the community;
      (2)   Does not conflict with the exclusive franchise agreement for
removal and disposal of general refuse and garbage heretofore entered into by
the city;
      (3)   Does not conflict with federal, state or local laws or regulations;
and
      (4)   Is approved by the city in writing.
(1992 Code, § 50.04) (Ord. 042781, passed 4-27-1981)
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION CONTRACTORS
§ 50.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGREEMENT. An exclusive contract with a solid waste hauler for the
collection, removal and disposition of solid waste in the city.
   CITY. The City of Villa Grove, a municipal corporation situated in Douglas
County, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the city and successors to the
legislative powers of the present City Council.
   COLLECTION. Includes the act of physically picking up, removing and
transporting solid waste from 1 location to another.
   DISPOSITION. The act of final disposal of solid waste which shall include,
but not be limited to incineration, resource recovery, conversion to energy or
landfill.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food and also wastes from handling, storage and sale of produce.
   HAULER. Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity engaged in the
collection and disposition of solid waste under this subchapter.
   REFUSE. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture
and bedding. Also, noncombustible trash, including but not limited to metals,
tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of
concrete, glass, crockery, or other mineral waste. Also street rubbish,
including but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt,
and contents of litter receptacles but refuse does not mean earth and waste
from building operation, nor shall it include solid waste resulting from
industrial processes and manufacturing operation such as food processing
wastes, boiler-house residue, lumber scraps and shavings.
   SOLID WASTE. Includes ashes, garbage and refuse and also includes all other
types of solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE BUSINESS. The collection, removal and disposition of all solid
waste as defined herein.
(1992 Code, § 50.15) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
§ 50.16 OPTIONAL BID LETTING.
   The city may exercise its power to let for bids for the collection, removal
and disposition of solid waste generated within the corporate limits of the
city. The bid letting shall be optional and if used shall not be binding upon
the city unless so stated in its advertisements for bid. The bid letting may be
exercised at the end of each contract or agreement period.
(1992 Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
§ 50.17 WRITTEN AGREEMENT REQUIRED BEFORE ENGAGING IN BUSINESS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, firm, partnership,
corporation or other entity to engage in the business of collection, removal or
disposition of solid waste within the corporate limits of the city without
first obtaining a written agreement therefor with the city.
(1992 Code, § 50.17) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.18 INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED BEFORE OBTAINING AGREEMENT.
   Each applicant shall submit the following information and documents:
   (A)   A written statement of the location and type of disposal facilities
proposed to be used by the applicant and the expected life expectancy of the
facilities;
   (B)   A written statement of the applicant’s business name, address and
owners or officers;
   (C)   All required certificates of insurance;
   (D)   Evidence of ability to pay premiums of required bonds;
   (E)   Proof of compliance with all federal, state and local laws, including
licenses or permits where required.
(1992 Code, § 50.18) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
§ 50.19 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   The hauler shall maintain the following types of insurance coverage and in
the following amounts:
   (A)   Fire and lightning insurance, with uniform extended coverage
endorsement, for all equipment used in the city;
   (B)   Liability insurance to the extent of $500,000 per occurrence for
property damage, including loss of use;
   (C)   Insurance adequate to meet liability requirements under the Illinois
Structural Work Act as required;
   (D)   Worker’s Compensation Insurance within statutory limits prescribed by
the Illinois Workers Compensation Act from time to time;
   (E)   Employer liability insurance at least $100,000; and
   (F)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of
$1,000,000 per occurrence against liability for bodily harm or death, and
$300,000 per occurrence against liability for property damage, including loss
of use.
(1992 Code, § 50.19) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
§ 50.20 BOND REQUIRED.
   The hauler shall file with the City Clerk a bond in the sum of $100,000.
This bond shall be conditioned to indemnify the city, its officers, agents and
employers for any damage, loss or liability resulting from the conduct of
business by the hauler and shall also be conditioned that the hauler shall obey
all provisions of this subchapter, as amended, and all ordinances now or
hereafter enacted relating to the collection and disposition of solid waste.
(1992 Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.21 VEHICLE INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   The hauler must provide proof that all vehicles to be used within the
corporate limits of the city by the hauler have been inspected by the
Superintendent of Municipal Services or his or her designee and approved as
conforming to the requirements of the city’s code and ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.22 DISPLAY OF SAFETY LANE TEST STICKER.
   The hauler shall be required to properly display valid vehicle safety lane
test stickers.
(1992 Code, § 50.22) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.23 EQUIPMENT FOR HAULING SOLID WASTES, REFUSE AND RUBBISH; SPECIFICA-
TIONS.
   The solid waste hauler shall use exclusively enclosed leakproof packer-type
disposal truck bodies for the collection of all residential, commercial and
industrial solid waste. For the collection of refuse and rubbish, the hauler
may use enclosed truck bodies so designed and covered as to prevent the
scattering of refuse and rubbish from the truck.
(1992 Code, § 50.23) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.24 VEHICLES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND SANITARY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the hauler to see that all vehicles are
kept clean and sanitary at all times. Failure to do so shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 50.24) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.25 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, without necessity, to park in front of
any building, place of business or other premises for an unreasonable length of
time in loading or in passing through or along any street or inhabited area.
(1992 Code, § 50.25) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.26 DISPOSAL AND STORAGE OF SOLID WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for the hauler to dispose of or store any solid waste
within the corporate limits of the city or to park any full or partly filled
vehicle within the corporate limits of the city, except in cases of an
emergency, and then in such instances, the hauler must notify the City Clerk of
the emergency, the location of the vehicle and the other facts as may be
relevant.
(1992 Code, § 50.26) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984)
Penalty, see § 50.99
LITTERING
§ 50.40 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste, including but
not limited to, garbage, trash, debris or rubbish, whether of man- made or
natural origin, such as yard waste and grass clippings.
(1992 Code, § 50.40) (Am. Ord. 052896A, passed 5-28-1996)
§ 50.41 LITTERING UPON STREETS, ALLEYS OR PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall cause or permit any litter to be dumped, deposited, dropped,
thrown, discarded or left upon any street, alley, or other public place. No
person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the person
is the owner or tenant in control, in a manner as to constitute a public
nuisance or in a manner that the litter may be blown or otherwise carried by
the natural elements onto the real property of another person or onto any
street, alley or other public place.
(1992 Code, § 50.41)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision
of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750. Each day that a
violation is allowed to continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Every violation of §§
50.15 through
50.26 shall make the offender subject to the following penalties.
      (1)   If the violation is a nuisance or creates a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare, then the conduct shall be subject to being
impounded by application of the city to the Circuit Court for a temporary
restraining order or preliminary or permanent injunction.
      (2)   In the event the hauler is convicted of a violation of the
provisions of §§
50.15 through
50.26, then he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $750 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the monetary fines provided for in the foregoing
divisions of this section, the violator shall also pay the costs incurred by
the city's disposal of such garbage, refuse or litter in violation of
provisions of §
50.99. Such costs may be paid in any non-judicial voluntary payment or
adjudication of such ordinance violations and, in the event of judicial
prosecution for such violation, the court may order that such costs be paid by
the violator.
(1992 Code, § 50.99) (Ord. 51484, passed 5-14-1984; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-
12-2002; Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER USE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
Private Sewage Disposal
   
51.10   Connection to private sewage disposal
   
51.11   Permit required
   
51.12   Inspections by Director of Public Works
   
51.13   Private sewage disposal system; minimum requirements
   
51.14   Public sewer to be used when available
   
51.15   Responsibility of owner
   
51.16   Connection to city sewer
Building Sewers and Connections
   
51.25   Permit required; application
   
51.26   Issuance of permit
   
51.27   Responsibilities of owner
   
51.28   Separate building sewer required for every building; exception
   
51.29   Specifications of building sewers
   
51.30   Placement of building sewers
   
51.31   Sources of surface runoff or groundwater; connection of building drains
prohibited
   
51.32   Requirements when excavation is required to install building sewer
   
51.33   Inspections; Superintendent to be notified before backfilling
   
51.34   Joints; requirements
   
51.35   Connection at sewer main
   
51.36   Disposal into sewer system prohibited; exceptions
   
51.37   Repairs and inspection of blockages of sewer main or lateral
Public Sewers
   
51.50   Use of public sewers
   
51.51   Prohibited discharges
   
51.52   Director of Public Work's authority on prohibited discharges
   
51.53   Restrictions on large volume discharges
   
51.54   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.55   Preliminary treatment facilities
   
51.56   Control manholes
   
51.57   Measurement of flows; sampling
Administration and Enforcement
   
51.70   Duties of Director of Department of Public Works
   
51.71   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.72   Permit fees
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   B.O.D. (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning 5 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works Department of the city or his or
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a residential structure or apartment
hotel, designed for occupancy by 1 family for living and sleeping purposes.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   ppm. Parts per million.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by the city.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and in which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with the
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. A person not expressly given the authority by the city
as described herein.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(1992 Code, § 51.01) (Am. Ord. 011480, passed 1-14-1980; Am. Ord. 011480B,
passed 1-14-1980; Am. Ord. 2005-MC11, passed 10-24-2005)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 51.10 CONNECTION TO PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
51.50(D) herein, and city water is being supplied, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 51.10)
§ 51.11 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of Public
Works. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and
other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. The permit and
inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
(1992 Code, § 51.11) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.12 INSPECTIONS BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Director of Public Works when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Director of Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 51.12) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.13 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State Environmental Protection
Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 11,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
(1992 Code, § 51.13) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.14 PUBLIC SEWER TO BE USED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
51.13 hereof, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
(1992 Code, § 51.14) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
§ 51.15 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(1992 Code, § 51.15)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.16 CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER.
   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected
to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(1992 Code, § 51.16) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
Penalty, see § 51.99
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 51.25 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   There shall be 2 classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 51.25) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.26 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(1992 Code, § 51.26) (Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
§ 51.27 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(1992 Code, § 51.27)
§ 51.28 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED FOR EVERY BUILDING; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where 1 building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as 1 building sewer. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Director of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 51.28) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.29 SPECIFICATIONS OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   Material required. The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe
ASTM Specification (A74-72) or equal (or most current ASTM Designation); or
vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specification (C-700-74) or equal (or most
current ASTM Designation); or other suitable material approved by the Director
of Public Works. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building
sewer that is located within 10 feet of a water service pipe shall be
constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints or equal substitute. Cast
iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the Director of Public Works
where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in
filled unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe,
except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete
bed or cradle as approved by the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be
subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, but in no event shall
the diameter be less than 6 inches. The slope of the 6-inch pipe shall be not
less than one-eighth inch per foot. For larger sizes of pipe, the minimum
slopes shall be according to all state and local regulations.
(1992 Code, § 51.29) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.30 PLACEMENT OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to
any bearing wall if within 3 feet of any wall, which might thereby be weakened.
The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building
sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction or grade shall be allowed only when a proper
manhole is constructed at the location of the change. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be lifted by approved artificial
means and discharged to the building sewer.
(1992 Code, § 51.30)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.31 SOURCES OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER; CONNECTION OF BUILDING DRAINS
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(1992 Code, § 51.31)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.32 REQUIREMENTS WHEN EXCAVATION IS REQUIRED TO INSTALL BUILDING SEWER.
   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
Pipe laying and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
Specification (C-12-74) (or most current ASTM Designation) except that no
backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. All excavations
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the city and any other governmental agency affected.
(1992 Code, § 51.32) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.33 INSPECTIONS; SUPERINTENDENT TO BE NOTIFIED BEFORE BACKFILLING.
   Before any trench shall be backfilled, the applicant for the building sewer
permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or his or her
representative.
(1992 Code, § 51.33) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.34 JOINTS; REQUIREMENTS.
   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All cast
iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with
molten lead, Federal Specification (QQ-L-156) (or most current Federal
Specification) not less than 1-inch deep. Lead shall be run in 1 pouring and
caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the
jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. All
joints in vitrified clay pipe or between the pipe and metals shall be made with
approved hot-poured jointing material, approved rubber gaskets, oakum and
Sewerite, Am-Vit, or an approved equal method and material. Material for hot-
poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the
joint when subjected to a temperature of 160°F, nor be soluble in any of the
wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight
with lute, hemp, or similar approved material. Other jointing materials and
methods may be used only by approval of the Director of Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 51.34) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.35 CONNECTION AT SEWER MAIN.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at
the “Y” branch, if the branch is available at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located “Y”
branch is available, the owner shall, at his or her expense, install a “Y”
branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the Director of Public
Works. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no
properly located “Y” branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the
public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream
direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make
the connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner
surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the
public sewer, but no higher than a point one- half the vertical distance
between the invert and the crown of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be
made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete.
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the
Director of Public Works. Manholes shall be constructed at any junction of an
8-inch diameter line or larger into a public sewer.
(1992 Code, § 51.35) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.36 DISPOSAL INTO SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   All disposals by any person into the sewer system are unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(1992 Code, § 51.36) (Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.37 REPAIRS AND INSPECTION OF BLOCKAGES OF SEWER MAIN OR LATERAL.
   (A)   Prior to performing any repairs or inspections for alleged blockage of
the city sewer main or lateral lines or building sewer lines or hookups thereof
to the city sewer main or lateral lines, because of any alleged blockages of an
owner’s building sewer line, the owner of the building sewer line shall prove
to the city’s satisfaction that the alleged blockage of his or her building
sewer line is not occurring upon the owner’s own property.
   (B)   In the event that repairs of blockage to a building sewer line require
an inspection of or new hookup to the city sewer main or lateral lines, the
city shall be responsible for the expense of the inspection or new hookup and
for the backfilling thereof, so long as all of the work occurs upon city
property or beyond the property line of the owner of the building sewer line.
(1992 Code, § 51.37) (Ord. 081186, passed 8-11-1986)
Penalty, see § 51.99
PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.50 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is
within 100 feet of the property line.
(1992 Code, § 51.50)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.51 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Director of Public Works, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited
to cyanides in excess of 2 mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public
sewer.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feather, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, water, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works that the wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give consideration to the
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150°F (0 and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three- fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director of Public Works;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing in excess of the following
concentrations and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to the degree that any material
received in the composite sewage at the treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Director of Public Works for the materials.
Waste or Chemical Concentration mg/l
Waste or Chemical                 Concentration mg/l
Arsenic                           0.5
Barium                            4.0
Boron                             1.0
Cadmium                           2.0
Chlorine Demand                   30.0
Chromium (Hexavalent)             0.5
Chromium (Trivalent)              2.0
Copper                            2.0
Cyanide                           0.025
Fluorine                          2.0
Iron                              4.0
Lead                              0.1
Manganese                         2.0
Mercury                           0.0005
Nickel                            2.0
Oil and Grease, etc.              30.0
(carbon tetrachloride extraction)
Phenols                           0.5
Silver                            0.2
Zinc                              2.0
Total suspended solids            30.0
Total dissolved solids            3,500.0
 
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Director of Public Works as necessary, after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters.
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in the quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(1992 Code, § 51.51) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.52 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORK'S AUTHORITY ON PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
51.51(C) herein, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D,
Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38,
No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public
Works may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
51.56.
   (B)   If the Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public
Works, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws.
(1992 Code, § 51.52) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.53 RESTRICTIONS ON LARGE VOLUME DISCHARGES.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a 5-day
B.O.D. greater than 300 ppm by weight, or containing more than 350 ppm by
weight of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described §
51.51(C), or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Director of Public Works. Where necessary in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, the preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to reduce the B.O.D. to 300 ppm by weight, or
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum
limits provided for in §
51.51(C), or control the quantities and rates of discharge of the waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Director of Public Works and of the State Environmental Protection
Agency, and no construction of the facilities shall be commenced until the
approvals are obtained in writing.
(1992 Code, § 51.53) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.54 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(1992 Code, § 51.54) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.55 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(1992 Code, § 51.55)
§ 51.56 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at the times and in the manner
as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At the times as
deemed necessary the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(1992 Code, § 51.56) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977)
§ 51.57 MEASUREMENT OF FLOWS; SAMPLING.
   (A)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected provided the Director of Public Works shall be permitted to take
samples within the premises of the user, including lagoons, ponds and other
places.
   (B)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analysis
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
(1992 Code, § 51.57) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 51.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.70 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall have general
supervision of the public sewers and sewage treatment plant of the city. He or
she shall ascertain the conditions and needs thereof and shall, from time to
time, report the same to the City Council. The Director shall keep proper
records of the location of all sewers, “Y” branches, and building sewer
connections, and the condition of private sewage disposal systems and building
sewers. He or she shall also have the duties specifically set forth in this
chapter and shall have authority to supervise the construction of private
sewage disposal systems and the construction and installation of building
sewers and to issue permits therefor. The Director shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and he or she is hereby
authorized to make the inspections, observations, measurements, samplings and
tests as may be necessary in that regard and is authorized to enter upon any
property for that purpose.
(1992 Code, § 51.70) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.71 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of
the city, the State Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Director of Public Works or his or her representative shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) herein, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized
employee of the city, the State Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city’s employees, and the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in §
51.56.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(1992 Code, § 51.71) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.72 PERMIT FEES.
   A permit shall be obtained from the Director prior to installation and
connection of private sewage disposal facilities, residential and commercial
building sewers and industrial sewers. A fee shall be charged for each permit
as follows:
   (A)   For installation of residential disposal facilities, $25.
   (B)   For installation of residential building sewers, $500 per each
dwelling unit.
   (C)   For installation of commercial building sewers, $350.
   (D)   For installation of industrial sewers, $400.
(1992 Code, § 51.72) (Am. Ord. 011480, passed 1-14-1980; Am. Ord. 011480B,
passed 1-14-1980; Am. Ord. 081301A, passed 8-13-2001; Am. Ord. 2005-MC07,
passed 8-22-2005)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of the violation. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. Any
person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be fined for each violation in accordance with the
provisions of §
10.99. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. The payment for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
city by reason of the violation shall not be considered a penalty so as to bar
enforcement of any other penalty that may be applicable.
(1992 Code, § 51.99) (Am. Ord. 121277, passed 12-12-1977; Am. Ord. 081292A,
passed 8-12-1992; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definition
   
52.02   Tampering with water system prohibited
   
52.03   Adoption of Illinois Plumbing Code by reference
   
52.04   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited
Water Service
   
52.15   Authorization to turn on service; application required
   
52.16   Compliance with city plumbing regulations; construction work in
unfinished building
   
52.17   Repair of leaks
   
52.18   Resale of water prohibited
Installations and Connections
   
52.30   Service pipes
   
52.31   Connection permit required; inspection; fee
   
52.32   Compliance with Illinois Plumbing Code required
   
52.33   Approval for connections required
   
52.34   Surveys and investigations of properties served by public water supply
to determine hazards
   
52.35   Inspectors; right of entry
   
52.36   Danger of contamination; discontinuance of service
   
52.37   Consumer to bear cost of clean-up of potable water supply system
   
52.38   Rental properties
Water Meters
   
52.50   Meters required
   
52.51   Moving meters
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY WATER SYSTEM. The entire physical property of the city used in raw and
treated water storage, pumping, purification and distribution. The CITY WATER
SYSTEM shall be under the general management and control of the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 52.01) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.02 TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper
with, alter or injure any hydrant, meter, service pipe or other part of the
city’s water system.
(1992 Code, § 52.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.03 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE BY REFERENCE.
   The Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this code the same as if set out in full herein. Three copies of the Illinois
Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be kept on file by the city for public
inspection during normal business hours.
(1992 Code, § 52.03)
§ 52.04 USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited. Except for
such uses or methods in existence before the effective date of this section,
the use of, or attempted use to use as a potable water supply groundwater from
within the limits of the city set forth herein, as a potable water supply, by
the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby
prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the city. This section pertains
to the properties and rights of ways adjoining. A map of the limits and a list
of the properties potentially affected for this section for the city are shown
in Attachment A of Ord. 2024-MC03.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
   (C)   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $750 for each
violation.
(Ord. 2018-MC16, passed 11-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2024-MC03, passed 3-11-2024)
WATER SERVICE
§ 52.15 AUTHORIZATION TO TURN ON SERVICE; APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No water provided by the Department of Public Works shall be turned on
for service into any premises by any person but the Director or some other
person authorized by him to perform this service.
   (B)   Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the
Office Manager and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and
accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of
the city water system by the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by
a service deposit if required by §
53.04.
   (C)   The City Council has hereby established a "Utility Billing Policy"
form which summarizes various sections of this code as they pertain to
utilities provided by the Public Works Department. Applicants shall receive
such policy when they submit the written application for city water and will
acknowledge the receipt of such policy on the application form as well.
(1992 Code, § 52.15) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-
MC10, passed 7-9-2007)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.16 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY PLUMBING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION WORK IN
UNFINISHED BUILDING.
   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing
does not comply with the ordinances of the city, provided that water may be
turned on for construction purposes in unfinished buildings, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 52.16)
§ 52.17 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   (A)   Any time a leak develops, the same shall be repaired immediately upon
notice to the owner by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Should
same not be repaired immediately upon notice, the city shall cause same to be
repaired at the expense of the owner or water shall be cut off until the
repairs shall have been made.
   (B)   In addition, prior to any full restoration of water service, the owner
shall repair, at his or her own expense, or pay to the city the estimated cost
thereof, any repairs to any city sidewalk damaged by the water line repairs.
Failure to repair sidewalk damages within a reasonable period after notice from
the city to do so shall result in termination of water service.
(1992 Code, § 52.17) (Am. Ord. 112596A, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14,
passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.18 RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
city’s water system to any premises other than that for which application has
been made, except in the case of emergency.
(1992 Code, § 52.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
INSTALLATIONS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.30 SERVICE PIPES.
   (A)   The city shall furnish and install the service pipe from the main to
the water meter. The water meter will be located as close to the property line
of the owner to be served as practicable. The city will furnish a corporation
cock, the curb cock, the water meter and the meter box. There is hereby
established a fee of $550 for the provision and installation of the pipe and
appurtenances. Except as hereinafter provided, all repairs on the corporation
cock, the curb cock, the water meter and the curb box shall be made by the city
at its expense after the first installation. In the event that a water meter is
located on private property, the city's responsibility and expense for repair
and maintenance of the service pipe shall not extend beyond the property line
of the owner of the private property.
   (B)   All service pipes from the water meter to the premises to be served
shall be installed by and at the cost of the owner of the property to be served
or by the applicant for the service. The installation shall be under the
supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Works. All service
pipes shall be buried at least 3½ feet deep in the ground. All repairs on
service pipes from the water meter to the premises being served and plumbing
system of building shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the
premises served. The city may in the case of emergency repair any service pipe,
and if this is done, the cost of the repair work shall be repaid to the city by
the owner of the premises served.
(1992 Code, § 52.30) (Am. Ord. 111477B, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 72880,
passed 7-28-1980; Am. Ord. 081301B, passed 8-13-2001; Am. Ord. 2005-MC08,
passed 8-22-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.31 CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION; FEE.
   (A)   Permit required. No connections with the city water system shall be
made without a permit issued by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
Application for the permit shall be made at least 24 hours in advance of the
connection and shall be accompanied by the payment of the permit fee.
   (B)   Inspections. All connections with the city water system shall be made
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. No connections shall be
covered until the work has been inspected by him or some other person
authorized by him to make the inspection. No connection permit shall be issued
until the inspection has been made and the applicant has fulfilled the
requirements of this chapter and has met any minimum specifications required by
the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   Permit fee. There is hereby established a fee of $50 for a permit to
connect to the city’s water system. Payment of the fee shall be waived if the
connection shall be made at the same time the city installs the service pipe to
the property line as provided by §
52.30.
(1992 Code, § 52.31) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-
MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.32 COMPLIANCE WITH ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE REQUIRED.
   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If in accordance with the
Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Director of the Department of
Public Works, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Director will give notice to the
water customer to install an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his or her own expense, install an approved device at a location and
in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all applicable
local regulations and shall have inspections and tests made of the approved
devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and
local regulations.
(1992 Code, § 52.32) (Ord. passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-
2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.33 APPROVAL FOR CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the city enter the supply or distribution systems of the city, unless the
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of the supply shall have been approved by the Director of the Department of
Public Works and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(1992 Code, § 52.33) (Ord. passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-
2005)
§ 52.34 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS OF PROPERTIES SERVED BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
TO DETERMINE HAZARDS.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Public Works to
cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. The surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be reported at least every 2
years, or as often as the Director shall deem necessary. Records of the surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least 5 years.
(1992 Code, § 52.34) (Ord. passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-
2005)
§ 52.35 INSPECTORS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections, and that the Director of the Department of Public Works or
his or her authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable
time any property served by a connection to the public water supply for the
purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the
required cross-connection control inspection.
   (B)   On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the Director of Public Works any information which he or she
may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on the
property. The refusal of the information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the Director of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 52.35) (Ord. passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-
2005; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.36 DANGER OF CONTAMINATION; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized
and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof,
the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take the other
precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service
to the property shall not be restored until the conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and until a
reconnection fee of $15 is paid to the city.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Director of Public Works is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. The action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
   (C)   Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to
prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water
supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Director of Public
Works or the State Environmental Protection Agency, the action is required to
prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water
supply.
   (D)   Neither the public water supply, the Director of Public Works, or its
agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or
lost revenues which may result from termination of the customer’s water supply
in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not the termination
was with or without notice.
(1992 Code, § 52.36) (Ord. passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-
2005; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.37 CONSUMER TO BEAR COST OF CLEAN-UP OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   The consumer responsibility for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(1992 Code, § 52.37) (Ord. passed - -1990)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.38 RENTAL PROPERTIES.
   Upon written complaint of any tenant of any rental property located within
the city, and city official specified by the City Council is authorized to
inspect the rental property occupied by the tenant for a violation of city
ordinances and upon determination of a potential violation the city official
shall notify the owner of the rental property, in writing, of the potential
violation and direct the owner to correct the violation within 30 days. In the
event the alleged violation is not corrected within the period, the city
official may authorize the discontinuance of water service to the rental
property until the appropriate correction is made. The direction to discontinue
by the city official shall be given, in writing, to the City Collector, who
shall order discontinuance in the same manner as provided in §
52.36. In addition, failure or refusal of any owner of rental property to
follow the direction of the city official to correct a violation of this
chapter shall be unlawful and subject the owner of the rental property to the
general provisions of this code in §
130.01 and §
10.99. Each day the alleged violation is not corrected, after notice, shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 052698A, passed 5-26-1998)
WATER METERS
§ 52.50 METERS REQUIRED.
   All premises using water from the city water system must be equipped with an
adequate water meter, furnished by the city. Before any premises are occupied,
a water meter shall be installed therein as herein required or no water shall
be furnished to the premises.
(1992 Code, § 52.50)
§ 52.51 MOVING METERS.
   Whenever a water user may desire to change the location of a water meter or
to install a remote meter reading device, the user shall apply to the Director
of the Department of Public Works to perform the work. The user shall pay the
city an amount equal to the cost of labor and materials as determined by the
Director. However, nothing in this section shall preclude the city from paying
for the work when the Corporate Authorities may deem it necessary or expedient
to improve the operation of the water system.
(1992 Code, § 52.51) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005)
CHAPTER 53: WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Basic user rates; minimum and overage charges
   
53.02   Fire hydrant use
   
53.03   Service deposit
Billing Procedure
   
53.15   Responsibility; when bills due; late penalty
   
53.16   Delinquent payment
   
53.17   Discontinuance of service
   
53.17-1   Denial of new service or re-connected service to delinquent customers
   
53.18   Duties of Office Manager
   
53.19   Administration of revenues; Water and Sewer Fund
   
53.20   Refunding of service deposits
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 BASIC USER RATES; MINIMUM AND OVERAGE CHARGES.
   (A)   There shall be and there are hereby established minimum monthly
charges and basic user rates for the use of and for utility services supplied
by the Public Works Department for the period up to and including July 15,
2020, which have been in effect since May 16, 2017, as follows:
 
                                          Water   Sewer
Minimum charge (includes first 1,000 gal.) $22.030 $21.162
Bulk rate/each additional 100 gallons      $0.630  $0.692
 
   (B)   The minimum monthly charges and basic user rates for the use of and
for utility service supplied by the Public Works Department for the period
beginning on or after July 13, 2020, through March 15, 2021, shall be as
follows:
 
                                          Water   Sewer
Minimum charge (includes first 1,000 gal.) $22.030 $22.470
Bulk rate/each additional 100 gallons      $0.630  $0.730
 
   (C)   The minimum monthly charges and basic user rates for the use of and
for utility service supplied by the Public Works Department for the period
beginning on and after March 16, 2021, through March 15, 2022, shall be as
follows:
 
                                          Water   Sewer
Minimum charge (includes first 1,000 gal.) $22.030 $23.970
Bulk rate/each additional 100 gallons      $0.630  $0.770
 
   (D)   The minimum monthly charges and basic user rates for the use of and
for utility service supplied by the Public Works Department for the period
beginning on and after March 16, 2017, as follows:
                        Water
      Wholesale rate (each 1,000 gal.)       $3.798
   (E)   The minimum monthly charges and basic user rates for the use of and
for utility service supplied by the Public Works Department (including to the
Village of Camargo) for the period beginning on and after March 16, 2022, shall
be determined by a new water and sewer rate study analysis to be completed no
later than December 31, 2021.
   (F)   The basic user rate for the use of and for utility service supplied by
the Public Works Department to the Village of Camargo for the period beginning
on and after March 16, 2015, through March 15, 2016, shall be as follows:
      Water wholesale rate (each 1,000 gallons)   $2.282
   (G)   The basic user rate for the use of and for utility service supplied by
the Public Works Department to the Village of Camargo for the period beginning
on and after March 16, 2016, through March 15, 2017, shall be as follows:
      Water wholesale rate (each 1,000 gallons)   $2.944
   (H)   The basic user rate for the use of and for utility service supplied by
the Public Works Department to the Village of Camargo for the period beginning
on and March 16, 2017, through March 15, 2018, shall be as follows:
      Water wholesale rate (each 1,000 gallons)   $3.798
   (I)   The minimum monthly charges and basic user rates for the use of and
for utility service supplied by the Public Works Department (including to the
Village of Camargo) for the period beginning on and after March 16, 2018, shall
be determined by a newwater and sewer rate study analysis to be completed no
later than December 31, 2017.
   (J)   To the extent that a third party desires to purchase bulk sales of
water the size of which exceeds normal existing delivery mechanisms and the
city's licensed water operator determines that there is sufficient capacity in
the water system to allow for such bulk sales of water without compromising
customary usage for existing customers, then the city may, at the City
Administrator's direction, elect to sell to such third party, subject to the
conditions set forth in this chapter. Such third parties may not resell said
water; additionally, such third party must provide a minimum 48-hour notice to
the Public Works Department before the water is to be consumed (excluding
holidays). The rate to be charged to such users shall be a connection/metering
fee of $50 per connection per day, plus $1.20 per 100 gallons of water. All
sums shall be paid in full at delivery, or corporate billing information shall
be provided to the Administrative and Billing Office prior to the scheduling of
such delivery.
(1992 Code, § 53.01) (Am. Ord. 72478C passed 7-24-1978; Am. Ord. 122286, passed
12-22-1986; Am. Ord. 011188, passed 1-11-1988; Am. Ord. 090991-3, passed 9-9-
1991; Am. Ord. 082294, passed 8-22-1994; Am. Ord. 102494B, passed 10-24-1994;
Am. Ord. 100995E, passed 10-9-1995; Am. Ord. 112497A, passed 11-24-1997; Am.
Ord. 011303A, passed 1-13-2003; Am. Ord. 020904A, passed 2-9-2004; Am. Ord.
2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-MC07, passed 4-23-2007; Am. Ord.
2009-MC03, passed 3-9-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-MC02, passed 2-23-2015; Am. Ord.
2019- MC12, passed 10-15-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-MC09, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 53.02 FIRE HYDRANT USE.
   The city shall pay to the Water Fund of the city for the estimated water
used for all firefighting efforts and departmental training events. Such
charges will be incurred at the current basic user rate established in §
53.01.
(1992 Code, § 53.02) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC11, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 53.03 SERVICE DEPOSIT.
   (A)   (1)   Except as hereinafter stated in §
53.17, all persons desiring to avail themselves of the water, or water and
sewer service of the Department of Public Works, shall, before the service is
installed or connected, pay a deposit of $100 to the Office Manager.
      (2)   Owners who reside in the real estate for which such service is
requested in the name of that owner, shall be exempt from this requirement,
unless that owner/ customer has had city services disconnected in the past for
non-payment.
      (3)   Except as hereinafter stated in §§
53.17 and
53.17-1, a purchaser on an installment contract sale from the owner shall not
be deemed the owner of the premises for the purpose of exemption from a service
deposit requirement, and shall pay a deposit of $100 for such service.
      (4)   If an owner who resides in real estate which has the city service,
and that service is exempt from the service deposit requirement under division
(A)(2) above, and that owner/customer is a city customer at other addresses
owned by that customer in the city, then the deposit requirement for each
additional service shall be $50, rather than $100.
      (5)   (a)   An owner of nonresidential real estate who occupies the real
estate and has water service in his or her own name and who does have city
water service at his residence shall be exempt from any service deposit
requirement.
         (b)   If that owner has additional service at other addresses, then
the service deposit requirement for each of the other addresses shall be $50,
rather than $100.
      (6)   Customers who request temporary (less than 30 days) service for
maintenance purposes shall be exempt from this deposit requirement.
   (B)   Any person requesting water and/or service, must, in addition to the
deposit required by division (A) of this section, pay all prior amounts owing
by that customer for water service to the property for which water service
application is requested, and must also pay all past due bills for water and/or
sewer service by the city for that customer at any other premises.
   (C)   The city shall not be liable for payment of interest to the depositors
on the deposits made. The deposits, or so much thereof as may not have been
applied toward payment of delinquent charges for water or water and sewer
service, shall be refunded to the respective depositors when the service to
them has been terminated for any reason.
   (D)   All full-time city employees shall be exempt from the service deposit
requirement stated in this section, since this is considered a benefit of their
employment and since any delinquent bills of city employees can, to the extent
allowed by law, be set off against, or deducted from, the employees' wages.
(1992 Code, § 53.04) (Am. Ord. 111477B, passed 11-14-1977; Am. Ord. 082382,
passed 8-23-1982; Am. Ord. 090991-2, passed 9-9-1991; Am. Ord. 122793N, passed
12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 092595A, passed 9-25-1995; Am. Ord. 062303B, passed 6-23-
2003; Am. Ord. 2005-MC14, passed 10-24-2005; Am. Ord. 2009-MC01, passed 2-23-
2009)
BILLING PROCEDURE
§ 53.15 RESPONSIBILITY; WHEN BILLS DUE; LATE PENALTY.
   The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof and the user of either
water or sewerage service, or both water and sewerage service, shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service on the premises, and the service is
furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of
the premises, occupant and user of the service, are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the city. Bills shall be rendered by the first day of each
month as hereinabove stated and shall be payable by the tenth day of each
month, then in such a case a penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be
added and become due.
(1992 Code, § 53.15) (Am. Ord. 031086, passed 3-10-1986)
§ 53.16 DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
   In the event the rates or charges for water and sewerage service, or either
of them, including any penalty then due are not paid within 30 days after the
rendition of the bill for the service, the charges and penalties shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter the
delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which the
services are supplied, and the Office Manager is hereby authorized and directed
to file upon statements showing the delinquencies in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, and the filing of the statement shall be deemed notice for
the payment of the charges and penalties for the services.
(1992 Code, § 53.16)
§ 53.17 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   If all charges and penalties for water and sewerage service, or either of
them, are not paid within 16 days after the rendition of the bill for the
service, then the service shall be discontinued without further notice, and
shall not be reinstated until all past due bills and penalties due thereon are
paid in full, together with payment of $50 made for reinstating the service
during regular business hours or $100 for reinstating the service at any other
time. In the event any person shall have the service discontinued for more than
2 times for reasons of nonpayment, the persons shall be required to make a
service deposit in an amount equal to 3 times their average monthly billing for
prior services before the service is reinstated.
(1992 Code, § 53.17) (Am. Ord. 082382, passed 8-23-1982; Am. Ord. 031086,
passed 3-10-1986; Am. Ord. 122793M, passed 12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 2009-MC02,
passed 3-9-2009)
§ 53.17-1 DENIAL OF NEW SERVICE OR RE-CONNECTED SERVICE TO DELINQUENT
CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   If an applicant for water/sanitary sewer services is indebted to the
city for water services and/or sanitary sewer services previously provided by
the city to said customer at any property, then no new service shall be
provided unless and until said customer pays all delinquent charges and related
expenses for all water and/or sanitary sewer services provided by the city to
such customer.
   (B)   Such customer must also pay a $200 service deposit.
(Ord. 2006-MC07, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 53.18 DUTIES OF OFFICE MANAGER.
   It is hereby made the duty of the Office Manager to render bills for water
and sewer service, or either of them, and all other charges in connection
therewith, and to collect all moneys due thereon, and it is hereby made the
duty of all officials of the city to enforce payment of all unpaid bills and
penalties in the manner, form, time and procedure under state laws thereunto
enabling. All revenues and moneys derived from the sale of utilities provided
by the Public Works Department shall be held by the Office Manager separate and
apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds
of the city, and all of the sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer not more than 10 days after the receipt of the
same, or at more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
City Council.
(1992 Code, § 53.18) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC11, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 53.19 ADMINISTRATION OF REVENUES; WATER AND SEWER FUND.
   The City Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the sale of utilities
provided by the Public Works Department and all other funds and moneys incident
to the operation of the Department, as the same may be delivered to him or her,
and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the Water Fund and Sewer
Fund of the city, and the Treasurer shall administer the funds in every respect
in the manner provided by state statute. The Treasurer shall establish a proper
system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts, in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
waterworks and sewage utility systems, and at regular annual intervals the City
Council shall cause to be made an audit, by an independent auditing concern, of
the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the utility systems.
(1992 Code, § 53.19) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC11, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 53.20 REFUNDING OF SERVICE DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Any customer who has paid a service deposit under the stated
provisions of §§
53.03,
53.17, or
53.17-1(B) herein may apply to the city for a refund of such funds as a credit
to their utility account, under the following conditions:
      (1)   The customer has not had their utility service terminated for
nonpayment of a utility bill in the past 12 months.
      (2)   The customer has not had a returned check/ACH payment in the past
12 months.
      (3)   The customer has not declared bankruptcy against an active city
account in the past 12 months.
      (4)   The customer has not in an unauthorized manner diverted utility
service or tampered with the city’s facilities.
      (5)   The customer shall complete the necessary refund form and attest
their acknowledgment of the provisions of this entire section.
   (B)   Any customer who has paid a service deposit under the stated
provisions of §
53.03 shall receive a full refund, payable by check to the account holder(s) on
record.
   (C)   Any customer who has paid a service deposit under the stated
provisions of §§
53.17 or
53.17-1 shall receive a partial refund, payable by check to the account holder
(s) on record on the following schedule:
      (1)   The customer shall receive a refund of any deposit previously paid
over the amount of $150 at the time of the request (thus reducing the deposit
on file to $150).
      (2)   The customer shall receive an additional refund of $75 6 months
from the original request date, assuming the conditions of §
53.20(A) are still met (thus reducing the deposit on file to $75).
      (3)   The customer shall receive a final refund of $75 12 months from the
original request date, assuming the conditions of §
53.20(A) are still met (thus reducing the deposit on file to $0.)
   (D)   If at any time following a full or partial refund of the service
deposit the conditions of §
53.20(A) are no longer met, the city shall require a new/higher service deposit
to be paid immediately in the form of cash or money order. Failure to pay such
deposit shall constitute grounds for termination of the utility service. Such
deposit will remain on file for a minimum of 24 months before the refund
request can be submitted again.
(Ord. 2016-MC07, passed 7-25-2016)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
   
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
73.   MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
   
74.   PEDESTRIANS
   
75.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS
   
76.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
   
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   
78.   PARKING SCHEDULES
   
79.   VEHICULAR SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
In General
   
70.01   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.10   Obedience to police officers
   
70.11   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.12   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.13   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings
   
70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.32   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.33   Lane-control signals
   
70.34   Flashing signals
   
70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or advertising signs
   
70.36   Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures
   
70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.39   Zones of quiet
   
70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.41   Stop and yield signs
   
70.42   Location of city traffic-control signs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation. (ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 1-102)
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access
highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways. (ILCS Chapter 70, Act 1205, § 3-9)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of village departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper state,
county, or local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department;
vehicles of a HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board
under ILCS Chapter 55, Act 5, § 5-1127; ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile
Justice; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of the
Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives emergency
response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois State Toll
Highway Authority with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000 pounds or more
and those identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol;
and vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency,
as defined by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-105)
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having 2 tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices. (ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 1-106)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than 10 persons. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on 1 side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at the points only and in the
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on 1 side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-
301. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-113)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-116)
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, 2 non- tandem
wheeled device designed to transport only 1 person with an electric propulsion
system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15 miles per hour or
less. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5 § 1-117.7)
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-120)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-125)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of 2 highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes 2 roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-132)
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into 2 or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control, and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-
137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state, including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit;
      (3)   Any nonresident’s driving privilege as defined herein.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-138)
   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned first division vehicle intended to be used
for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a
meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination. (ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 1-139.1)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, village, and other local board or body
having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution and
laws of this state and each road district Highway Commissioner having that
authority. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-140)
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one
of the following classes:
      (1)   “Class 1 low-speed electric bicycle” means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   “Class 2 low-speed electric bicycle” means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the
bicycle and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (3)   “Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle” means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of 28 miles per hour.
      A “low-speed electric bicycle” is not a moped or a motor driven cycle.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10)
   LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE. A 2 or 3-wheeled device with fully operable pedals
and a gasoline motor of less than 1 horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved
level surface, when powered solely by such a motor while ridden by an operator
who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 miles per hour. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act
5, § 1-140.15)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-141)
   MOPED. A moped is a motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power
derived from manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in 1 mile is at
least 20 m.p.h. but not greater than 30 m.p.h., and is equipped with a motor
that produces 2 brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and
the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for vehicles
moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric
bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles. For this section, motor vehicles are
divided into 2 divisions:
      (1)   First division: motor vehicles designed for carrying not more than
10 persons.
      (2)   Second division: motor vehicles designed for carrying more than 10
persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those motor vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of
the second division.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider, and designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-
147)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self- propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled
vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable
of a speed in excess of 8 m.p.h. on level ground. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §
1-148.3)
   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS (MFSAB). A school bus manufactured for the
purpose of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver, whose
purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or school bus
stops. A MFSAB is prohibited from meeting the special requirements for school
buses in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803, and 12-805 and § 12-802
(a). (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-151)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act
5, § 1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act
5, § 1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-156)
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than 10
persons. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-157)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates or riding a
skateboard, including a person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-158)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed
physician, by a licensed physician assistant, by a licensed advanced practice
registered nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist:
      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane,
crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive
device;
      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her
forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for 1 second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than 1 liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;
      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person’s functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to
standards set by the American Heart Association;
      (5)   Is severely limited in the person’s ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition;
      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of 1 of the
above 5 conditions; or
      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand
or arm.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-162)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his or her
principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or her
payroll, maintains a central file of records, and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in 1 place, then that place where a majority of these functions are
performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally transact and
control his or her business affairs shall be considered as the principal place
of business. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§ 1-163)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws
governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad
tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-167)
   RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT. All vehicles operated upon rails for the purpose
of the maintenance of railroads including, but not limited to, all hi-rail
vehicles and on-track roadway maintenance machines, as defined in 49 CFR, Part
214.7. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. (ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 1-168)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-169)
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration
plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles. Includes digital registration plates and digital registration
stickers issued by the Secretary of State under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-
401.5. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate that
will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed 1 registration year. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act
5, § 1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals or a fire department
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances and associated with some unit of
government. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-
171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not
comprising a business district, when the property on the highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business. For purposes of establishing maximum speed
limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with
residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more
than 500 feet apart. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-174)
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
secretary, of a person’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least 1 year after the
date of revocation. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under the
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§ 1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-178)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes 2 or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any roadway separately, but not to all roadways collectively. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-181)
   
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition does not include the following:
         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, village corporation, or
common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of
passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
            1. On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare- paying passengers;
            2. Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with special events; or
            3. Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities;
         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division;
         (c)   A multifunction school-activity bus.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-187)
   SHOULDER. That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§ 1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the Dominion of
Canada. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. As defined in the Illinois Highway Code, as the same may
from time to time be amended. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois State Police.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. That portion of any city, village, or incorporated town,
other than the business and residence districts. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-
203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar, towline, or
auxiliary axle, or to render assistance to disabled vehicles, except for any
truck tractor temporarily converted to a tow truck by means of a portable
wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of the truck tractor and used only by
the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also owned by him or her and never used for
hire. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use. (ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that carries as
property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a semitrailer in
transporting motor vehicles or any other commodity, including cargo or general
freight, on a backhaul. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-212)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of 1/4 mile or
more. (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-214)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes. (ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 1-214.8)
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title
under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d), except devices moved by human power,
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as
defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until the time it either comes
within the definition of a “junk vehicle,” as defined under this section, or a
junking certificate is issued for it.
      (3)   For this section vehicles are divided into 2 divisions:
         (a)   First division: those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than 10 persons;
         (b)   Second division: those vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than 10 persons; those designed or used for living quarters; those which
are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo; those
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as vehicles of the
second division.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-217)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.10 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, fireman, person authorized by a local
authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of
violating this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-203)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.11 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the state, or any county, city, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property;
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to the persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from the work.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-205)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.12 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL- DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-206)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.13 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or
refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or
her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal
given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue
light. However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and,
if driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
Penalty, see § 70.99
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
§ 70.30 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control
devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which
no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a
stop sign. This provision does not apply to the driver of a vehicle approaching
a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   (F)   Any violation of division (A) that occurs within a designated highway
construction zone or maintenance zone shall result in a fine of no less than
$100 and no more than $1,000.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-305) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively 1 at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits the
turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield
the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or the other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. The vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   (1)   Steady yellow indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being
terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in
§
70.32, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
      (2)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the
signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk
that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by traffic
controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
   (C)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if there is no the stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing until an
indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering
the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing until an
indication permitting the movement indicated by the red arrow is shown.
      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and the village
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter
the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one- way street, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. The driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      (4)   After stopping as required by divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above,
the driver or a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which fails
to change to a green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than
120 seconds because of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to
detect the arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to the vehicle’s size or
weight, shall have the right to proceed, after yielding the right of way to
oncoming traffic facing a green signal, subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204.
      (5)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall
not enter the roadway.
   (D)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made; or, in the absence of
the sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-306)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.32 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Don’t Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Don’t Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal or upraised palm
symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don’t Walk”
signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-307)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.33 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings.
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise he or
she shall obey all other traffic controls and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-308)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.34 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (C)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-309)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.35 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic- control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in this city which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway signs by the city as provided in the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway
Act, ILCS Chapter 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-310)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.36 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control
device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-311)
§ 70.37 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure, or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed
in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or
for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-312)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The City Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals, or markers owned by the city, is authorized to indicate the ownership
of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than inch, or more than ¾
inch in height, by use of a metal stamp, etching, or other permanent means.
Except for employees of the City Street Department, police officers,
contractors and their employees engaged in a highway construction contract or
work on the highway approved by the city, it is unlawful for any person to
possess a sign, signal, or marker so identified.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-313)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.39 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device except in an emergency.
§ 70.40 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
§ 70.41 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching
a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1204) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.42 LOCATION OF CITY TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS.
   The locations of authorized traffic-control signs in the city are set forth
in this code.
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Traffic violations.
      (1)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for
which another penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance or by
appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in ILCS Chapter 625, Act
5, §§ 16-101 et seq. shall, upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more
than $750.
      (2)   School buses. In addition to the suspensions authorized by ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1414, any person convicted of violating § 71.045 shall
be subject to a mandatory fine of $150, or upon a second or subsequent
violation $500 (see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1414).
      (3)   Special speed limits. A violation of § 71.002 shall be a petty
offense with a minimum fine of $150 as provided in §
71.002 (see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-605).
   (B)   Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of any provision
of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or
restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, or parking in a
metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the required time,
may settle and compromise the claim against him for the illegal parking by
paying to the city $25 for each offense if paid within seven days, or $35 if
paid after seven days, or $50 if paid after 30 days. The payment may be made at
the police station, a receipt shall be issued for all money so received, and
the money shall be promptly turned over to the City Treasurer to be credited to
the General Fund. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved. This
section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the
entrance or exit of any place where Police or Fire Department apparatus or
other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency
entrance in a hospital; nor shall this section apply to any persons charged
with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or
alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to
one-way traffic only; not to any persons who refused to move a vehicle
illegally parked at the request of any member of the Police Department.
   (C)   Railroad crossing violations.
      (1)   Vehicles at crossings. A violation of any part of §
71.080 shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community
service (see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1201).
      (2)   Pedestrians at crossings. A violation of any part of §
74.12 shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community service
(see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1011).
   (D)   Obedience to police officers. Any person convicted of violating §
70.10 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a mandatory fine of
$150 (see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-203).
   (E)   In addition to the monetary fines provided for in the foregoing
divisions of this section, the violator shall also pay the costs incurred by
the city as a result of such violations, including the towing costs for any
vehicle or property, and the storage costs for any towed or impounded vehicle
or property resulting from such violations. Such costs may be paid in any non-
judicial voluntary payment or adjudication of such ordinance violations and, in
the event of judicial prosecution for such violation, the court may order that
such costs be paid by the violator.
(Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009; Am. Ord. 2021-MC06, passed 7-26-2021)
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Speed Restrictions
   
71.001   Speed limits
   
71.002   Special speed limits while passing schools and while traveling through
highway construction or maintenance zones
   
71.003   Maximum attainable operating speed
   
71.004   Minimum speed regulation
Turning and Starting; Signals
   
71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
71.021   Limitations on U-turns
   
71.022   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.023   When signal required
   
71.024   Signal by hand and arm or signal device
   
71.025   Method of giving hand and arm signals
Overtaking and Passing
   
71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left
   
71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus
   
71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.047   No-passing zones
   
71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
Right-of-Way
   
71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection
   
71.061   Vehicle turning left
   
71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk
   
71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
   
71.064   Merging traffic
   
71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.067   Funeral processions
Special Stops Required
   
71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track
equipment
   
71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road, or driveway
   
71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed
Prohibitions
   
71.095   Backing
   
71.096   Following vehicle too closely
   
71.097   Obstruction of driver’s view or driving mechanism
   
71.098   Opening vehicle doors
   
71.099   Coasting
   
71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose
   
71.101   Driving upon sidewalk
   
71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters, or similar devices
   
71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited
   
71.104   Obstructing person in highways
   
71.105   Farm tractor operation
   
71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway
Parades
   
71.120   Definitions
   
71.121   Permit required
   
71.122   Application for permit
   
71.123   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.124   Notice of rejection of permit application
   
71.125   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.126   Alternative permit
   
71.127   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
   
71.128   Contents of permit
   
71.129   Duties of permittee
   
71.130   Public conduct during parades
   
71.131   Revocation of permit
Golf Carts and Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles
   
71.140   Generally
   
71.141   Definitions
   
71.142   Requirements
   
71.143   Permits
 
   
71.999   Penalty
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.001 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this city at a speed
which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or which endangers the safety of any
person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any street at a speed which is
greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by
divisions (C) and (D) below, by §
71.002, or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.
   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in an urban district (as defined in §
70.01) for all vehicles is:
      (1)   Thirty miles per hour; and
      (2)   Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.
   (D)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in a non-urban district shall be as determined under
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-601.
   (E)   A first violation of this section is a petty offense with a minimum
fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a petty
offense with a minimum fine of $300.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-601)
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-604
§ 71.002 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS AND WHILE TRAVELING THROUGH
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE ZONES.
   (A)   School zones.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, a SCHOOL DAY shall begins at 6:30
a.m. and concludes at 4:00 p.m.
      (2)   On a school day when school children are present and so close
thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the
motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess
of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone, or while traveling on a
local, county, or state roadway on public school property or upon any public
thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school.
      (3)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets wherein the school zone is located. With regard to the
special speed limit while passing schools, the signs shall give proper due
warning that a school zone is being approached, and shall indicate the school
zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when school
children are present.
      (4)   A first violation of this section is a petty offense with a minimum
fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a petty
offense with a minimum fine of $300.
      (5)   When a fine for a violation of this section is $150 or greater, the
person who violates the section shall be charged an additional $50 to be paid
to the unit school district where the violation occurred for school safety
purposes. If the violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the
surcharge shall be paid to the elementary school district for school safety
purposes and $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for
school safety purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire
$50 surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-605)
   (B)   Construction and maintenance zones. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in a construction or maintenance zone at a speed in excess of the
posted speed limit when workers are present and so close to the moving traffic
that a potential hazard exists because of the motorized traffic.
   (C)   Use of electronic surveillance. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
the use of electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a
special school speed zone or a construction or maintenance zone indicating the
zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be
inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding, provided the use of the device
shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in the special school
speed zone or a construction or maintenance zone.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, a
CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE SPEED ZONE is an area in which the Department, Toll
Highway Authority, or a local agency has posted signage advising drivers that a
construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached, or in which the
Department, Authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed limit with a
highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after
determining that the preexisting established speed limit through a highway or
construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe with
respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance
zone.
            (b)   If it is determined that the preexisting established speed
limit is safe with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the
construction or maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit signs which
conform to the requirements of this division (D)(1) shall be posted.
      (2)   Design. Highway construction or maintenance zone special speed
limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Department. The signs shall
give proper due warning that a construction of maintenance zone is being
approached and shall indicate the maximum speed limit in effect. The signs
shall also state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation when workers
are present.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.003 MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERAT- ING SPEED.
   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or highway
in this city where the minimum allowable speed on that street or highway, as
posted, is greater than the maximum attainable operating speed of the vehicle.
Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the manufacturer of
the vehicle and clearly published in the manual of specifications and
operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule and regulation
promulgated by the Secretary of State.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-611)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.004 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a slow speed as to impede or block
the normal and regular movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation of his or her vehicle or in compliance with law.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a))
Penalty, see § 71.999
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 71.020 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows.
      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   The state Department of Transportation and local authorities in
their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be
placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that
a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, and when the devices are so placed no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and
required by the devices.
   (B)   Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by
drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic-control devices:
      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for
or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making
a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-801)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.021 LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-802)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.022 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-803)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.023 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the highway as required in §
71.020, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may
so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, change lanes, otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, move right or left upon a highway, or when
required must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle within a business or residence district, and the signal
must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the vehicle outside a business or residence district.
   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §
12-208 must be used and operated as prescribed in division (B) of this section
to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, turn a vehicle from a direct
course, move right or left upon a highway or start from a parallel parked
position. Unless the conditions of division (B) of this section are met, an
electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208 shall not
be left in the on position and must not be flashed on 1 side only on a parked
or disabled vehicle,or flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators
of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, signal devices may be
flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking, and passing.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-804)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.024 SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-208.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-805)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.025 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward, except that a person
operating a bicycle may extend the right hand and arm horizontally and to the
right side of the bicycle.
   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-806)
Penalty, see § 71.999
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.040 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing those movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within the distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into 3 marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on 1 side of the public
highway and 2 vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider
shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to the other vehicle.
   (B)   Upon a two-lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or
when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having 4 or more lanes for moving traffic, and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2). However, this division
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Upon an Interstate highway or fully access- controlled freeway, a
vehicle may not be driven in the left lane, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle.
   (E)   This section does not apply:
      (1)   When no other vehicle is directly behind the vehicle in the left
lane;
      (2)   When traffic conditions and congestion make it impractical to drive
in the right lane;
      (3)   When snow and other inclement weather conditions make it necessary
to drive in the left lane;
      (4)   When obstructions or hazards exist in the right lane;
      (5)   When a vehicle change lanes to comply with ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,
§§ 11-907, 11-907.5 and 11-908;
      (6)   When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be driven in the
left lane when preparing to exit;
      (7)   On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and on toll and
other highways when driving in the left lane is required to comply with an
official traffic control device; or
      (8)   To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances, and other emergency
vehicles engaged in official duties and vehicles engaged in highway maintenance
and construction operation.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-701)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.041 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than 1 line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least ½ of the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-702)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.042 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special
rules otherwise stated in this chapter.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.
   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or individual
proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe distance, but
not less than 3 feet, when passing the bicycle or individual and shall maintain
that distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or individual.
   (E)   A driver of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the
same direction on a highway may, subject to the provisions in division (D) of
this section and ILCS § 11-706, pass to the left of the bicycle on a portion of
the highway designated as a no-passing zone under ILCS § 11-707 if the driver
is able to overtake and pass the bicycle when:
      (1)   The bicycle is traveling at a speed of less than half of the posted
speed limit of the highway;
      (2)   The driver is able to overtake and pass the bicycle without
exceeding the posted speed limit of the highway; and
      (3)   There is sufficient distance to the left of the centerline of the
highway for the motor vehicle to meet the overtaking and passing requirements
under this section.
   (F)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless manner,
drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward, or near a bicyclist,
pedestrian, or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn vehicle.
   (G)   Every person convicted of division (F) of this section shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not result in great bodily harm
or permanent disability or disfigurement to another. If the violation results
in great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to another, the
person shall be guilty of a Class 3 felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-703)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.043 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with 3 or more wheels may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for 2
or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by
the overtaking vehicle;
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to 1 direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for 2 or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement
to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than 8 feet.
This division (B) does not apply to devices propelled by human power.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement
shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-704) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.044 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   Passing on the left.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.
      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized
lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement
involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-705)
   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions.
         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within a distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of
any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply upon a one-
way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for 2 or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of a
vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway when the
movements can be made with safety.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-706)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.045 MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting or
overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped on a highway,
roadway, private road, parking lot, school property, or at any other location,
including, without limitation, a location that is not a highway or roadway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils. The stop is required before
reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual
signals as specified in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-803 and 12-805. The
driver of the vehicle shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or
the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or
the visual signals are no longer actuated.
   (B)   The stop signal arm required by ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-803
shall be extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the
purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the school
bus is placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any
other time.
   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an 8-lamp flashing signal
system required by ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated after
the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in
motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time
except as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an 8-lamp flashing
signal system required by ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the school bus
before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an
urban area, and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school
bus outside an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until
the school bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any
other time.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having 4 or more lanes which
permits at least 2 lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not
stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing
roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a controlled access
highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped
in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1414)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.046 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or the times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only
to the right of the island.
   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into 2 or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to
use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or
section except through an opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section,
or space, or at a cross- over or intersection as established by public
authority.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed
dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control device.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-708)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.047 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to determine those portions of any
highway within the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of the zones, and when
signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in division (A) no driver may at any time drive on the left side of
the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark the no- passing zone throughout its length.
   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in §
71.040(A)(2), §
71.042(E), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley,
private road, or driveway. The pavement striping designed to mark the no-
passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver’s direction of travel.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-707)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.048 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into 2 or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into 3 lanes and provides for two-way
movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except
when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction
when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in
preparation for making a left turn or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official traffic-control
devices.
   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every device.
Drivers must obey lane designation signing except when it is necessary to use a
different lane to make a turning maneuver.
   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every device.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having 4 or more lanes which
permits at least 2 lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not
stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing
roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a controlled access
highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped
in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1414)
Penalty, see § 71.999
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   When 2 vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This rule may be modified at
through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this traffic code.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-901)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.061 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed
as soon as a safe interval occurs.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-902)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.062 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.
   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection, or
flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between
intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of
the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of
vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-903)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.063 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
or yield signs.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway, or which
is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval
occurs.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, of
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of- way.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-904)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.064 MERGING TRAFFIC.
   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in §
71.060, at an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with another vehicle.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-905)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.065 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-906)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.066 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this chapter, or
a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual
signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop
and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-907)
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   Additional offenses; statutory penalties, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-
907
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when
vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard lights
lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal;
      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when the leading vehicle
has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not
drive his or her vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do
so by a traffic officer or when the vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle
giving audible or visible signal.
   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form
a procession or convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or both
lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to
funeral processions.
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in the procession if overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with the
procession.
   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when the vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in the procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may utilize
funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or flashing hazard warning
signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in a procession.
   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic control assistance for a
funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may direct
traffic during a funeral procession.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1420)
Penalty, see § 71.999
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.080 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD TRACK
EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing where the driver is not always required to stop, the person must
exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a
highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in
this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until the tracks
are clear and he or she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (3)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a highway
crossing emits a warning signal and the train or railroad track equipment, by
reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is an immediate hazard;
      (4)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing;
      (5)   (a)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching
so closely that an immediate hazard is created.
         (b)   Whenever any person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as
defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing
where the driver is not always required to stop, the person must exercise due
care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a
warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section,
the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest
rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until the tracks are clear and he or
she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
            1.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
            2.   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or
railroad track equipment;
            3.   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a
highway crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train or railroad
track equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard;
            4.   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing;
            5.   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created.
      (6)   Whenever a person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing where the
driver is not always required to stop but must slow down, the person must
exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a
highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in
this section, the driver shall slow down within 50 feet but not less that 15
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or
she checks that the tracks are clear of an approaching train or railroad track
equipment.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   When stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the driver of
any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of the railroad, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
   (D)   At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs,
without automatic, electric, or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates, or a
human flagger giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train or railroad
track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in obedience to the railroad
crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for
the existing conditions and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly
marked stopped line, or if no stop line, within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or
she can do so safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad
crossing or interferes with the movement of a train or railroad track equipment
after driving past the railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference
is prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of-way.
   (E)   No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to
negotiate a railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of insufficient
undercarriage clearance.
   (F)   It is unlawful to violate any part of this section.
      (1)   A violation of this section is a petty offense for which a fine of
$500 shall be imposed for a first violation, and a fine of $1,000 shall be
imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court may impose 25 hours of
community service in place of the $500 fine for the first violation.
      (2)   For a second or subsequent violation, the Secretary of State may
suspend the driving privileges of the offender for a minimum of 6 months.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1201) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.081 CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks at grade, stop that vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail, and while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment, and shall not
proceed until that movement can be made with safety:
      (1)   Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses
in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803, and 12-804. The driver of the
bus, in addition to complying with all other applicable requirements of this
division (A), must also (a) turn off all noise-producing accessories, including
heater blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and (b) open the
service door and driver’s window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
      (3)   (a)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before
crossing a railroad track or tracks at grade, stop such vehicle within 50 feet
but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail and, while so stopped, shall
listen and look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment and
shall not proceed until such movement can be made with safety:
            1.   Any commercial motor vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 6-500;
            2.   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school
buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803, and 12-805 and is designed to
transport 16 or more persons, including the driver. The driver of the bus, in
addition to complying with all other applicable requirements of this division,
and must also (i) turn off all noise producing accessories, including heater
blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and (ii) open the service
door and driver’s window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
            3.   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to
be placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo hazardous material as
defined in the Illinois Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
         (b)   After stopping as required in this section, the driver shall
proceed only in a gear not requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and
the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a
police officer or a human flagger;
      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning traffic-
control signal transmitting a green indication which, under law, permits the
vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without slowing or stopping,
except that division (A) of this section shall apply to any school bus;
      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or residence
district; or
      (4)   At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade crossing
designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked with an
official sign as authorized in the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1202) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.082 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road, or
driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance,
road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the
point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1205)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.083 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to accommodate
the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   (1)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
      (2)   No driver operating a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
   (C)   Beginning January 1, 2009, the Secretary of State shall suspend for a
period of 1 month the driving privileges of any person convicted of a violation
of division (B) of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance;
the Secretary shall suspend for a period of 3 months the driving privileges of
any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of division (B) of
this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance if the second or
subsequent violation occurs within 5 years of a prior conviction for the same
offense. In addition to the suspensions authorized by this section, any person
convicted of violating division (B) of this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service. Any person given a disposition of court supervision for
violating division (B) of this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance shall also be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service. Upon a second or subsequent violation, in addition to the
suspensions authorized by this section, the person shall be subject to a
mandatory
fine of $500 and 50 hours community service. The Secretary may also grant, for
the duration of any suspension issued under this subsection, a restricted
driving permit granting the privilege of driving a motor vehicle between the
driver's residence and place of employment, or within other proper limits that
the Secretary of State shall find necessary to avoid any undue hardship. A
restricted driving permit issued hereunder shall be subject to cancellation,
revocation and suspension by the Secretary of State in like manner and for like
cause as a driver's license may be cancelled, revoked or suspended; except that
a conviction upon 1 or more offenses against laws or ordinances regulating the
movement of traffic shall be deemed sufficient cause for the revocation,
suspension or cancellation of the restricted driving permit. The Secretary of
State may, as a condition to the issuance of a restricted driving permit,
require the applicant to participate in a designated driver remedial or
rehabilitative program. Any conviction for a violation of this division shall
be included as an offense for the purposes of determining suspension action
under any other provision of state law, provided however, that the penalties
provided under this division shall be imposed unless those penalties imposed
under other applicable provisions are greater.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1425) Penalty, see §
71.999
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.095 BACKING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or
roadway of any controlled- access highway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1402)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.096 FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-710)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.097 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat the number of persons, exceeding 3, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to
interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to
interfere with his or her control of the driving mechanism of the bus.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1406)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.098 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1407)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.099 COASTING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1410)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.100 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1412)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.101 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human
power, to any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized
wheelchair.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preempt the
authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of the city from regulating or
prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.102 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play
streets when authorized by the traffic authority.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.103 PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any litter, as defined in the Litter
Control Act, ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, § 3.
   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) upon any highway shall
immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in
ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.215, hazardous waste as defined in ILCS Chapter
415, Act 5, § 3.220, and potentially infectious medical waste as defined in
ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.360, dropped upon the highway from the vehicle.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1413)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.104 OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or
willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within this
city, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway so as to interfere
with the effective movement of traffic.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1416)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.105 FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in this city
unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in connection
with farming operations.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as an
implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to
include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment, and supplies, as well
as the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of purchase
to its place of storage, in connection with the obtaining of repairs of the
implement of husbandry, and the towing of a registered truck of not more than
8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is left at the
place of work or repair.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1418)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.106 DRIVING ON CONTROLLED- ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-711)
Penalty, see § 71.999
PARADES
§ 71.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. The repeated operation of 2 or more vehicles in a continuous or
nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city, or CRUISING as defined above.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.
§ 71.121 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form, or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.122 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Procedure. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms
provided by the officer.
   (B)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than 5 days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (C)   Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any assembly area or areas;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his or her behalf;
      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
   (D)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council as set
forth in this code.
§ 71.123 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for private
profit;
   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
§ 71.124 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within 3 days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
excepted, after filing thereof. If he or she disapproves the application, he or
she shall mail to the applicant within the 3 days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his or her action stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit.
§ 71.125 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30 days after
its receipt.
§ 71.126 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this subchapter.
§ 71.127 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the Mayor and the Fire Chief.
§ 71.128 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place to
be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (G)   The other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement of
this subchapter.
§ 71.129 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his or
her person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.130 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other authorized city
official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other public thoroughfare or
part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. Signs shall be
posted to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street or other public thoroughfare unless signs have been posted
in accordance with this section.
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.131 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF- HIGHWAY VEHICLES
§ 71.140 GENERALLY.
   Golf carts specifically defined and qualified herein shall be allowed on
city streets under the conditions as stated herein.
(Ord. 2017-MC06, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 71.141 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply:
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel
primarily off highway, 50 inches or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry
weight of 1,500 pounds or less, traveling on 3 or more non-highway tires,
designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering
wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
   CITY STREETS. Means any of the streets within the boundaries of the City of
Villa Grove, Illinois.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting 1 or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance, equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed
to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on 4 or more non-
highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
(Ord. 2017-MC06, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 71.142 REQUIREMENTS.
   All persons wishing to operate a golf cart or a recreational off-highway
vehicle on the city streets must ensure compliance with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Proof of current liability insurance.
   (B)   Must be certified with the city and inspected by the Chief of Police
and/or his/her designee.
   (C)   Must display city decal on the rear of the vehicle.
   (D)   Must have a current, valid Illinois driver's license.
   (E)   Golf carts must be equipped as follows:
      (1)   Horn;
      (2)   Brakes and brake light;
      (3)   Turn signals;
      (4)   A steering wheel apparatus;
      (5)   Tires;
      (6)   Rearview mirror;
      (7)   State approved "Slow Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of the
vehicle (Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-709);
      (8)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation;
      (9)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation; and
      (10)   Any additional requirements which may be amended to Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 11-1426.1 or the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   (F)   Must obey all traffic laws of the State of Illinois.
   (G)   Must be operated only on the city streets, except where prohibited.
   (H)   May not be operated on state highways and county roads except at
designated crossing points. Designated crossing points shall only include any
street intersecting with U.S. Route 130 which features an electronic stop
light.
   (I)   Must not be operated in excess of posted speed limit and, regardless,
may not exceed 35 miles per hour.
   (J)   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a golf cart
or recreational off-highway vehicle as described herein on a roadway while
under the influence is subject to ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 11-500 through
11-502.
   (K)   Golf carts and/or recreational off-highway vehicles shall not be
operated on sidewalks other than parking areas except when authorized by the
City Council, Mayor or City Chief of Police for special events.
   (L)   Each golf cart and/or recreational off-highway vehicles may transport
only as many individuals as is the lesser of the number of seats or as its
manufacturer designates. No individuals may ride on any other portion of the
golf cart and/or recreational off-highway vehicles.
(Ord. 2017-MC06, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 71.143 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart and/or recreational off-
highway vehicle without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police and/
or his/her designee as provided herein. The Police Department may issue such an
annual permit for any date approved of and designated by the City Council. The
cost of the permit is $25. Insurance coverage is to be verified to be in effect
by the Police Department when obtaining and renewing a permit.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name of liability insurance carrier;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model and description of golf cart;
      (4)   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the city and
agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all future claims
resulting from the operation of their golf carts and/or recreational off-
highway vehicles on city streets;
      (5)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit; and
      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be inspected by the designated representative to
ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets and is in compliance
with this subchapter and with the State of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code;
      (2)   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by the physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart and/or recreational off-highway vehicle on city streets;
and
      (3)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the Illinois Statutes regarding minimum liability insurance.
   (D)   The city may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this subchapter
or there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified golf cart
and/or recreational off-highway vehicle on the designated roadways.
   (E)   Failure to abide by this subchapter (other than failure to secure a
permit provided herein) shall result in a fine of $100 with each infraction of
this subchapter constituting a separate offense bearing a separate fine.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall be authorized to issue a permit on only such days
as may be approved by the City Council.
   (G)   Special permits shall be granted for a period of 72 hours for the date
designated on the permit. There shall be a $25 fee that shall be applied to the
General Fund.
   (H)   No permits shall be issued for all-terrain vehicles. Their use in the
public right-of- way is outright prohibited.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provisions, the within restrictions and
requirements shall not apply to such vehicles operated and/or owned by the City
of Villa Grove.
(Ord. 2017-MC06, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty
is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.99, and shall, in addition, be subject to the payment to the city for the
costs it incurred as a result of that violation, as provided in §
70.99(E), for towing and other expenses directly caused by that violation.
(Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Method of Parking
   
72.01   General parking regulations
   
72.02   Unattended motor vehicles
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing, and Parking
   
72.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.11   Stopping, standing, or parking outside business or residence district
   
72.12   Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities
   
72.13   Parking of tractor trailers, semi trailers, and other trailers within
the city
   
72.14   Parking on private property
Snow Emergencies
   
72.25   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.26   Termination of emergency
   
72.27   Snow emergency routes
Violations
   
72.40   Officers authorized to remove vehicles
   
72.41   Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter
 
   
72.99   Penalty
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.01 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close
as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one- way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-
hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   No angle parking shall be permitted except as set forth in this code.
   (D)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under the
jurisdiction of the state Department of Transportation which prohibit, limit,
or restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.02 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Except for a law enforcement officer or an operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle performing his or her official duties, no person driving or
in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition,
effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any perceptible
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. An
unattended motor vehicle shall not include an unattended locked motor vehicle
with the engine running after being started by a remote starter system.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1401)
Penalty, see § 72.99
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
§ 72.10 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic- control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         (l)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or digital registration sticker or current
temporary permit pending registration.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic- control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted);
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1303)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.11 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park,
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view
of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon the highway.
   (B)   The city, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the
maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where
in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by
the city regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any
specific street, streets, or highways become effective at the time of the
erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations. The regulations shall
be set forth in this code.
   (C)   This section, §
72.10 and ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1304 shall not apply to the driver of
any vehicle which is disabled in the manner and to the extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in the
position.
   (D)   Any second division vehicle used exclusively for the collection of
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material may stop or stand on the road in a
business, rural, or residential district for the sole purpose of collecting
garbage refuse, or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition to having its
hazard lights lighted at all times that it is engaged in stopping or standing,
shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating, or flashing light or lights as
authorized in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-215, if so equipped.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1301)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.12 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by § 70.01, pursuant to ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 3-
616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2, or to a veteran with a disability pursuant to
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by
or for a person with disabilities or a veteran with a disability, in any
parking place, including any private or public off- street parking facility,
specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles displaying the
registration plates.
      (2)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle in a designated
access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons
with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated under ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles displaying the registration
plates.
      (5)   Proper usage of the disability license plate or parking decal or
device requires the authorized holder to be present and enter or exit the
vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being used.
      (6)   It is a violation of this section to park in a space reserved for a
person with disabilities if the authorized holder of the disability license
plate or parking decal or device does not enter or exit the vehicle at the time
the parking privileges are being used.
      (7)   Any motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or
a parking decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued
to persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory
or foreign country shall be recognized by state and local authorities as a
valid license plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as
residents of this state.
      (8)   An individual with a vehicle properly displaying disability license
plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a
disability under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or
to a veteran with a disability under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 3-609 is in
violation of this section if (a) the person using the disability license plate
or parking decal or device is not the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device, or is not transporting the authorized
holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device to or from
the parking location; and (b) the person uses the disability license plate or
parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the
disability license plate or parking decals or devices under state law.
      (9)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a
parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability under
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a veteran with
a disability under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in violation of this
section if (i) the person to whom the disability license plate or parking decal
or device was issued is deceased and (ii) the driver uses the disability
license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted
through a disability license plate or parking decal or device under state law.
   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Police Department,
remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety
any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person
withdisabilities which does not display person with disabilities registration
plates or a special decal or device as required under this section.
   (C)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of divisions
(A)(1) through (7) of this section shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs
or charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle
authorized under this section; but the city by ordinance may impose a fine up
to $350 and shall display signs indicating the fine imposed. If the amount of
the fine is subsequently changed, the city shall change the sign to indicate
the current amount of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a charge under
this section that either the sign posted pursuant to this section or the
intended accessible parking place does not comply with the technical
requirements of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-301, Department regulations, or
local ordinance if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or
notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person
with disabilities.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of division (A)
(8) of this section a first time shall be fined $600. Any person found guilty
of violating division (A)(8) a second or subsequent time shall be fined $1,000.
Any person who violates division (A)(9) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and
shall be fined $2,500. The circuit clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine
imposed on any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this
section, including any person placed on court supervision for violating this
section, to the law enforcement agency that issued the citation or made the
arrest. If more than 1 law enforcement agency is responsible for issuing the
citation or making the arrest, the 50% of the fine imposed shall be shared
equally. If an officer of the Secretary of State Department of Police arrested
a person for a violation of this section, 50% of the fine imposed shall be
deposited into the Secretary of State Police Services Fund.
   (D)   The city shall impose fines as established in divisions (C)(1) and (2)
for violations of this section.
   (E)   As used in this section, AUTHORIZED HOLDER means an individual issued
a disability license plate under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-616, an
individual issued a parking decal or device under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §
11-1302.2, or an individual issued a license plate for veterans with
disabilities under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3- 609.
   (F)   Any person who commits a violation of division (A)(8) of this section
may have his or her driving privileges suspended or revoked by the Secretary of
State for a period of time determined by the Secretary of State. Any person who
commits a violation of division (A)(9) of this section shall have his or her
driving privileges revoked by the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State
may also suspend or revoke the disability license plates or parking decal or
device for a period of time determined by the Secretary of State.
   (G)   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any
person who commits a violation of this section. Any police officer may seize
the disability license plate upon authorization from the Secretary of State.
Any police officer may request that the Secretary of State revoke the parking
decal or device or the disability license plate of any person who commits a
violation of this section.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3)
§ 72.13 PARKING OF TRACTOR TRAILERS, SEMI TRAILERS, AND OTHER TRAILERS WITHIN
THE CITY.
   (A)   Except for the purposes of loading and/or unloading in the city, it
shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park any semitrailer
(cargo portion only) on any property in the city which is zoned R-1/I-Family
Dwelling District, R-2/General Residence District, B-1/Limited Retail Business
District, F-1/Flood Plain District or M-P/Mobile Home Park District, or upon
any city street or alley or any other city property in the city.
   (B)   No trailer of any kind may be parked on a public roadway without being
attached to a licensed operational motor vehicle and bearing current
registration/license plate.
   (C)   Trailers which are not attached to a licensed operational vehicle may
be parked on a public roadway if they are duly licensed and parked adjacent to
a property where a building permit has been issued, are used for construction
related to said issued permit, and so long as the trailer owner has applied for
and secured a parking permit for same, verifying all for a period not to exceed
10 days with no more than 2 such permits being issued in any given 6-month
period. Such permits may be revoked by order of the Mayor or Chief of Police if
either determines that such a permit is inconvenient for the city and/or public
and/or poses any public safety concern. There shall be an administrative fee of
$5 for each such permit.
(Ord. 2006-MC08, passed 8-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2017-MC10, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 72.14 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall park any motor vehicle on private property without the
consent of the owner of the private property.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle on private property except on a weed-
free surface made of gravel, crushed stone, asphalt, Portland cement concrete,
or brick pavers.
(Ord. 2021-MC05, passed 5-10-2021)
SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 72.25 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor finds that falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain will
create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles
on snow emergency routes be prohibited, or whenever he or she finds on the
basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather
conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it necessary that
parking be prohibited, he or she is authorized to announce the prohibition, to
become effective at a time specified by him or her. After the effective time of
the prohibition no person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to
remain parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Mayor has
not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency routes is to
be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow emergency
route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following the fall. The prohibition
of parking announced by the Mayor under the authority of this section shall
remain in effect until he or she announces the termination of the snow
emergency, in part or in whole, after which the prohibition of parking
authorized by this section shall no longer be in effect.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.26 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which gave
rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized
to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective
immediately on announcement. If the announcement is made other than between 6:
00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.27 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Mayor.
On the street or highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs
shall be posted to this effect.
VIOLATIONS
§ 72.40 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of §
72.11 or any other applicable section of this traffic code or ordinance of the
city, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the
roadway.
   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a
place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any
highway, bridge, causeway, or in a tunnel, or in a position or under
circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
   (C)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to
the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway
when:
      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner; or
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to
provide for its custody or removal; or
      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person
arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
      (4)   The registration of the vehicle has been suspended, cancelled, or
revoked.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1302)
§ 72.41 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who
leases the vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this chapter involving the vehicle, shall upon request provide the police
officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having jurisdiction
thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the
time of the offense and the identifying number upon the registration plates or
digital registration plates and registration sticker or stickers or digital
registration sticker or stickers of the vehicle.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1305)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.99(B), and shall, in addition, be subject to the payment to the city for the
costs it incurred as a result of that violation, as provided in §
70.99(E), for towing and other expenses directly caused by that violation.
   (B)   A violation of any part of §
72.10(A)(1)(h) shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1303) (Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
73.02   Riding on bicycles
   
73.03   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.05   Carrying articles
   
73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
73.07   Lamps on mopeds
   
73.08   Riding on mopeds
Motorcycles
   
73.20   Riding on motorcycles
   
73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles
   
73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles
   
73.23   Operating motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one wheel
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the
rights, including, but not limited to, rights under ILCS Chapter 625, Act. 10
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this traffic code,
and those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature can have no
application.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1502)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.02 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a back pack or sling.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1503)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1504)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle,
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway; or
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this subsection, a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE means a lane that is
too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel safely
side by side within the lane; or
      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way
highway with 2 or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand curb
or edge of the roadway as practicable.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than 2 abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for their exclusive use. Persons riding 2 abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of division (A) and division (B) above.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.05 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least 1 hand on the
handlebars at all times.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1506)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.06 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the state Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting
a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle, any siren. This division does not apply to a bicycle that is a police
vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the state Department of Transportation, on each pedal, visible from the
front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this
division may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least 3/16 inch
wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle, and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear
tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the
state Department of Transportation.
   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1507)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.07 LAMPS ON MOPEDS.
   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by
the state Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-
powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.08 RIDING ON MOPED.
   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit 2 persons to ride thereon
at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry 2 persons. Any moped
designed for 2 persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for
use of a passenger.
   (B)   The provisions of §§
73.01 through
73.07 shall be applicable to the operation of mopeds, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to mopeds.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.20 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is
designed to carry more than 1 person, in which event a passenger may ride upon
the permanent and regular seat if designed for 2 persons, or upon another seat
firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward, with 1 leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher
than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by
the operator.
   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a
handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.
   (E)   The operator of a motorcycle may not transport a passenger unless the
passenger is capable of resting a foot on the footrest while the motorcycle is
in motion.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1403)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.21 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   Requirement. The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle, motor
driven cycle, or moped and every passenger thereon shall be protected by
glasses, goggles, or a transparent shield.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GLASSES. Ordinary eye pieces such as spectacles or sunglasses worn before
the eye, made of shatter-resistant material. Shatter-resistant material, as
used in this section, means material so manufactured, fabricated, or created
that it substantially prevents shattering or flying when struck or broken.
      GOGGLES. A device worn before the eyes, the predominant function of which
is protecting the eyes without obstructing peripheral vision. Goggles shall
provide protection from the front and sides and may or may not form a complete
seal with the face.
      TRANSPARENT SHIELD. A windshield attached to the front of a motorcycle
that extends above the eyes when an operator is seated in the normal, upright
riding position, made of shatter- resistant material, or a shatter resistant
protective face shield that covers the wearer’s eyes and face at least to a
point approximately above the tip of the nose.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1404)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.22 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTOR- CYCLES.
   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed
cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1405)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.23 OPERATING MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE, OR MOPED ON ONE WHEEL ON ONE
WHEEL.
   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one
wheel.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2(a))
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulations
   
74.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
   
74.05   Pedestrian with disabilities; right-of- way
   
74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
   
74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
74.12   Bridge and railroad signals
   
74.13   Motorized wheelchairs
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals
provided in §§
70.31 and
70.32 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1001)
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety,
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) shall not apply under the condition stated in §
74.03(B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in §
71.062.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1002)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSS- WALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where the
intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1003)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.05 PEDESTRIAN WITH DISABILITIES; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian with
clearly visible disabilities.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1004)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1005)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly permitted by
this code. Solicitation on highways within this city shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. Any person
engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more and shall
be wearing a high visibility vest. The soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by “An Act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor,” approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity;
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a street or highway.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1006)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGH- WAYS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (E) below, where a sidewalk is provided
and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the
left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Upon highways where the maximum posted speed limit is 45 miles per
hour or less, and during the period from sunrise to sunset, a pedestrian who is
18 years of age or older and wearing in-line speed skates may travel upon the
roadway as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway. Pedestrians
wearing in-line speed skates upon a roadway may not impede or obstruct other
vehicular traffic. Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates shall be subject to
all other rights and duties under state law. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent a pedestrian wearing in- line speed skates from using a
lane designated for bicycles.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1007)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of- way to any pedestrians on
a sidewalk.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1008)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHOR- IZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 12-601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use
of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the
authorized emergency vehicle.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1009)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway,
except on a sidewalk.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1010)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon, or traverse over a railroad
grad crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible
bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is operational
giving warning of the approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.
   (D)   A violation of any part of this section is a petty offense for which a
$250 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a $500 fine shall be
imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court may impose 25 hours
community service in place of the $250 fine for a first violation.
   (E)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (D) of
this section for pedestrians who fail to obey signals indicating the presence,
approach, passage, or departure of a train or railroad track equipment.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)
CHAPTER 75: EQUIPMENT; LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
75.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements
Loads
   
75.10   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations
   
75.11   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
75.12   Protruding members of vehicles
   
75.13   Spilling loads prohibited
   
75.14   Pushing of disabled vehicles
EQUIPMENT
§ 75.01 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq., or which
is equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et
seq., or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act
required under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq., with
respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry,
road machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, or to farm-wagon type trailers
having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon, having a
gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only for the
transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not
to exceed 2,000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as
field-storage “nurse tanks,” supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and
highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field applicator from a local
source of supply to the farm or field or from 1 farm or field to another.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 12-101)
Penalty, see § 70.99
LOADS
§ 75.10 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon, or across, or
for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved on, upon, or
across any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq., or otherwise
in violation of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq. governing
size, weight, and load do not apply to equipment for snow and ice removal
operations owned or operated by the city, or to implements of husbandry, as
defined in §
70.01, temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon a highway provided
the combination does not consist of more than 3 vehicles or, in the case of
hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of first
processing, not more than 3 wagons being towed by an implement of husbandry, or
to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit. Except for weight
limits on Class I highways under this chapter, the provisions of ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq. governing size, weight, and load do not apply to
fire apparatus or emergency vehicles.
   (C)   The provisions of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq. governing
size, weight, and load do not apply to any snow and ice removal equipment that
is no more than 12 feet in width, if the equipment displays flags at least 18
inches square mounted on the driver's side of the snow plow. These vehicles
must be equipped with an illuminated rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber
light or lights, or a flashing amber strobe light or lights, mounted on the top
of the cab and of sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal
sunlight. If the load on the transport vehicle blocks the visibility of the
amber lighting from the rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must also be equipped
with an illuminated rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber light or lights,
or a flashing amber strobe light or lights, mounted on the rear of the load and
of sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-101)
   (D)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the city in
violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial vehicle
restrictions set forth in this code.
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate loads, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
§ 75.11 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than 6 inches beyond the line of the fenders on
the right side thereof.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-105)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.12 PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig, or other protruding component shall be
operated upon any highway in the city unless the protruding component is
fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing, or moving in any manner.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-106)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.13 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway.
   (C)   The state Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules and
regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and
other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of highways
and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on any highway
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the state Department
of Transportation under this division shall be punished as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-109)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.14 PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other
vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in this city, except in
an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed farther than is
reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the immediate hazard
that exists.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-114)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 76: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
   
76.01   Reckless driving
   
76.02   Reserved
   
76.03   Crashes involving death or personal injuries
   
76.04   Duty to give information and render aid
   
76.05   Crash involving damage to vehicle
   
76.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property
   
76.07   Duty to report accident
   
76.08   False reports
   
76.09   When driver fails to report
§ 76.01 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   A person commits reckless driving if he or she:
   (A)   Drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety
of persons or property; or
   (B)   Knowingly drives a vehicle and uses an incline in a roadway, such as a
railroad crossing, bridge approach, or hill to cause the vehicle to become
airborne.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a))
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.02 RESERVED
§ 76.03 CRASHES INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crashes
resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop
the
vehicle at the scene of the crash, or as close thereto as possible, and shall
then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
crash until the requirements of § 76.04 have been fulfilled. Every stop shall
be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any injury
requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor’s
office.
   (C)   Any person arrested for violating this section is subject to chemical
testing of his or her blood, breath, other bodily substance, or urine for the
presence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds,
or any combination thereof, as provided in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1,
if the testing occurs within 12 hours of the time of the occurrence of the
crash that led to his or her arrest. The person's driving privileges are
subject to statutory summary suspension under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-
501.1 if he or she fails testing or statutory summary revocation under ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or she refuses to undergo the testing.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-401) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.04 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is
driven or attended by any person shall give the driver’s name, address,
registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and
shall upon request and if available, exhibit the driver’s license to the person
struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided
with, and shall render to any person injured in the accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the
carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or
surgical treatment, if it is apparent that the treatment is necessary or if
carrying is requested by the injured person.
   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this
section is in condition to receive and understand the information and no police
officer is present, the driver, after rendering reasonable assistance, shall
forthwith report the accident at the Police Department, disclosing the
information required by this section.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-403)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.05 CRASHES INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the motor vehicle accident or as
close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event
shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle crash until the requirements of
this chapter have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate this section if the
driver moves the vehicle as soon as possible off the highway to the nearest
safe location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage road, the nearest suitable
cross street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct traffic and
remains at that location until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of §
76.04. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall make a
finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, and in
the case a statement of this finding shall be reported to the Secretary of
State with the report of conviction.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-402) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.06 DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor
vehicle crash with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property,
resulting in any damage to the other vehicle or property shall immediately stop
and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of the
vehicle or other property of the driver’s name, address, registration number,
and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach securely in a
conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a written
notice giving the driver’s name, address, registration number, and owner of the
vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay notify the
Police Department and shall make a written report of the crash when and as
required in § 76.07. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more
than is necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the
driver of the vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or
have it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-404) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.07 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
within this city, resulting in injury to or death of any person or in which
damage to the property of any 1 person, including himself, in excess of $1,500
(or $500 if any of the vehicles involved in the accident is subject to ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 7-601, but not covered by a liability insurance policy in
accordance with ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 7-601) is sustained shall, as soon
as possible but not later than 10 days after the accident, file with the Police
Department a copy of the written report required to be filed with the state
under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a).
   (B)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in this city, caused
by a collision, a sudden stop, or otherwise, resulting in any property damage,
personal injury, or death, and whenever an accident occurs within 50 feet of a
school bus in this city resulting in personal injury to or the death of any
person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately after
exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but not later than 10
days after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the written
report required to be filed with the state under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-
406(b). If a report is also required under division (A) above, that report and
the report required by this division (B) shall be submitted on a single form.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may require any driver, occupant, or owner of a
vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in
this section or §
76.09 to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient
in the opinion of the Chief of Police and may require witnesses of the accident
to submit written reports. The report may include photographs, charts,
sketches, and graphs.
   (D)   Should the Police Department learn through other reports of accidents
required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under this chapter
and the driver, owner, or witness has not reported as required under divisions
(A) through (C) above or §
76.09 within the time specified, the person is not relieved of the
responsibility and the Police Department shall notify the person by first class
mail directed to his or her last known address of his or her legal obligation.
However, the notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty
for failure to report as provided in division (E) below.
   (E)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license or any
nonresident’s driving privilege of any person who fails or neglects to make
report of a traffic accident as herein required or as required by any other law
of this state.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-406)
Statutory reference:
   Authorization for city to require accident reports, see ILCS Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 11-415
§ 76.08 FALSE REPORTS.
   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report required by
this chapter with knowledge or reason to believe that the information is false
shall be fined as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-409)
§ 76.09 WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required written accident report and if there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written
report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made. If the
driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle
involved in the motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make the
report to the Police Department.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-410)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Through streets
   
III.   Stop intersections
   
IV.   Yield intersections
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on the following streets at
speeds in excess of those speeds indicated.
Street Miles Per Hour
Street                                                         Miles Per Hour
Ash Street                                                     20
Cherry Lane                                                    25
South Douglas Street                                           25
Fox Run                                                        20
Hancock Drive                                                  25
Harrison Street, west of Sycamore Street                       25
Hawthorne Drive                                                25
Henson Road                                                    25
Hickory Lane                                                   25
McCoy Avenue                                                   25
McCoy Avenue (on school days when children are present)        20
McCoy Circle                                                   20
Madison Street                                                 25
Magnolia Drive                                                 25
Main Street                                                    25
Maple Street                                                   25
Oak Street                                                     25
Park Drive                                                     25
Pine Street                                                    25
Possum Trail                                                   20
Raccoon Road                                                   20
Railroad Street, east of Richman Street                        25
Richman Street, south of Harrison Street                       25
North Spruce Street                                            25
South Spruce Street                                            20
Sycamore Street, north of Harrison Street (on school days when 20
children are present)
Vine Street                                                    25
Walnut Street                                                  25
West Street                                                    25
Wilson Street                                                  25
 
(1992 Code, Chapter 77, Sch. I) (Am. Ord. 052781, passed 5-27-1981; Am. Ord.
101182A, passed 10-11-1982; Am. Ord. 082586, passed 8-25-1986; Am. Ord. 032392,
passed 3-23-1992; Am .Ord. 122793H, passed 12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 100995B, passed
10-9-1995; Am. Ord. 112398A, passed 11-23-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-MC15, passed 12-
12-2005; Am. Ord. 2023-MC12, passed 6-12-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. THROUGH STREETS.
   The streets set forth below are hereby designated as through streets and
every driver of a vehicle crossing the intersection with a through street shall
stop the vehicle before entering the intersection, except as provided below.
Location
Location
Harrison Street east of Sycamore Street
Harrison Avenue west of Sycamore Street
Henson Road south from Harrison Street
Madison Street between Main Street and Douglas Street
Main Street between Railroad Street and Harrison Street
Richman Street between the railroad tracks and Madison Avenue
Richman Street between Madison Avenue and Harrison Street
Sycamore Street (Illinois State Highway Number 130)
 
(1992 Code, Chapter 77, Sch. II) (Am. Ord. 112276A, passed 11-22-1976; Am. Ord.
101182, passed 10-11-1982; Am. Ord. 2023-MC12, passed 6-12-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever a stop sign is placed at any of the following intersections,
every driver of a vehicle crossing the intersection shall stop the vehicle
before entering.
      (1)   One-way stops.
Description Direction
Description                                                           Direction
Entering Birch Lane from Hickory Lane                                 North
Entering Hancock Drive from Matteson Drive                             
Entering Hancock Drive from Park Drive                                 
Entering Harrison Street from Main Street                              
Entering Henson Road from East Vine Street                            East
Entering Henson Road from East Wilson Street                          East
Entering Henson Road from Perk s Trailer Court                        East
Entering Hickory Lane from Cherry Lane                                 
Entering Hickory Lane from Willow Lane                                 
Entering Madison Street/Railroad Street from Main Street              South
Entering Main Street from the alley located between the United States East
Post Office and Adams Street
Entering Maple Street from East Vine Street                           West
Entering Maple Street from East Wilson Street                         West
Entering Matteson Drive from Hancock Drive                            North
Entering Pine Street from Wilson Street                               East
Entering Railroad Street from Lincoln Street                           
Entering Railroad Street from Oak Street                               
Entering Railroad Street from Pine Street                              
Entering Railroad Street from Walnut Street                            
Entering Railroad Street from Washington Street                        
Entering West Street from Waymire Street                              South
Entering West Street from Crawford Avenue                             West
Entering West Street from North Street                                West
Entering West Street from Timothy Avenue                              West
Entering West Street from Vine Street                                 West
Entering West Street from Wilson Street                               West
Entering Willow Lane from Beech Lane                                   
Entering Wilson Street from Perk s Trailer Court                      South
Entering Wilson Street from First Street                              North
 
      (2)   Two-way stops.
Description
Description
Entering Douglas Street from Vine Street
Entering Madison Street from Oak Street
Entering Madison Street from Pine Street
Entering Madison Street from Walnut Street
Entering Maple Street from Vine Street
Entering Maple Street from Wilson Street
Entering Oak Street from Adams Street
Entering Oak Street from Jefferson Street
Entering Oak Street from Monroe Street
Entering Pine Street from Adams Street
Entering Pine Street from Monroe Street
Entering Pine Street from Washington Street
Entering Pine Street from the alley located between Vine Street and Wilson
Street
Entering Spruce Street from Cleveland Avenue
Entering Spruce Street from Hayes Avenue
Entering Spruce Street from Lincoln Avenue
Entering Spruce Street from Lincoln Avenue
Entering Spruce Street from McKinley Avenue
Entering Vine Street from First Street
Entering Vine Street from Pine Street
Entering Walnut Street from Adams Street
Entering Walnut Street from Vine Street
Entering Wilson Street from First Street
Entering Wilson Street from Fourth Street
 
      (3)   Three-way stops.
 
Description                                         Direction
Intersection of Railroad Street with Richman Street All
Intersection of Spruce Street and Arthur Avenue     South, East, West
 
      (4)   Four-way stops.
 
Description
Sycamore Street and Harrison Street
Lincoln Street and Walnut Street
Madison Street and Richman Street
Fourth Street and Vine Street
Spruce Street and Garfield Avenue
 
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersections when stop signs
are in place shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway which is
approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver having so yielded may proceed at the time as a safe interval
occurs.
   (C)   Any vehicle driver violating the requirements of this schedule may be
prosecuted under applicable Illinois law regulating motor vehicles, Illinois
Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq., including ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-904, or the violations may instead be prosecuted by the city as
violations of this schedule.
   (D)   Any person operating a motor vehicle contrary to the requirements of
this schedule shall be punished by a fine not less than $75 and not more than
$200, and the City Attorney may, upon the direction of the City Council,
prosecute the offenses in the name of the city.
(1992 Code, Chapter 77, Sch. III) (Am. Ord. 112276A, passed 11-22-1976; Am.
Ord. 101182, passed 10-11-1982; Am. Ord. 091090-2, passed 9-10-1990; Am. Ord.
—, passed 12-10-1990; Am. Ord. 021191, passed 2-11-1991; Am. Ord. 122793D,
passed 12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 032894A, passed 3-28-1994; Am. Ord. 061394A, passed
6-13-1994; Am. Ord. 050895, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 100995A, passed 10-9-
1995; Am. Ord. 102896A, passed 10-28-1996; Am. Ord. 051297A, passed 5-12-1997;
Am. Ord. 102300C, passed 10-23-2000; Am. Ord. 081202B, passed 8-12-2002; Am.
Ord. 2007-MC11, passed 7-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2023-MC12, passed 6-12-2023)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE IV. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   Whenever a yield sign is placed at any of the intersections set forth below,
every driver of a vehicle approaching the yield sign shall slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop,
shall stop before entering the intersection. After slowing or stopping, the
driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
   (A)   One-way yield.
 
Description                                  Direction
Entering Beech Lane from Magnolia Drive      South
Entering Cherry Lane from Magnolia Drive     North
Entering Spruce Street from Jefferson Street West
 
   (B)   Two-way yield.
Location
Location
Entering Douglas Street from Wilson Street
Entering Fourth Street from Vine Street
Entering Pine Street from Jefferson Street
Entering Spruce Street from Adams Street
Entering Spruce Street from McKinley Avenue
Entering Walnut Street from Jefferson Street
Entering Walnut Street from Washington Street
Entering Walnut Street from Monroe Street
Entering Wilson Street from Richman Street
Entering Wilson Street from Walnut Street
 
(1992 Code, Chapter 77, Sch. IV) (Am. Ord. 52785, passed 5-27-1985; Am. Ord.
passed 12-10-1990; Am. Ord. 122793C, passed 12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 100995C,
passed 10-9-1995; Am. Ord. 102896B, passed 10-28-1996; Am. Ord. 102300B, passed
10-23-2000; Am. Ord. 2023-MC12, passed 6-12-2023) Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking restrictions
   
II.   Parking spaces reserved for handicapped
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
Street    LocatiProhibitedTimes Side
Street      Location                ProhibitedTimes                Side
         East of its intersection with
         Oak Street up to and west of  Monday through Friday, 8:00
Adams    the alley running north and   a.m. to 5:00 p.m.              North
         south between Oak and Main
         Streets
         West of the intersection of   All (except during church
Harrison Spruce Street                 services at the Sacred Heart   Both
                                       Catholic Church)
Harrison Within 100 feet of the        All                            Northeast
         intersection of Maple Street
         In front of the Zest for Life
         Center (however, any bus or
Harrison van used for transport of     Monday through Friday, 10:00    
         senior citizens may be parked a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
         within the space during the
         aforementioned time)
         All parking spaces between    7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., every
Main     its intersection with Adams   day                             
         and Madison Streets
         All parking spaces between    2:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m., every
Main     its intersection with         day                             
         Harrison and Madison Streets
         All parking spaces between    12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., every
Main     its intersection with         day after a snowfall of 3       
         Jefferson and Railroad        inches or more
         Streets
         North of its intersection
         with Madison and Railroad
         Streets where the Handicapped
Main     Parking Only sign is posted,  All                            East
         unless the vehicle using the
         posted area is operated or
         occupied by a physically
         handicapped person
         Parking lot located at 123    9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Main     North Main Street             everyday (unless city permit    
                                       obtained and displayed)
McCoy    Between Ruby Street and       During athletic contests or    Both
         Sycamore/Illinois Route 130   event sanctioned by the city
         First parking lane west of
         its intersection with
         Sycamore/Illinois Route 130,
Monroe   where the Handicapped Parking All                             
         Only sign is posted, unless
         the vehicle using the area is
         operated or occupied by a
         physically handicapped person
         The first and second marked
         parallel parking spaces on    All, except that vans and
Railroad the south side of Railroad,   buses may stand there to load  South
         immediately south of its      or unload passengers
         intersection with Madison
         Street
                                       All (except for official
                                       emergency vehicles used at any
                                       time, and manned commercial
         From its intersections from   vehicles used by the Union
Railroad Main to Oak Streets           Pacific Railroad employees     South
                                       and/or their designated
                                       contractors during the pickup
                                       and drop-off of railroad
                                       employees only)
         From its intersection with    All parking shall be limited
         Oak Street to the             to 3 hours (except for
Railroad intersection with the alley   official emergency vehicles    North
         running north-south between   used at any time)
         Oak and Main Streets
         Between the driveways serving
Waymire  111 and 114 Waymire, north to All                            West
         south
 
(1992 Code, Chapter 78, Sch. I) (Am. Ord. 121376, passed 12-13-1976; Am. Ord.
061383, passed 6-13-1983; Am. Ord. 062783, passed 6-27-1983; Am. Ord. 22585,
passed 2-25-1985; Am. Ord. 092286, passed 9-22-1986; Am. Ord. 122793J, passed
12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 032894B, passed 3-28-1994; Am. Ord. 022800A, passed 2-28-
2000; Am. Ord. 102201A, passed 10-22-2001; Am. Ord. 102802A, passed 10-28-2002;
Am. Ord. 021102A, passed 2-11-2002; Am. Ord. 2011-MC04, passed 5-9-2011; Am.
Ord. 2014-MC01, passed 2-10-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-MC01, passed 1-26-2015; Am.
Ord. 2015-MC09, passed 8-10-2015; Am. Ord. 2016-MC01, passed 2-22- 2016; Am.
Ord. 2018-MC02, passed 3-26-2018; Am. Ord. 2021-MC05, passed 5-10-2021; Am.
Ord. 2023- MC12, passed 6-12-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED.
 
Designated Location
Space/Area
           North of the intersection of Main, Madison and Railroad Street where “Handicapped
1          Parking Only” sign is posted, unless the vehicle using the posted area is operated
           or occupied by a physically handicapped person.
2- east    North and south of the intersection of Main and Walnut Streets
side
3- west    South of the intersection of Main and Adams Streets
side
 
(Ord. 061404A, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 2023-MC12, passed 6-12-2023)
 
CHAPTER 79: VEHICULAR SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
Section
   
79.01   Definitions
   
79.02   Violations; exceptions
   
79.03   Seizure and impoundment
   
79.04   Notice
   
79.05   Hearing
   
79.06   Hearing officer; proceedings
   
79.07   Disposition of impoundment vehicle
   
79.08   Posting of bond
   
79.09   Failure to pay penalty
§ 79.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the words, terms and phrases set forth below shall be these meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section as follows:
   CITY. The City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
   OWNER OF RECORD. Collectively, the record title holder of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.02 VIOLATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The owners of record of any motor vehicle shall be liable to the city
for an administrative penalty in the amount of $500, plus any applicable towing
and storage fees payable to a towing agent, whenever any such motor vehicle is
used in the commission of any of the following offenses:
      (1)   The knowing possession of more than ten grams of cannabis as
provided in § 4 of the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4) or the
knowing possession of a controlled substance in violation of § 402 of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402).
      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs and/or intoxicating
compounds in violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-501).
      (3)   Driving at a time when the driver's license, permit or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked in violation of § 6-303 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303).
      (4)   Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer in violation of §
11-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204).
      (5)   The commission of an offense involving a weapon in violation of
article 24 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1 et seq.).
      (6)   Driving without a valid driver's license or permit as provided in §
6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101). The only
exception to this provision shall be if the driver has a valid graduated
driver's license as defined in § 6-107 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 6-107).
      (7)   Any motor vehicle used in the commission of any such violation
shall be subject to seizure and impoundment as provided in this section.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle is not considered to
have been used in a violation that would render such motor vehicle eligible for
seizure and impoundment if:
      (1)   The motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The motor vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the
violation occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor
vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner of record provides adequate proof that the motor
vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.03 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to § 79.02, such police officer
shall provide for the towing of such motor vehicle to a facility designated by
the city. Before or at the time the motor vehicle is towed, the police officer
shall notify the owner of record or the person in control of the motor vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation, whichever is present if there is such a
person, of the fact of the seizure and impoundment and of the right of the
owner of record to request a vehicle impoundment hearing under this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.04 NOTICE.
   Within 72 hours after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to §
79.02, the Police Department shall notify by certified mail the owner of record
and any lien holder of record of the fact of the seizure and impoundment and
the right to request a motor vehicle impoundment hearing under this chapter.
However, no such notice need be sent to the owner of record if the owner of
record is personally served with the notice at the time the motor vehicle is
seized and impounded and the owner of record acknowledges receipt of such
notice in writing. A copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the hearing
officer. The notice shall state the penalties that may be imposed if no hearing
is requested, including that a motor vehicle not released by payment of the
administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees may be sold or
disposed of the city in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.05 HEARING.
   The owner of record seeking a vehicle impoundment hearing shall file a
written request for such a hearing with the Police Department no later then 15
days after notice was mailed or otherwise given to the owner of record. The
hearing date shall be no more than ten calendar days after a request for a
vehicle impoundment hearing has been filed. If, after the vehicle impoundment
hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
the motor vehicle was used in the violation, the hearing officer shall enter an
order finding the owner of record liable to the city for the amount of the
administrative penalty prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage fees
payable to the towing agent. If, after a hearing, the hearing officer does not
determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in
such a violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding for the
owner of record and for the return of the motor vehicle and any previously paid
administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees; provided that if
the motor vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug
asset forfeiture laws, the motor vehicle shall not be returned unless and until
the city receives notice from the appropriate, state, or where applicable,
federal officials that forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or
forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court
order providing that the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of
record. If the owner of record requests a vehicle impoundment hearing but fails
to appear at such hearing or fails to request a vehicle impoundment hearing in
a timely manner, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his right
to such a hearing and the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor
of the city for the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed, plus
applicable towing and storage fees payable to the towing agent. However, if the
owner of record pays such administrative penalty and applicable towing and
storage fees and motor vehicle is returned to the owner of record, no default
order need to be entered if the owner of record is informed of his right to a
hearing and signs a written waiver, in which case an order of liability shall
be deemed to have been made when the city receives the written waiver.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.06 HEARING OFFICER; PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor or her designee shall serve as the hearing officer for the
vehicle impounding hearings under this chapter.
   (B)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at any vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at any such hearing.
   (C)   Any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in
compliance with § 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-501.1) that is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's
duties and sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment,
shall be admissible evidence of the owner of record's liability under § 79.02
and shall support a finding of the owner of record's liability under § 79.02,
unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.07 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDMENT VEHICLE.
   (A)   Any administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a debt due and owing the city which may be enforced in any manner
provided by law. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a motor vehicle
impounding pursuant to this chapter shall remain impoundment until:
      (1)   The administrative penalty is paid in full to the city and all
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case
the owner of record shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;
      (2)   A cash bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the city and all
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time
the motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, whenever a person
with a lien of record against a motor vehicle impounded under this section has
commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the motor vehicle shall be
given to that person if he pays the applicable towing and storage fees and
agrees in writing to refund to the city the net proceeds of any foreclosure
sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the
total amount of administrative penalties imposed under this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized
and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws shall be
returned to the owner of record unless and until the city has received notice
from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that
forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or forfeiture proceedings have
concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle
shall be returned to the owner of record.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.08 POSTING OF BOND.
   If a cash bond of $500 is posted with the city comptroller, the impounded
motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record upon the payment of any
applicable towing and storage fees to the towing agent. If an administrative
penalty is imposed for any violation under § 79.02, the cash bond will be
forfeited to the city; however, in the event a violation under § 79.02 is not
proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the cash bond will be returned to
the person posting the bond. Any bond money to be forfeited to the city
pursuant to this section shall be held by the city comptroller until 30 days
after an administrative penalty is imposed by the hearing officer under this
chapter, or, if there is a judicial review, until a final judgment is rendered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
§ 79.09 FAILURE TO PAY PENALTY.
   If the administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees are not
paid within 30 days after and administrative penalty is imposed under this
chapter against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the
vehicle impoundment hearing, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and
applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within 30 days after the
expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing officer's
determination may be sought, or within 30 days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is
applicable, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed
of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles;
provided that, if the motor vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to state
or federal drug asset forfeiture laws and proceedings have been instituted
under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the motor vehicle may not be
disposed of by the city except as consistent with those proceedings.
(Ord. 2011-MC01, passed 4-25-2011)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
   
91.   ANIMALS
   
92.   FIRE PREVENTION; EXPLOSIVES
   
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
   
94.   NUISANCES; PLANTS AND WEEDS
   
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
   
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   
97.   TREES AND OTHER PLANTS
   
98.   FAIR HOUSING
   
99.   SMOKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Inoperable vehicles declared to be a nuisance
   
90.03   Disposal of inoperable motor vehicles
   
90.04   Impoundment of vehicles
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Vehicular seizure and impoundment, see
Ch. 79
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is left at any place for the time and
under the circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of a
least 7 days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power;
however, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor vehicle
that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles
over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or organization
of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to those of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
(1992 Code, § 90.01) (Am. Ord. 10884, passed 10-8-1984; Am. Ord. 022288, passed
2-22-1988)
§ 90.02 INOPERABLE VEHICLES DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.
   Inoperable motor vehicles, as defined in §
90.01, whether on public or private property and in view of the general public,
are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1992 Code, § 90.02) (Am. Ord. 10884, passed 10-8-1984; Am. Ord. 102891-1,
passed 10-28-1991)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.03 DISPOSAL OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Any person is required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle under his
or her control within 7 days after receiving written notice from the city
stating that the person is to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle under his
or her control within 7 days or the inoperable motor vehicle will be removed
and disposed of in accordance with Illinois Vehicle Code, Chapter 4, Article
II.
(1992 Code, § 90.03) (Am. Ord. 022288, passed 2-22-1988)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.04 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   The Chief of Police or any member of his or her Department designated by him
is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or
which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which is an
inoperable vehicle as defined in §
90.01. The vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in
accordance with Illinois Vehicle Code, Chapter 4, Art. II.
(1992 Code, § 90.04) (Am. Ord. 022288, passed 2-22-1988)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each violation.
   (B)   Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder.
   (C)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (A), the violator is
also liable for payment to the city for its vehicle towing and impoundment
expenses and, if the city causes a third party to tow and/or impound such
vehicle, the violator must pay such towing and impoundment fees directly to the
third-party provider to obtain the vehicle therefrom.
   (D)   The removal and disposal of any vehicle or object, and/or the payment
by the violator or anyone on his or her behalf for the costs of towing or
impoundment as required in division (C) hereof, shall be in addition to and
separate from any fine imposed under the provision of division (A) hereof, and
shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar enforcement of any
penalty that may be applicable.
(1992 Code, § 90.99) (Am. Ord. 10884, passed 10-8-1984; Am. Ord. 081202A,
passed 8-12-2002; Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Cruelty to animals
   
91.03   Housing animals in unclean environment
   
91.04   Disposal of dead animals
   
91.05   Butchering of animals
   
91.06   Maintaining certain animals restricted
Dogs and Cats
   
91.15   Running at large
   
91.16   Registration of dogs
   
91.17   Vicious dogs
   
91.18   Barking dogs; disturbing the peace
   
91.19   Certain conditions declared nuisance
   
91.20   Removal of dog excrement
Enforcement Procedures
   
91.30   Impoundment of animals; redemption; disposition
   
91.31   Rabies control; notification
   
91.32   Killing dangerous animals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, other than man.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or her
agent, to an escape- proof building or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
   HAS BITTEN. Has seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or animal
seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further includes
contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   LICENSE TAG. A tag, disk or plate of suitable and durable material furnished
by the county in accordance with the Animal Control Act of the state.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog or other animal, or
who keeps or harbors a dog or other animal, or who has it in his or her care,
or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic
animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity.
   RUN AT LARGE. Suffering, permitting or causing an animal to be at any place
within the city, at any time, other than premises occupied by the owner
thereof, except when the animal is under the direct, effective, physical
control of the owner thereof, his or her agent, or a member of the immediate
family of the owner.
   VICIOUS, DANGEROUS or FIERCE DOG. A dog which has once bitten a person, or a
dog which by barking, snarling, growling or snapping at a person, or rushing at
or upon, or chasing a person, or by other overt action, displays an inclination
to do harm to, or to frighten a person; and includes a dog which attacks or
worries or mutilates or wounds, or kills a dog, or a cat, or a domestic animal.
(1992 Code, § 91.01)
§ 91.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in any way; and any person who
inhumanely under feeds, overloads, or abandons any animal shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 91.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.03 HOUSING ANIMALS IN UNCLEAN ENVIRONMENT.
   No person shall cause or allow any stable, kennel, or other place where any
animal may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.
(1992 Code, § 91.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner or owners of any animal which shall die within the corporate
limits of the city shall dispose of the same so as not to cause a nuisance; the
disposal shall be performed not later than 6 hours after the owner or owners
have been notified, or informed, of the death of the animal.
(1992 Code, § 91.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.05 BUTCHERING OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to kill for domestic use or for the purpose of selling
for meat any cattle, calves, sheep or hogs within the corporate limits of the
city.
(1992 Code, § 91.05) (Am. Ord. 2019-MC05, passed 4-8-2019)   
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.06 MAINTAINING CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any hogs, rabbits, horses, cattle,
chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks or other like fowl within the corporate limits
of the city.
(1992 Code, § 91.06) (Am. Ord. 2019-MC05, passed 4-8-2019)   
Penalty, see § 10.99
DOGS AND CATS
§ 91.15 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No owner shall permit or suffer a dog or cat to run at large within the city
at any time. Any dog or cat found running at large at any time within the city
shall be taken up and impounded as provided in §
91.30(A) herein.
(1992 Code, § 91.15) (Am. Ord. 080888A, passed 8-8-1988; Am. Ord. 080888B,
passed 8-8-1988)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.16 REGISTRATION OF DOGS.
   Every owner of a dog 4 months or more of age shall cause the dog to be
registered with the appropriate authorities of the county. Each dog so
registered shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar or harness to
which the license tag for that dog shall be securely attached. Both collar or
harness and license tag shall be worn by the dog at all times.
(1992 Code, § 91.16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.17 VICIOUS DOGS.
   No person shall keep within the city limits a vicious, dangerous or fierce
dog.
(1992 Code, § 91.17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.18 BARKING DOGS; DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall keep within the city limits a dog which disturbs the peace
and quiet of any person or neighborhood by barking, whining or howling.
(1992 Code, § 91.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.19 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED NUISANCE.
   Any vicious, dangerous or fierce dog, or any noisy dog which in any manner
disturbs the quiet of any person or neighborhood, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and the dog shall be taken up and impounded as provided in §
91.30(A) herein.
(1992 Code, § 91.19)
§ 91.20 REMOVAL OF DOG EXCREMENT.
   (A)   No owner or person in control of a dog shall permit the dog to deposit
fecal matter on any public right-of-way or property or on any private property,
other than that of the owner or person in control or a property owner who has
consented thereto, without providing a means of disposing of the fecal matter.
   (B)   The owner or person in control of a dog shall promptly remove any
fecal matter deposited on any property, other than property belonging to the
owner or person in control of the dog, or on other property whose owner has
consented thereto.
(Am. Ord. 062899B, passed 6-28-1999)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
§ 91.30 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS; REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Animals taken up under the provisions of this chapter shall be
impounded in some suitable place provided by the city by contract or otherwise.
The animals shall be impounded for not less than 7 days after the giving of
notice as herein provided, unless earlier redeemed by the owner as hereinafter
provided. Within 36 hours after an animal is impounded, the person impounding
the animal shall give notice thereof as follows.
      (1)   If the owner is known to the person, or is made known to the person
within 24 hours after the animal is impounded, and the address of the owner is
reasonably ascertainable, the person shall mail notice to the owner, which
notice shall show the date, time and place of impoundment, and shall recite the
manner by which the animal may be redeemed.
      (2)   If the animal does not have a county license tag upon it and the
person impounding the animal does not know the name of the owner, or the name
of the owner is not made known to the person within 24 hours of the impoundment
of the animal, then notice shall be given by the person so impounding by
posting a brief description of the size, color and breed, if known, of the
animal, along with a statement of the date, time and place the animal was taken
up, which notice shall be posted at the place of impoundment.
      (3)   The certificate of the person impounding the animal that the person
has given notice as in this section provided stating the manner and time of the
giving thereof shall be sufficient and adequate proof that a notice was given
as required.
   (B)   In case the owner of any impounded animal desires to make redemption
thereof, he or she may do so on the following conditions:
      (1)   If the animal is a dog 4 months or more of age, the owner shall
present proof that the dog is currently registered with the county;
      (2)   The owner shall pay the pound for the board of the animal for the
period it was impounded; and
      (3)   The owner shall pay the penalties for violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Animals not redeemed from impoundment as provided herein after 7 days
shall be humanely destroyed or shall otherwise be disposed of in the manner as
may be from time to time authorized by state statute.
(1992 Code, § 91.30)
§ 91.31 RABIES CONTROL; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The owner of any dog or other animal which exhibits clinical signs of
rabies or which has bitten a person, whether or not the dog or other animal has
been inoculated against rabies, shall immediately notify the Police Department,
and shall promptly confine the dog or other animal, or have it confined, under
suitable observation. The Police Department shall immediately notify the
appropriate county and state authorities and shall assist the authorities as
appropriate. Any dog or other animal in direct contact with the dog or other
animal, whether or not the exposed dog or other animal has been inoculated
against rabies, shall also be confined.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person
has been bitten by a dog or other animal to refuse to notify the Police
Department promptly. It shall be unlawful for the owner of the dog or other
animal to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any dog or other
animal known to have bitten a person, until it is released by the county
authorities.
(1992 Code, § 91.31)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.32 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be lawful for city police officers or their designees to kill any
vicious animals at large found within the limits of the city, which cannot
safely be taken up and impounded or which are killed while being taken up.
(1992 Code, § 91.32)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION; EXPLOSIVES
Section
General Provisions Burning
   
92.01   City exemption
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Prohibitions
   
92.04   Prohibition of landscape waste burning
   
92.05   Penalty for violation
   
92.06   Obstruction of fire hydrants
Fire Prevention Code
   
92.15   Adoption by reference
Explosives; Flammable Liquids
   
92.25   Definitions
   
92.26   Storage of explosives prohibited
   
92.27   Storage of flammable liquids; tanks and receptacles; location
Fireworks
   
92.35   Sale or possession of fireworks
Administration and Enforcement
   
92.45   Officers of the Fire Department to enforce provisions
   
92.46   Order to correct fire hazard; compliance required
   
92.47   Inspections; right of entry
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 CITY EXEMPTION.
   The City of Villa Grove and their employees while performing city activities
shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-MC01, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Where used in this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set out in this section:
   BONFIRE. An unenclosed celebratory or food preparation fire, on private
property only, which contains no garbage or items which would violate Federal
and State EPA regulations, and is substantially a wood product fire used to
prepare for food preparation or as part of a celebration.
   GARBAGE. Waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food or food products.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Any solid waste (except garbage but including sanitary
waste in septic tanks) derived from households (including single and multiple
residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, camp grounds, picnic areas and day-
use recreation areas).
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. All accumulation of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE. Commercial waste, industrial, lunchroom or office waste and
construction or demolition debris.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, state agency or any other legal entity or their
legal representative, agent, or assigns.
(Ord. 2018-MC01, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall cause or allow the open burning of garbage, household waste
or municipal waste within the city, pursuant to Illinois EPA Regulations. No
person shall cause or allow the open burning of landscape waste within the city
except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 2018-MC01, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.04 PROHIBITION OF LANDSCAPE WASTE BURNING.
   The burning of landscape waste is prohibited within the City of Villa Grove
or any territories under its authority pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2018-MC01, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.05 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who violates §§
92.02 though
92.04 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$750 for each and every offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition
to such fine, all court costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
city in prosecuting the case shall be recoverable from anyone convicted of a
violation of this ordinance, in addition to such fine and additional costs as
stated above, any person who violates any of the provisions of this subdivision
resulting in the need for emergency services to extinguish the fire or
otherwise respond to the violation shall be responsible for the cost of such
services.
   (B)   The foregoing portions of this subchapter shall not apply to wood,
charcoal, gas operated grills and small wood bonfires.
(Ord. 2018-MC01, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.06 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person shall, in any manner, obstruct the use of any fire hydrant, or
have or place any material in front thereof, or within 5 feet from either side
thereof. No person shall, without lawful authority, take water from any public
fireplug or hydrant or remove the cover therefrom.
(1992 Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 92.15 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   As a guide to giving orders or suggestions for correction of hazardous fire
conditions, either as to buildings or materials therein, or the business
operated therein, the Fire Chief is hereby authorized to use the “Fire
Prevention Code,” as required by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and
the rules and regulations as therein set forth except the portions as are
deleted, modified, or amended by the provisions of this chapter, which shall be
adopted by reference as if set out at length herein.
(1992 Code, § 92.15)
EXPLOSIVES; FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
§ 92.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXPLOSIVE. Gunpowder, black powder, nitroglycerine, TNT, dynamite, and
similar materials except for ammunition and very small amounts used only for
medicinal purposes.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Coal oil, benzine, turpentine, gasoline, propane,
petroleum or any products thereof in liquid form.
(1992 Code, § 92.25)
§ 92.26 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to store any explosives within the city.
(1992 Code, § 92.26)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.27 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS; TANKS AND RECEPTACLES; LOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to store any flammable liquids in any other
but leakproof metallic tanks or receptacles. Provided, that receptacles and
tanks of other materials may be used if the material used is leakproof and
absorption-proof. Tanks containing more than 15 gallons of the liquids must be
equipped with adequate escape valves.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to store flammable liquids in greater
quantities than 50 gallons in any but an underground tank, unless the tank is
in a separate fireproof building used only for the storage of the liquids.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to store any flammable liquids in a greater
quantity than 10 gallons in any building, except in an underground tank or as
mentioned in division (A)(2) above.
      (4)   The foregoing provisions of this division shall not be applicable
to the city and its use of its above-ground storage tanks.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to keep, store or sell any crude petroleum,
gasoline, kerosene or other flammable liquids upon any property within the city
which has heretofore or hereafter been zoned for residential purposes.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to store any greater quantity than 15 gallons
of any flammable liquid within 200 feet of any building used exclusively for
school or church purposes or within 100 feet of any theatre.
(1992 Code, § 92.27) (Am. Ord. 112398B, passed 11-23-1998)
Penalty, see § 10.99
FIREWORKS
§ 92.35 SALE OR POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use or possess fireworks within
the city, unless duly authorized for public display by the laws and statutes of
the state.
(1992 Code, § 92.35)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.45 OFFICERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.
   It shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire Department to see that the
provisions of this chapter are enforced and to arrest on view any person who
shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey any officer in the discharge of his or
her duty, and to that end all officers are hereby vested with the usual power
and authority of police officers.
(1992 Code, § 92.45)
§ 92.46 ORDER TO CORRECT FIRE HAZARD; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any officer of the Fire Department shall find any fire,
building or premises in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or shall
find in any building or upon any premises or any other place combustible or
explosive matter, or dangerous accumulation of rubbish, or unnecessary
accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any other highly inflammable
materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the
Fire Department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire, he or she shall order
the same to be removed or remedied.
      (2)   The service of any order shall be made upon the occupant of the
premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to the
occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person
in charge of the premises by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on
the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
an order upon the owner of premises, the order may be served either by
delivering to and leaving with the person a true copy of the order, or, if the
owner is absent from the jurisdiction of officer making the order by mailing
the copy to the owner’s last known post office address.
   (B)   The order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of
the premises or buildings, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the Mayor. Upon
the appeal, the Mayor shall within 10 days review the order and file his or her
decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain
in full force and be obeyed by the owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant
failing to comply with the order within 10 days after the appeal shall have
been determined, or if no appeal is taken, then within 10 days after the
service of the order, shall be in violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 92.46)
§ 92.47 INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her designated representative may enter and
inspect any premises or materials therein, for the purpose of eliminating
conditions that might present fire hazards, when the Fire Chief:
      (1)   Has the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises; or
      (2)   Has reasonable cause to believe that the premises present a fire
hazard and has obtained a search warrant identifying the premises to be entered
and the purpose of the inspection.
   (B)   Upon finding any hazardous or dangerous condition, it shall be the
duty of the Fire Chief to issue an order as provided in §
92.46(A) above.
(1992 Code, § 92.47)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
93.01   Sale of unwholesome food
   
93.02   Spitting upon sidewalk, stairway, floors, walls and the like, of public
buildings
   
93.03   Emission of dense smoke prohibited
   
93.04   Dangerous appliances; keeping in accessible outdoor location prohibited
   
93.05   Obstruction or pollution of watercourses
   
93.06   Stagnant pools of water
§ 93.01 SALE OF UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   It shall be unlawful to knowingly sell, expose or offer for sale any flesh
of any sick or diseased animal, poultry or fish, or the flesh of any diseased
fowl to be used or eaten for food, or articles of food whatsoever for any form
or nature of human consumption or any adulterated, deleterious milk drink or
liquors or other beverages.
(1992 Code, § 93.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.02 SPITTING UPON SIDEWALK, STAIR- WAY, FLOORS, WALLS AND THE LIKE, OF
PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   No person shall spit or expectorate upon any public sidewalk, public
doorstep, public stairway, public elevator or upon the floor or walls of any
public building.
(1992 Code, § 93.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03 EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any
fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency.
(1992 Code, § 93.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.04 DANGEROUS APPLIANCES; KEEPING IN ACCESSIBLE OUTDOOR LOCATION
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or permit to be kept in any accessible outdoor
location any refrigerator, ice box, freezer, washing machine or other similar
appliance that may cause bodily harm to any child or other person who may gain
access to the appliance.
(1992 Code, § 93.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.05 OBSTRUCTION OR POLLUTION OF WATERCOURSES.
   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to
obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply.
(1992 Code, § 93.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.06 STAGNANT POOLS OF WATER.
   Any stagnant pool of water is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any nuisance to remain
or exist on any property under his or her or its control.
(1992 Code, § 93.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES; PLANTS AND WEEDS
Section
Nuisance Abatement
   
94.01   Certain acts, conduct and conditions declared nuisance
   
94.02   Nonsummary abatement procedure; notice
   
94.03   Summary abatement procedure
Plants and Weeds
   
94.15   Definition
   
94.16   Planting trees and shrubs on city property; permission required
   
94.17   Cutting, injuring or altering trees located on city property;
permission required
   
94.18   Weeds; declaration of nuisance
   
94.19   Growth of weeds, grass or plants restricted; exceptions
   
94.20   Weeds or plants in violation of provisions; removal notice; failing to
comply; costs; lien against property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
§ 94.01 CERTAIN ACTS, CONDUCT AND CONDITIONS DECLARED NUISANCE.
   The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined
to be nuisances, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any
individual, firm, association or corporation within the territorial limits of
the city, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited.
   (A)   Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of
the state, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the ordinances of the
city. In addition, the officials of the municipality shall be authorized to
abate any nuisance which while not specifically defined within this subchapter
shall constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use by a person
of property real or personal or from his or her own improper, indecent or
unlawful personal conduct which works an obstruction or injury to a right of
another, or of the public, and produces the material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort or hurt that the law will presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances
may be abated which are public or which are both public and private in nature.
   (B)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under
his or her ownership or control to the prejudice of others.
   (C)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public highway.
   (D)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond or lake to the injury or prejudice of others.
   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places.
   (F)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or of the public.
   (G)   (1)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the same
on, or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors, utility
poles, or on hydrants, other public or private property, or on rocks or other
natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or
other public place, without permission of the proper authorities.
      (2)   To fail to remove notices referred to in division (G)(1) above
within 24 hours after the end of advertised period of sale, event or election.
   (H)   To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or
lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is about to
buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when
the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s attempt to sell,
buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to a person’s sale,
purchase or lease of a residence or other real property.
   (I)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public property
or right-of-way, highway, park, street or parkway, anywhere in the city, any
trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof,
or miscellaneous waste.
   (J)   To store, keep or maintain outside of a closed building any junk,
parts, machinery or equipment not in an operable condition, or motor vehicle
not in an operable condition, where the inoperable motor vehicle is an actual
danger or detriment to life, safety, health or peaceful enjoyment of the
property of surrounding land owners. However, this provision shall not apply to
a properly licensed junkyard or other permitted outdoor storage use which is in
full compliance with all of the ordinances of the city governing the same.
   (K)   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human habitation,
or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of lack of
repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the existence
of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause sickness among
persons residing in the premises or residing in proximity thereof.
   (L)   To store or place any materials in a manner which may harbor rats.
   (M) To produce or permit to be produced, whether on public or private
property, any offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any
person residing in the vicinity.
   (N)   To permit or maintain an unsightly yard or premises where there is an
accumulation or deposit of any vehicle, equipment, junk, wrecked or disabled
automobile, trucks, material of any nature, waste or earth.
(1992 Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 101182C, passed 10-11-1982; Am. Ord. 080888A, passed
8-18-1988; Am. Ord. 101088A, passed 10-10-1988)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.02 NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE; NOTICE.
   (A)   Except where otherwise provided by the ordinances of the city, any
officer of the city possessing police powers may serve or cause to be served a
notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any lot, building or premises or item of personalty in or
upon which any nuisance, requiring them, or either or both of them, to abate
the same within a specified reasonable time, in the manner as the notice shall
direct.
   (B)   If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance
within the specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to
abate the nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without
limiting the generality thereof, the following:
      (1)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by §
94.99 by instituting an ordinance enforcement action;
      (2)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of
a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 101182C, passed 10-11-1982)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 SUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the city possessing police powers,
the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent threat of
serious injury to persons or serious damage to personal or real property, or if
the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only minor damage to the
items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the continuation of the
nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or property or a
substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of life normally present in
the community, the officer shall proceed to abate the nuisance; provided,
further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession,
charge or control of the real or personal property which has become a nuisance
is unknown or cannot readily be found, the municipal officer with police power
may proceed to abate the nuisance without notice. Where the abatement of the
nuisance requires continuing acts by the Corporate Authorities beyond the
initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatement, it
shall seek abatement of the nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial
process as soon as reasonably possible.
(1992 Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 101182C, passed 10-11-1982)
Penalty, see § 94.99
PLANTS AND WEEDS
§ 94.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOULEVARD. That territory between the pavement or traveled portion of a
street and the property line between the street right-of-way and the adjacent
property.
(1992 Code, § 94.15)
§ 94.16 PLANTING TREES AND SHRUBS ON CITY PROPERTY; PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any trees or shrubs on any street, boulevard,
alley, park or other city property without permission from the corporate
authorities. Any and all permitted planting shall conform to the visibility
requirements of §
96.21(B).
(1992 Code, § 94.16)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.17 CUTTING, INJURING OR ALTERING TREES LOCATED ON CITY PROPERTY;
PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to cut, break, injure, alter, or move any tree located
on any street, boulevard, alley, park, or other city property without
permission from the Chairperson of the Public Works Committee or his or her
representative. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following
types of work performed on trees located on a boulevard:
   (A)   Pruning branches with a diameter of less than one-inch; or
   (B)   Removal of trees or branches felled by storms or high winds and
presenting an immediate danger or an obstacle to travel.
(1992 Code, § 94.17)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.18 WEEDS; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, or other
obnoxious weeds found growing in or upon any lot or tract of land in the city
are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any
weeds to grow or remain in any place.
(1992 Code, § 94.18)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.19 GROWTH OF WEEDS, GRASS OR PLANTS RESTRICTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding 8 inches anywhere in the city; any plants or weeds exceeding the
height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for a
property owner to permit any weeds, grass, or plants on the boulevard adjacent
to his or her property to grow in violation of this section.
(1992 Code, § 94.19)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.20 WEEDS OR PLANTS IN VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS; REMOVAL NOTICE; FAILING TO
COMPLY; COSTS; LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to serve or cause to be
served a notice in writing upon the owner and occupant, if the premises are not
owner occupies, of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow
in violation of the provisions of this subchapter, and to demand the abatement
of the nuisance within 10 days.
   (B)   If the person(s) or entity(ies) shall fail to comply with the notice,
the Police Department may cause the offending weeds, grass or plants to be cut,
and removed if necessary, and the expense thereof shall be repaid to the city
by the owner, person or entity in control of the premises. The City Clerk or
his or her designee shall furnish a bill therefor to the owner and occupant who
shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs.
   (C)   All charges for the cutting shall be a lien upon the premises and
whenever a bill for the cutting remains unpaid for 30 days after same has been
rendered by the city, the City Clerk may file and enforce by foreclosure or
otherwise a lien claim as provided by law. If and to the extent allowed by
state statute, the lien shall include the city’s reasonable cost of cutting and
removal, lien preparation and filing and reasonable attorney fees.
   (D)   If the charges remain unpaid for 30 days after the billing therefor,
the city may, in lieu of foreclosing its lien, file an appropriate action in a
court of competent jurisdiction for its expenses, as set forth in division (C)
of this section, and/or the city may prosecute the owner and/or the occupant
for violating this subchapter for fine(s) as provided in §
94.99. An action to recover the city expenses and/or to enforce the city’s lien
may be joined with an action prosecuting violations of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 94.20) (Am. Ord. 072400C, passed 7-24-2000)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provisions
of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750. Each day that a
violation is allowed to continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Any individual, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§
94.01 through
94.03 shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $750. Each day that a
violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, § 94.99) (Ord. 101182C, passed 10-11-1982; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed
8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
95.01   Park hours
   
95.02   Parks to be kept clean
   
95.03   Picnic areas; restrictions
   
95.04   Group activity; permit required
   
95.05   Interference with others prohibited
   
95.06   Driving in parks restricted
   
95.07   Animals to be properly leashed
   
95.08   Additional activities prohibited
   
95.09   Use of hand driven and motor driven boats and floating devices on the
reservoir
Cross reference:
   For provisions concerning the Park and Recreation Department, see §§
32.25 through
32.28
§ 95.01 PARK HOURS.
   Except when sanctioned activities are in progress, all municipal parks shall
be closed to the general public at sunset until sunrise.
(1992 Code, § 95.01) (Am. Ord. 7979, passed 7-9-1979; Am. Ord. 2006-MC09,
passed 9-11-2006)
§ 95.02 PARKS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   It shall be unlawful to bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or
refuse or other trash. No refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles
are not so provided, all the rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere. Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds
shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when the fires are permitted,
and leave the premises in good order, and the facilities in a neat and sanitary
condition.
(1992 Code, § 95.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 PICNIC AREAS; RESTRICTIONS.
   No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those
designated for that purpose. No person in a park shall use any portion of the
picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose
of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use
the area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(1992 Code, § 95.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.04 GROUP ACTIVITY; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use park
facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or
entertainment performances, a representative of the group, association or
organization shall first obtain a permit from the Chairperson of the Park,
Recreation and Band Committee. The Chairperson or his or her representative
shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association, or
organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by the
individual members of the public.
(1992 Code, § 95.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 INTERFERENCE WITH OTHERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to prevent any person from using any park, or any of
its facilities, or interfere with the use in compliance with this chapter and
the rules applicable to the use.
(1992 Code, § 95.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 DRIVING IN PARKS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a
street, driveway or parking lot in any park or to park or leave any vehicle in
any place other than one established for public parking.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle on the circular road in
Henson Park except in a counter- clockwise direction only.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle in Henson Park in excess of
10 miles per hour.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to drive, operate or park any motorcycle,
snowmobile or other motor driven vehicle of any kind except on a street,
driveway or parking lot in any city park or to park or leave any vehicle in any
place in the parks except in places established for public parking.
(1992 Code, § 95.06) (Am. Ord. 112591-1, passed 11-25-1991)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.07 ANIMALS TO BE PROPERLY LEASHED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to be present in any
park located in the city or upon any city owned property, unless the animal is
properly leashed and within the control of the person.
(1992 Code, § 95.07) (Am. Ord. 011083, passed 1-10-1983)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.08 ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, boat or possess liquor or
fireworks in any park located in the city, or on any other property owned by
the city, except in those places designated for that purpose by the city.
(1992 Code, § 95.08) (Am. Ord. 011083, passed 1-10-1983)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.09 USE OF HAND DRIVEN AND MOTOR DRIVEN BOATS AND FLOATING DEVICES ON THE
RESERVOIR.
   (A)   No boats or other floating devices carrying or capable of carrying 1
or more persons may be operated on the reservoir, except as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Row boats with current state licenses may be operated on said
reservoir, provided such boat has all equipment required by state statute and
is operated in accordance with applicable state statutes.
   (C)   No motorized boats shall be operated on said reservoir except boats
using only electric trolling motors, provided said boats are duly licensed and
operated in accordance with applicable state law.
   (D)   No other boat raft, paddleboat, inflatable or non-inflatable floating
device shall be occupied by persons while such device is on the reservoir water
surface.
   (E)   Any boat operated on said reservoir must be equipped with an adequate
life jacket for every person on such boat and said life jackets must be worn at
all times by all persons on a boat on the city reservoir.
   (F)   No persons under the age of 16 years may occupy an authorized boat on
the city reservoir, unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (G)   Boats authorized by this section may only be operated on the city
reservoir from the hours of sunrise to sunset.
   (H)   All boats authorized by this section must be equipped and operated in
compliance with all applicable state statutes and regulations.
   (I)   This section shall not apply to emergency or rescue boats or
floatation devices being used for such purposes.
(Ord. 2006-MC10, passed 12-11-2006)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Deposit of materials likely to injure persons, animals or vehicles
prohibited; removal
   
96.02   Moving stakes, posts or stones placed to designate boundaries
prohibited; reporting to Building Official
Obstructions of Streets and Sidewalks
   
96.15   Obstruction on streets and sidewalks
   
96.16   Trains blocking streets and sidewalks
   
96.17   Obstruction of gutters or sewers
   
96.18   Maintenance of alleys and gutters
   
96.19   Blockage of streets and sidewalks for construction purposes; permit
required
   
96.20   Cellar doors, wells, ditches and the like; prohibited to leave open
   
96.21   Visibility at corners
Excavations
   
96.30   Permit required
   
96.31   Application for permit
   
96.32   Issuance of permit
   
96.33   Bond required
   
96.34   Compliance with other provisions
   
96.35   Barricades required; disturbing barricades
   
96.36   Streets to be put in good condition upon repair
   
96.37   Inspection of excavations and tunnels
Sidewalk Construction
   
96.50   Permit required
   
96.51   Compliance with other provisions
   
96.52   Specifications of sidewalks
   
96.53   Sidewalks to be kept in good repair
   
96.54   Safety precautions; barricades and lights
   
96.55   Defects in sidewalks to be reported
   
96.56   Work to be done by city
   
96.57   Painting signs or advertisements on sidewalks
   
96.58   Supervision of sidewalk construction
Driveway Construction
   
96.70   Permit required
   
96.71   Application for permit
   
96.72   Issuance of permit
   
96.73   Compliance with other provisions
   
96.74   Construction requirements
   
96.75   Cross-drainage required when crossing drainageway and the like
   
96.76   Maintenance of driveways which cross sidewalks
Moving Buildings
   
96.85   Permit required
   
96.86   Application for permit
   
96.87   Issuance of permit
   
96.88   Compliance with other provisions
   
96.89   Records to be kept
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS LIKELY TO INJURE PERSONS, ANIMALS OR VEHICLES
PROHIBITED; REMOVAL.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle upon the street.
   (B)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same
or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from the
vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 96.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions on littering, see §§
50.40 and
50.41
§ 96.02 MOVING STAKES, POSTS OR STONES PLACED TO DESIGNATE BOUNDARIES
PROHIBITED; REPORTING TO BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to change or remove any stake, post or stone
placed or set to designate the corner or line of any lot or tract of land,
street, alley or sidewalk, or to show the grade of any street, alley or
sidewalk.
   (B)   Any person who shall change or remove the stakes, posts, or stones,
whether intentionally, willfully, negligently or accidentally, shall
immediately report same to the Building Official.
(1992 Code, § 96.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 96.15 OBSTRUCTION ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed any obstruction on any
street, alley or sidewalk except as provided by §
96.19(A) below.
(1992 Code, § 96.15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.16 TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a railroad corporation to permit any train,
railroad car or engine to obstruct public travel at a railroad-highway grade
crossing within the city, for a period in excess of 10 minutes, except where
the train, railroad car or engine cannot be moved by reason of circumstances
over which the railroad corporation has no control.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any railroad employee to willfully or
intentionally permit any trail, railroad car or engine to obstruct public
travel at a railroad-highway grade crossing within the city, for a period in
excess of 10 minutes, except where the train, railroad car or engine cannot be
moved by reason of circumstances over which the railroad employee has no
control. However, no employee acting under the rules or orders of the railroad
corporation or its supervisory personnel may be prosecuted for the violations.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of any
violation of divisions (A) or (B) shall be fined not less than $50 and no more
than $750 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each incident when a train violates either division.
(1992 Code, § 96.16) (Am. Ord. 052901A, passed 5-29-2001)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.17 OBSTRUCTION OF GUTTERS OR SEWERS.
   It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit in any gutter or sewer any
ashes, dirt, chips, trash or anything that might prevent water from flowing
freely along or in the gutter, sewer or margin of any street or sidewalk, or
that might prevent the ready flow or free drainage of any water from the center
toward the margin thereof, or the drainage of any lot.
(1992 Code, § 96.17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.18 MAINTENANCE OF ALLEYS AND GUTTERS.
   It shall be the duty of every person owning any lot or parcel of land
adjoining any public or private alley to keep the same clean and in an
inoffensive condition, and also to keep the gutter in front of the premises
owned or occupied by him, under his or her control, free from filth or other
matter that may prevent the free flow of water therein.
(1992 Code, § 96.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.19 BLOCKAGE OF STREETS AND SIDE- WALKS FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES; PERMIT
REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person engaged in constructing or improving any building, fence,
lot, street or sidewalk may apply to the City Clerk for a permit to deposit
material upon a contiguous street, alley, or sidewalk. The permit shall be
applied for and issued in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code. The permit shall state during what time period
blockage of the street, alley or sidewalk shall be permitted. There shall be no
fee for the permit.
   (B)   The Clerk shall forward the application to the Director of Public
Works who shall make the inspections as may be necessary. The Director of
Public Works shall take the appropriate action, as provided in §
110.04 of this code. The Director of Public Works shall not issue a permit for
any activity that does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter. No
permit shall be valid for a period of time longer than 4 months from the date
of issuance.
   (C)   The holder of any permit as provided in division (A) above, issued by
the city, shall comply with the other provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter or
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the permit as provided by §
110.12 of this code.
   (D)   Any and all permitted blockages of a street, alley or sidewalk for
construction purposes shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The obstruction of the street, alley or sidewalk as permitted shall
not occupy more than one-half of the street, alley or sidewalk;
      (2)   The obstruction by material shall in all cases be placed or
deposited so as to create the least possible interference with vehicles and
persons lawfully passing by and using the street, alley or sidewalk;
      (3)   No material shall be placed in front of any premises other than
those being improved, or about to be improved, without the consent of the
occupant.
(1992 Code, § 96.19) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.20 CELLAR DOORS, WELLS, DITCHES AND THE LIKE; PROHIBITED TO LEAVE OPEN.
   It shall be unlawful to leave open any cellar door, vault, well, cistern,
excavation, ditch or other like hole, upon or adjoining any street or sidewalk,
without securing and protecting the same so as to prevent persons or animals
passing thereby from falling therein.
(1992 Code, § 96.20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.21 VISIBILITY AT CORNERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FENCE. A constructed barrier enclosing or bordering a field, yard,
building and the like.
      HEDGE. An ornamental hedge, line of trees, line of plants and the like.
      VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. The triangle having as vertices the following 3
points: point of intersection of the center lines of 2 intersecting streets and
the point of each street located on the center line of the street distant from
the intersection of the center lines the sum of 75 feet.
   (B)   Requirements for visibility at corners shall be as follows:
      (1)   To prevent obstruction of sight-lines, except within 5 feet of a
building and except for wire or chain-link type fences which are more than 95%
open, no fence or hedge may be taller than 3 feet measured from the crown of
the pavement within the visibility triangle.
      (2)   To prevent obstruction of sight-lines, trees within a visibility
triangle shall be trimmed so that the lower foliage line is maintained at least
6 feet above the crown of the adjoining pavement, except that trees need not be
trimmed more than of their height.
      (3)   Height limitations of this section for fences shall govern over any
screening height requirements of
Chapter 155.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Public Works Committee
may require the modification or removal of any fence, hedge, shrub, tree or
other similar item of landscape upon a finding that the object constitutes an
eminent danger to the health or safety of the public. In reaching their
decision, the Committee shall consider traffic visibility, traffic density,
street widths and alternate ways of alleviating the danger.
(1992 Code, § 96.20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 96.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel under or
to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place without first
having obtained a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the
provisions of this subchapter or in violation of or variance from the terms of
any permit.
(1992 Code, § 96.30)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.31 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Applications for the permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof,
the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual
excavating work and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or for
which the work is being done. There shall be no fee for the permit.
(1992 Code, § 96.31)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.32 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The City Clerk shall forward the application to the Director of Public Works
who shall inspect the application and the proposed location. The Director of
Public Works shall take the appropriate action as provided in §
110.04 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 96.32) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.33 BOND REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed
with the City Clerk the bond as the Director of Public Works may specify, with
good and sufficient surety thereon, in a form satisfactory to and to be
specified by the Director of Public Works, conditioned to indemnify the city
for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of
the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any the tunnel or
excavation.
(1992 Code, § 96.33) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.34 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The holder of any excavation permit issued by the city shall comply with the
other provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter or of
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the permit as provided by §
110.12 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 96.34)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.35 BARRICADES REQUIRED; DISTURBING BARRICADES.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a
street, sidewalk or other public place or making an excavation in the place
shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person by reason of
the work and shall have the barricades lighted at night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or
light lawfully erected to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1992 Code, § 96.35)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.36 STREETS TO BE PUT IN GOOD CONDITION UPON REPAIR.
   Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or under
any public street, alley or other public place shall restore the surface to its
original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be properly
tamped down and any bracing in the tunnel or excavation shall be left in the
ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant, in compliance with the
ordinances of the city and under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works.
(1992 Code, § 96.36) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.37 INSPECTION OF EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELS.
   The Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to
be inspected all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public
street, alley or other public place to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this subchapter. Notice shall be given to him at least 10 hours before the
work or refilling of any tunnel or excavation commences.
(1992 Code, § 96.36) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 96.50 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay the pavement for any public
sidewalk within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for the permits shall be made in writing to the City Clerk in
accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code. The Clerk shall forward the application to the
Director of Public Works or the City Building Inspector who is hereby
authorized to issue a permit in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and
Chapter 110.
(1992 Code, § 96.50) (Am. Ord. 090902B, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.51 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The holder of any sidewalk construction permit issued by the city shall
comply with the other provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter or of
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the permit as provided by §
110.12.
(1992 Code, § 96.51)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.52 SPECIFICATIONS OF SIDEWALKS.
   All sidewalks shall be of concrete, 4 feet in width and 4 inches in
thickness. All sidewalks shall be 6 inches in thickness and reinforced with
steel rods where they may cross a driveway or alley. The specifications shall
be incorporated in the permit and it shall be unlawful to deviate in any
material way from the specifications.
(1992 Code, § 96.52)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.53 SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR.
   All public sidewalks in the city shall be kept in good repair. Repairs shall
be made by order of the City Council and shall be supervised by the Director of
Public Works or the City Building Inspector.
(1992 Code, § 96.53) (Am. Ord. 090902B, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.54 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   All repair or construction work on any sidewalk shall be protected by
barricades and lights as provided in §
96.35(A) herein.
(1992 Code, § 96.54)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.55 DEFECTS IN SIDEWALKS TO BE REPORTED.
   It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee to report to the
Director of Public Works or City Building Inspector every defect observed in
any pavement of any sidewalk; and it shall be the duty of the Director of
Public Works or Building Inspector to either repair the same promptly, or to
report it to the City Council, after first properly barricading the same so as
to avoid injury to any person or property.
(1992 Code, § 96.55) (Am. Ord. 090902B, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
§ 96.56 WORK TO BE DONE BY CITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter relating to the construction of sidewalks
shall not apply to sidewalks which are laid by the city, unless the provisions
of this subchapter are specifically made applicable.
(1992 Code, § 96.56)
§ 96.57 PAINTING SIGNS OR ADVERTISEENTS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint any sign or advertisement upon
any sidewalk or pavement within the corporate limits.
(1992 Code, § 96.57)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.58 SUPERVISION OF SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   All sidewalks in the city shall be under the supervision of the Director of
Public Works or City Building Inspector. That official shall have general
supervision of all work done on the places, shall superintend the cleaning, and
shall see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating thereto.
(1992 Code, § 96.58) (Am. Ord. 090902B, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
§ 96.70 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut any curbing for the purpose of
any driveway entry or to construct or reconstruct any driveway between the
property line and the pavement or traveled way of a street or alley under the
jurisdiction of the city without having first obtained a permit to do so as
provided in this subchapter or without complying with the provisions of this
subchapter or in violation of or in variance from the terms of any permit.
(1992 Code, § 96.70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.71 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring to cut any curbing or to construct any driveway as
referred to in §
96.70 above shall apply for a driveway permit to the City Clerk in accordance
with
Chapter 110 of this code. The application shall state the place where the curb
is to be cut, the manner in which the driveway is to be constructed, together
with a plan thereof. There shall be no fee for a driveway permit.
(1992 Code, § 96.71)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.72 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The City Clerk shall forward the application to the Director of Public Works
or City Building Inspector who shall inspect the plans and proposed locations.
The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall take the appropriate
action as provided in §
110.04 of this code. The Director of Public Works or Building Inspector shall
not issue a permit for any proposed driveway that does not comply with the
provisions of this subchapter. No driveway permit shall be valid for a period
of time longer than 6 months from the date of issuance.
(1992 Code, § 96.72) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.73 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The holder of any driveway permit issued by the city shall comply with the
other provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter or of
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the permit as provided by §
110.12.
(1992 Code, § 96.73)
§ 96.74 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any and all driveways constructed within the city shall comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   It shall be of material approved by the Director of Public Works or
City Building Inspector.
   (B)   Special care shall be taken to effect a neat, perfect and durable
junction with the original curbing and to prevent injury to the gutter.
   (C)   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step,
sharp depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as
nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk.
   (D)   Construction of a driveway shall comply with the ordinances as apply
to excavations, blockage of streets and sidewalks, and other construction
requirements.
(1992 Code, § 96.74) (Am. Ord. 090902B, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-MC13,
passed 10-24-2005)
§ 96.75 CROSS-DRAINAGE REQUIRED WHEN CROSSING DRAINAGEWAY AND THE LIKE.
   Whenever a proposed driveway will cross a drainageway, watercourse, or other
surface drain, cross-drainage shall be provided. The cross-drainage shall be as
specified by the Director of Public Works. The specification shall be written
on the permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 96.75) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 96.76 MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAYS WHICH CROSS SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a driveway to keep the same
in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstructions and
openings.
(1992 Code, § 96.76)
Penalty, see § 10.99
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 96.85 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to proceed with the
moving of any building, or of any structural part thereof along any street,
alley or public way of the city until a permit shall first have been obtained.
(1992 Code, § 96.85)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.86 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a permit for moving a
building as required by §
96.85 above shall apply for the permit to the City Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code. The application shall describe with reasonable
certainty the old location, the location to which it is proposed to remove any
building, and the route along which the building is to be moved. The
application shall likewise be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $500 payable
to the city, conditioned upon the payment of all damages to property or persons
which may be occasioned by moving. The fee for the permit shall be as provided
in §
150.17 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 96.86)
§ 96.87 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.  
   The City Clerk shall forward the application to the Building Official who
shall make the inspections as are necessary. The Building Official shall take
the appropriate action as provided by §
110.04 of this code. If a permit shall be issued and the operation authorized
by the permit shall not be commenced within 30 days after the date thereof, the
permit shall thereafter be null and void and no operation shall be had
thereunder, and the moving authorized therein shall not be commenced and
performed until a new permit shall be obtained and the fee paid as hereinbefore
provided.
(1992 Code, § 96.87)
§ 96.88 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The holder of any permit to move a building issued by the city shall comply
with the other provisions of
Chapter 110 of this Code as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with
the provisions of this subchapter or of
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the permit as provided by §
110.12.
(1992 Code, § 96.88)
§ 96.89 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to keep among the records of
his or her office a record showing, in numerical order, the permits issued by
him, the name of the applicant therefor, the names of the sureties upon his or
her bond, the location and general nature of the moving authorized by the
permit and the date thereof.
(1992 Code, § 96.89)
CHAPTER 97: TREES AND PLANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Title
   
97.02   Definitions
City Tree Board
   
97.15   Creation and establishment of City Tree Board and a City Forester
   
97.16   Term of office
   
97.17   Compensation
   
97.18   Duties and responsibilities
   
97.19   Review by City Council
Regulations
   
97.30   Operation
   
97.31   Tree species to be planted
   
97.32   Spacing
   
97.33   Distance from curbs and sidewalks
   
97.34   Distance from street corners and fire hydrants
   
97.35   Utilities
   
97.36   Public tree care
   
97.37   Tree topping
   
97.38   Pruning to corner clearance
   
97.39   Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property
   
97.40   Removal of stumps
   
97.41   Interference with City Tree Board
   
97.42   Arborists license and bond
 
   
97.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Tree Ordinance of
Villa Grove, Illinois.”
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearing indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land
laying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within the city limits of the city.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
CITY TREE BOARD
§ 97.15 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD AND A CITY FORESTER.
   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the city which
shall consist of 5 members composed of residents of this area who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. There is also
hereby created and established a City Forester for the city.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.16 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of the 5 persons appointed to the Board by the Mayor shall be 1
year. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
The term of the Forester shall also be 1 year.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.17 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Board and the City Forester shall serve without monetary
compensation, either from the city or other private interest groups or
residents.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.18 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Forester, with the assistance of the
Board, to study, investigate, counsel, and develop a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, and shrubs in the defined streets and parks
and public areas. This plan shall be enforced by the Forester and will be
presented annually to the City Council. Upon their acceptance and approval, it
shall constitute the official City Tree Policy of the city. The Board and
Forester, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate and
make reports and recommendations upon any special matter or question falling
within its scope.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.19 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions
of the Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Board to
the Council, who may hear the matter and take final action.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
REGULATIONS
§ 97.30 OPERATION.
   The Board shall choose its own officers and keep minutes of all its meetings
and other proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transactions of business. The Board shall makes its own rules and regulations
within established ordinances and policies of the city.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.31 TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The Board develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting
along streets in 3 size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet),
medium (20 to 40 feet), and large (over 40 feet). Lists of trees most suitable
for planting will also be created by the Board.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.32 SPACING.
   The spacing of trees will be in accordance with the tree species size
classes listed in the aforementioned section and may be planted no closer than
the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50
feet. Any exceptions for special plantings and landscaping must have specific
approval by the Board.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.33 DISTANCE FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs, curb lines, and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the size classes listed in §
97.31 and may be planted no closer than the following: small trees, 2 feet;
medium trees, 3 feet; and large trees, 4 feet.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.34 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curb or curb line. No
street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.35 UTILITIES.
   No street tree other than those species listed as small trees may be planted
under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.36 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and
plants located within the lines of all streets, avenues, drives, lanes, alleys,
or public grounds as necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public grounds. The City Tree Board may
remove or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition, or which by reason its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected
with any disease, fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit
the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the
selection and location of the tree is in accordance with §§
97.31 through
97.35.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.37 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or firm to top any
street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger that 3 inches in diameter
within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
cause disfigurement. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the
Board.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.38 PRUNING TO CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street right-of-way within the city
shall prune the branches so that they will not severely obstruct the light from
any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection so that there
shall be a clear space of 13 feet above the street surface or 8 feet above the
sidewalk surface. The owner shall remove and dispose of all dead, diseased, or
dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic
control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. Tree limbs that grow
near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of the
conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable
franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the
utility company and the Board prior to any trimming by the company.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.39 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property with the city limits when the trees constitute a
hazard to life or property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The Board or Forester shall
notify the owners of the trees in writing. Removal shall be done by the owners
at their own expense within 60 days after the date of notification. In the
event of failure to comply with the provisions by the owners, the city shall
have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of the removal as a
lien on the property with the office of the Douglas County Recorder.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.40 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
§ 97.41 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Forester or Board or any of its agents while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivation, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street,
park or private grounds trees as authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.42 ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BOND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing of street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license. The fee shall be $ 100
annually, paid in advance. No license shall be required of any public service
company, including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or city
employees doing the work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.
Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of
possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for
bodily damage and $1,000,000 for property damage, indemnifying the city or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as herein
described.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction or
a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each separate
offense. If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the
injury, mutilation, or death of a tree or shrub or other plant located on
municipal-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of the
plant shall also be assessed to the person.
(Ord. 102494D, passed 10-24-1994)
CHAPTER 98: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
98.01   Declaration of policy
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its Constitution
and other laws; and in order that the safety and general welfare, peace and
health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is hereby declared
the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the city, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons housing accommodations and/or real property because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the person
or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in the
conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Ord. 072296A, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to the sale,
exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for the loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a
home, residence or sleeping place of 1 or more human beings, or any real estate
so used, designed or intended for the use.
   OWNER. Any person or persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or owns
any beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable
title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate
cooperative which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 072296A, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 98.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the city to do the
following:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental or lease of the real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability;
      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with the owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability;
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(Ord. 072296A, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750,
unless Illinois State law permits a higher penalty to be imposed for such
violation, in which event the fine should not be more than $1,500.
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (C)   This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city
to specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 072296A, passed 7-22-1996; Am. Ord. 2009-MC04, passed 3-9-2009)
CHAPTER 99: SMOKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Smoking in public places, places of employment, and government vehicles
prohibited
   
99.03   Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays
   
99.04   Smoking prohibited in student dormitories
   
99.05   Designation of other nonsmoking areas
   
99.06   Exemptions
   
99.07   Enforcement
   
99.08   Injunctions
   
99.09   Discrimination prohibited
   
99.10   Entrances, exits, windows, and ventilation intakes
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of
its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. BAR includes,
but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult
entertainment facilities and cabarets.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Health.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity, that employs
the services of 1 or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with:
      (1)   Solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
      (2)   Solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways,
that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation,
lobbies and corridors.
   ENCLOSED or PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
   GAMING EQUIPMENT or SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
   GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaining equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during
the course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in § 70 of the
Smoke Free Illinois Act, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open,
and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break
rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home-based
business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care
or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a PLACE OF
EMPLOYMENT.
   PRIVATE CLUB.
      (1)   A not-for-profit association that:
         (a)   Has been in active and continuous existence for at least 3 years
prior to January 1, 2008, whether incorporated or not;
         (b)   Is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion
thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times;
         (c)   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain; and
         (d)   Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation.
      (2)   For purposes of this definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an organization
that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a
constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not
considered a PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   PUBLIC PLACE. That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, the city, or any
other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance, as set forth in §
99.10 of this chapter, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and
ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A
PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the private residence
is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social
service care on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is not limited to,
hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments,
elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public
conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or
partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls,
convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all
government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles
owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract, the city or city
subcontract, healthcare  facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers,
retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities,
ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas,
lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no
less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn,
lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented
to guests, but excludes private residences.
   RESTAURANT.
      (1)   An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employee; and
      (2)   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of
its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars,
cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related
smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of
any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
   STATE AGENCY. Has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of §
3 of the Illinois Purchasing Act (now repealed).
   UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Has the meaning ascribed to it in § 1 of Article
VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
§ 99.02 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND GOVERNMENT VEHICLES
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment
or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment in
the city.
   (B)   No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the
city.
   (C)   Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces in the
city unless specifically exempted by §
99.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.03 POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS.
   (A)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of
that place.
   (B)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of the area.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.04 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited
in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping
rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies and hallways, of a
building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and
operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher
education.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.05 DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public
place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking
is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee, or occupant
shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
divisions (A) and (B) of §
99.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
§ 99.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in
the following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child
care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any other home-based business
open to the public.
   (B)   Retail tobacco stores as defined in §
99.01 of this chapter in operation prior to January 1, 2008. The retail tobacco
store shall annually file with the city by January 31 an affidavit stating the
percentage of it gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived
from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes,
or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories.
Said affidavit may be a certified copy of the affidavit filed with the State of
Illinois for this purpose. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after
the effective date of this chapter may only qualify for an exemption if located
in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the
business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by 1 or more persons, all of whom are smokers and
have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is
permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home.
   (D)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other area where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25%
of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms
where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not
be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
§ 99.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department, the city public health authorities, other city
personnel designated by the city municipal authorities or such other law
enforcement agency as the city municipal authorities may designate shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter and may assess fines pursuant to law.
   (B)   Any person may register a complaint with the Police Department or the
City Hall for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
§ 99.08 INJUNCTIONS.
   The city or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may
institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
§ 99.09 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008) Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.10 ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS, AND VENTILATION INTAKES.
   Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that tobacco
smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other
means.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates §
99.02 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
   (C)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under §
99.02 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than $100
and not more than $250. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment that violates §
99.02 of this chapter shall be fined:
      (1)   Not less than $250 for the first violation;
      (2)   Not less than $750 for the second violation within 1 year after the
first violation; and
      (3)   Not less than $750 for each additional violation within 1 year
after the first violation.
(Ord. 2008-MC01, passed 1-28-2008)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
   
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
112.   AMUSEMENTS
   
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
114.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
   
115.   OUTDOOR CAFES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Persons subject to license
   
110.02   Application; content
   
110.03   Fees
   
110.04   Inspection before issuance of permit; action upon inspection
   
110.05   Forms to be provided by City Clerk; signatures required
   
110.06   License to be posted
   
110.07   Term of license; notification of expiration
   
110.08   Place where business or activity is conducted must be in conformance
to city and state regulations before issuance of permit
   
110.09   License required for every separate business
   
110.10   Nonassignability
   
110.11   Inspection of licensed business; right of entry; refusal to submit to
inspection
   
110.12   Suspension; revocation
   
110.13   Appeals
§ 110.01 PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE.
   Whenever in this code, or in any city ordinance, a license or permit is
required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation,
any person, firm, or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by
himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, he or she or it is
held forth as being engaged in the business, activity, or occupation, or if he
or she or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or if he or
she or it performs or attempts to perform any part of the business, activity,
or occupation in the city.
(1992 Code, § 110.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATION; CONTENT.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license or permit required by
this code shall make a written application therefor to the City Clerk or other
officer as designated by this code. The application shall state:
   (A)   The applicant’s name and residence;
   (B)   The purpose for which the license or permit is required;
   (C)   The location, if appropriate;
   (D)   For what length of time the license or permit is needed; and
   (E)   The additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
the city officials in the issuing of the license or permit applied for.
(1992 Code, § 110.02)
§ 110.03 FEES.
   The application for a license or permit shall be accompanied by payment of
the fee as determined by the appropriate section of this code. Where no fee is
specifically defined, there shall be no payment required.
(1992 Code, § 110.03)
§ 110.04 INSPECTION BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; ACTION UPON INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an
investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of the
permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the City Clerk, within 48 hours of the
receipt, shall refer the application to the officer authorized by this code to
issue the license or permit for the making of the investigation or inspection.
   (B)   Within 4 business days the issuing officer shall report to the
applicant the following.
      (1)   If it shall appear to the officer that the matters and
circumstances relating to an application require further information before a
proper determination can be made, the application shall be returned to the
applicant for the inclusion of the additional information as may be specified
necessary and appropriate.
      (2)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related inspection, the officer shall determine that the
matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he or she may disapprove
the application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the Clerk shall
promptly return any license or permit fee.
      (3)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related inspection, the officer shall determine that the
application is satisfactory, he or she shall approve the application.
Thereupon, the officer and the Clerk shall issue the license or permit.
(1992 Code, § 110.04)
§ 110.05 FORMS TO BE PROVIDED BY CITY CLERK; SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   Each license, permit or certificate shall be signed by the officer
authorized by this code to issue the license or permit, and countersigned and
sealed by the City Clerk, and shall be on a form supplied by the Clerk.
(1992 Code, § 110.05)
§ 110.06 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting a business or activity
licensed or permitted by this code to keep his or her license or permit posted
in a prominent place on the premises used for the business or activity at all
times.
(1992 Code, § 110.06)
§ 110.07 TERM OF LICENSE; NOTIFICATION OF EXPIRATION.
   (A)   All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the
city shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on the last day
of April of the following year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall notify all licensees of the city of the time of
expiration of the license held by the licensee (if an annual) 3 weeks prior to
the date of the expiration. However, a failure to make the notification or the
failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee from the
obligation to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a
defense in an action based upon operation without a license.
(1992 Code, § 110.07)
§ 110.08 PLACE WHERE BUSINESS OR ACTIVITY IS CONDUCTED MUST BE IN CONFORMANCE
TO CITY AND STATE REGULATIONS BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any purpose or activity if the premises and building to be
used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the city and the state.
(1992 Code, § 110.08)
§ 110.09 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE BUSINESS.
   No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the city
shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or
establishment in more than 1 location in the city; a separate license shall be
required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the purposes of
this chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact
that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be
connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and
managed by the same person or owner and shall be an establishment with the same
classification.
(1992 Code, § 110.09)
§ 110.10 NONASSIGNABILITY.
   No license or permit granted by the city shall constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be
alienable or transferable voluntarily or involuntarily, nor subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated; nor shall anyone be permitted to do business under
it except the person therein named.
(1992 Code, § 110.10)
§ 110.11 INSPECTION OF LICENSED BUSINESS; RIGHT OF ENTRY; REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO
INSPECTION.
   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation or permitted purpose or
activity are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary
to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the
city, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or
the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making
the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is duly authorized to
make the inspection at any reasonable time that the admission or entry is
requested.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license or permit of any owner or operator of a licensed business or
permitted activity in the city who refuses to permit any duly authorized
officer or employee to make the inspection, or who interferes with the officer
or employee while in the performance of his or her duties. However, no license
shall be subject to revocation for the cause unless the officer or employee has
been refused permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the city
after first having presented a warrant authorizing the entry.
(1992 Code, § 110.11)
§ 110.12 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   When the conduct or operation of any business, establishment or
activity, whether or not licensed or permitted, shall constitute a nuisance in
fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, the Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of
business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of any license or
permit for a period not to exceed 10 days.
   (B)   Within 8 days after he or she has so acted, the Mayor shall call a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit
should be revoked.
   (C)   Licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the city, unless
otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing as
provided in divisions (D) and (E) of this section for any of the following
causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit,
or the premises occupied;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city;
      (5)   (a)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any
interference with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the
performance of his or her duties in making the inspections.
         (b)   The revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his or her last
known address at least 5 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   (E)   At the hearing the City Attorney shall present the complaint and shall
represent the city. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and
shall have the right to submit evidence and cross- examine witnesses. The Mayor
shall preside and shall render the decision.
(1992 Code, § 110.12)
§ 110.13 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor or other officer of the
city in regard to the denial of an application for a license or permit, or in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a license or permit, shall have
the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing
with the City Clerk, within 10 days after notice of a denial of an application
or a revocation of a license or permit, a written statement under oath setting
forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall thereupon set
the time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall
be given to the applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as
provided in §
110.12 of this code. The decision of the City Council on the appeal shall be
final.
(1992 Code, § 110.13)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Liquor Control Act adopted by reference
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Deputy Liquor Commissioner
 
Licensing Provisions
   
111.15   Classifications of licenses
   
111.16   Application for licenses
   
111.17   Duration of licenses; fee
   
111.18   Issuance of license; transference; number of licenses
   
111.19   License to be posted
   
111.20   Revocation of license
   
111.21   Change of location
Standards of Operation
   
111.30   Closing hours
   
111.31   Sale defined
   
111.32   Sale of alcoholic liquor to certain persons prohibited
   
111.33   Sale of intoxicating liquors
   
111.34   Possession of liquor by persons under 21 years of age
   
111.35   Intoxication; possession of open container of intoxicating liquors
   
111.36   Use of alcoholic beverages on city- owned property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 LIQUOR CONTROL ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   All the regulations and requirements set forth in the Act of the General
Assembly referred to as “Liquor Control Act” which relate in any manner to the
licensing or the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail within cities of less than
200,000 population shall be taken and construed as a part of this chapter, as
fully and completely as though the same were fully set forth herein.
(1992 Code, § 111.01)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases used in this chapter and which are defined in the Act
of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois, known as “Liquor Control Act”
being “An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors” approved January 31, 1934, as
amended, shall have the same meaning as in that act defined.
(1992 Code, § 111.02)
§ 111.03 DEPUTY LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor may designate an Alderman with the consent of the City Council to
serve as “Deputy Liquor Commissioner” for purposes of serving the City Liquor
Commissioner during times of absence, illness and/or conflicts of interest. In
the event that the Mayor is unavailable to make such an appointment, then such
an appointment may be made upon motion and approval by the majority of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2023-MC03, passed 2-27-2023)
 
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.15 CLASSIFICATIONS OF LICENSES.
   (A)   No person, club, lodge or other organization shall keep or offer for
sale at retail or conduct any place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors
within the corporate limits of the city without having first obtained a valid
license to do so.
   (B)   The licenses shall be and are hereby divided into 5 classes.
      (1)   Class “A” licenses (to be known as regular retailers’ license)
which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form or
by drink for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The annual fee for
which shall be $750.
      (2)   Class “B” licenses shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises where sold for a period of
less than 1 week. The license fee for which shall be $5 per day.
      (3)   Class “C” licenses shall be issued only to clubs, lodges or similar
organizations and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual license fee for
Class “C” licenses shall be $300.
      (4)   Class “D” licenses shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic
liquors in package form for consumption off the premises where sold. The annual
license fee for Class “D” licenses shall be $500.
      (5)   Class “E” licenses shall be issued for the retail sale of beer and
wine in package form or for consumption off the premises where sold. The annual
fee for Class “E” licenses shall be $500.
(1992 Code, § 111.15) (Am. Ord. 092280, passed 9-22-1980; Am. Ord. 122601A,
passed 12-26-2001)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.16 APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
   Application for the licenses shall be made in writing to the Mayor or to the
person or persons he or she may appoint to assist him in his or her regular
Liquor Control Commissioner, or Commission, signed by the applicant if an
individual, or by the duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation,
verified by oath and shall contain the information as may be required by the
Mayor or Commissioner or Commission, consistent with the Act, known as “Liquor
Control Act.” The right to reject any and all applications is hereby reserved.
(1992 Code, § 111.16)
§ 111.17 DURATION OF LICENSES; FEE.
   A license for the sale of alcoholic liquors under this chapter shall be
granted for a term of not to exceed 1 year and all licenses shall have expired
May 1 after the date of issuance. Where the license has ¾ of a year or more to
run, the full annual license fee shall be paid; if the license shall have less
than three- fourths of 1 year to run, the license shall be prorated according
to the number of months left until the expiration date, no deduction being made
for any part of a month. One-half of the annual fee shall accompany the
application for the license and the balance shall be paid on November 1,
thereafter. Where application is made after November 1, the entire fee shall
accompany the application. No part of the license fee after the issuance of the
license shall be refunded.
(1992 Code, § 111.17)
§ 111.18 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; TRANSFERENCE; NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   No licenses of any kind shall be issued to the persons as are prohibited to
receive a retail liquor dealer's license under the “Liquor Control Act”
hereinabove referred to. No license under this section shall be transferable.
Not more than 8 Class “A” licenses, not more than 3 Class “D” licenses, and not
more than 1 Class “E” license shall be issued in any 1 year; provided that in
the case of surrender or cancellation of any 1 of the 8 Class “A” licenses, the
3 Class “D” licenses or the 1 Class “E” licenses originally issued in any year,
another license, respectively, may be issued in place of the original license.
(1992 Code, § 111.18) (Am. Ord. 092280, passed 9-22-1980; Am. Ord. 120996B,
passed 12-9-1996; Am. Ord. 022398A, passed 2-23-1998; Am. Ord. 122601B, passed
12-26-2001; Am. Ord. 090902A, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 2009-MC07, passed 4-27-
2009; Am. Ord. 2014-MC02, passed 3-10-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-MC08, passed 8-10-
2015; Am. Ord. 2017-MC12, passed 12-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2023-MC04, passed 3-13-
2023)
§ 111.19 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   All licenses issued hereunder shall immediately be posted and kept posted
while in force in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(1992 Code, § 111.19)
§ 111.20 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor may revoke any retail liquor dealers license for any violation of
any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquors.
(1992 Code, § 111.20)
§ 111.21 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises
described in the application and license, and the location may be changed upon
a written permit issued by the Mayor only.
(1992 Code, § 111.21)
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 111.30 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell, or to consume on the
premises, where sold, any alcoholic liquors during the following hours:
      (1)   Every day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Sunday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
and 12:00 a.m.;
      (3)   Monday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m.
   (B)   All persons holding a Class A license under this chapter shall have
their place of business cleared of all patrons, customers and other persons and
all lights therein extinguished within 15 minutes after closing time which
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Monday through Saturday - 1:00 a.m. of the following day;
      (2)   Sunday - 11:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (C)   The premises shall not reopen liquor sales until 5:00 a.m. on any day
except Sunday when they shall not open until 12:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2014-MC08, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.31 SALE DEFINED.
   The term SALE (TO SELL) shall mean any transfer or exchange in any manner or
by any means whatsoever for direct or indirect consideration, and including all
sales made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or
employee, includes, but is not limited to, all of the followings acts:
   (A)   The selling of alcoholic liquor;
   (B)   The giving away of alcoholic liquor;
   (C)   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor;
   (D)   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for consumption of
alcoholic liquor on premises;
   (E)   The pouring of alcoholic liquor;
   (F)   The providing of setups containing alcoholic liquor;
   (G)   The storage of any alcoholic liquor.
(Am. Ord. 122793G, passed 12-27-1993)
§ 111.32 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give or deliver alcoholic
liquors to any person under the age of 21 or to any intoxicated person.
(1992 Code, § 111.32)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.33 SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any wine, beer, alcoholic
spirits or other intoxicating liquors within the city limits except as provided
by this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 111.33)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.34 POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to be in possession
of any intoxicating liquor.
(1992 Code, § 111.34) (Am. Ord. 12880A, passed 1-28-1980)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.35 INTOXICATION; POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To be intoxicated while on any street, alley, school grounds or other
public place;
   (B)   To be in possession of a bottle, can or other container of wine, beer,
or intoxicating liquor which is opened or has a seal broken while on any
street, alley, school grounds or other public place; or
   (C)   To be intoxicated or in possession of the bottle, can or other
container of wine, beer, or intoxicating liquor which is open or has the seal
broken and to be disturbing the peace of the public or of his or her own or
another family while in any private building or place.
(1992 Code, § 111.35)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.36 USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell, or to consume on the
premises, where sold, any alcoholic liquors on city-owned property without
prior consent and approval of the Liquor Commissioner and the City Council.
   (B)   A liquor license for 1-time use shall be issued upon written
documentation of said permission and a certificate of insurance showing the
city as additional insured under the residents “dram shop”/liability coverage
for amounts to be determined by the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
Association.
(Ord. 2023-MC03, passed 2-27-2023)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
License Regulations
   
112.01   License required; exemption
   
112.02   Application
   
112.03   Fees for license
   
112.04   Issuance of license
Standards of Operation
   
112.15   Compliance with other provisions required
   
112.16   Hours of operation
   
112.17   Inspection of exhibitions, amusements and the like
   
112.18   Safety requirements
LICENSE REGULATIONS
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to exercise, offer, operate or engage in any of the
following activities for gain, or to which the public is required to pay a fee
for admission, without first obtaining an amusement license therefor:
      (1)   All bowling or pin alley or alleys;
      (2)   All pool, billiard, pigeonhole or bagatelle table or tables;
      (3)   All shooting galleries or places for target shooting;
      (4)   All juke boxes, pinball machines, and other coin-operated amusement
devices. For the purposes of this chapter the term COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT
DEVICE means and includes a coin- in-the-slot device which returns to the
player thereof no money or property or right to receive money or property. The
term shall not mean and include a coin- in-the-slot-operated device maintained
by any public utility for furnishing service of any public utility, nor any
device which is designed and used strictly as a vendor of merchandise or
service and which is not an amusement device;
      (5)   All roller skating or ice skating rinks or halls;
      (6)   All public dance halls;
      (7)   All carnivals. For the purposes of this chapter the term CARNIVAL
means and includes an aggregation of attractions, whether shows, acts, games,
vending devices or amusement devices, whether conducted under 1 or more
managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted in a
public place or upon any private premises accessible to the public, with or
without admission fee, and which, from the nature of the aggregation, attracts
attendance and causes promiscuous intermingling of persons in the spirit of
merrymaking and revelry.
   (B)   No license shall be required for any amusement or entertainment of the
nature set out above when the entertainment is given exclusively for charitable
or benevolent purposes or for promotion of the city, by societies or citizens
of this city, or by other persons not engaged in giving the entertainments as a
business.
(1992 Code, § 112.01)
§ 112.02 APPLICATION.
   Any person, persons or corporation desiring to exercise or engage in any of
the activities enumerated in §
112.01(A) above shall apply to the City Clerk in accordance with the provisions
of
Chapter 110. The applications shall be submitted no less than 7 days before the
amusement activity is to be opened to the public or no less than 7 days before
the expiration of a license previously granted by the city.
(1992 Code, § 112.02)
§ 112.03 FEES FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   The fee for a semi-annual amusement license for each of the activities
set out in §
112.01(A)(1) through (4) shall be $5 for each alley, table, gallery, machine or
device.
   (B)   The fee for an annual amusement license for each of the activities set
out in §
112.01(A)(5) and (6) shall be $25 per rink or hall.
   (C)   The fee for an amusement license for a carnival as set out in §
112.01(A)(7) shall be $25 per day of operation.
(1992 Code, § 112.03)
§ 112.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to issue an amusement license. An amusement
license shall not be issued to any activity that does not comply with §
112.18 below.
(1922 Code, § 112.04)
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 112.15 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   The holder of any amusement license issued by the city shall comply with the
other provisions of
Chapter 110 as are appropriate. Any holder failing to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or
Chapter 110 shall be liable to revocation of the license as provided by §
110.12.
(1992 Code, § 112.15)
§ 112.16 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any holder of an amusement license to exercise,
offer, operate or engage in the licensed activity or activities during the
hours of 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. During the above prohibited hours for
operation, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit
any person other than an employee to remain in any premises where any activity
is located. During the above prohibited hours for operation, it shall be
unlawful for any person other than an employee to remain in the premises.
(1992 Code, § 112.16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.17 INSPECTION OF EXHIBITIONS, AMUSEMENTS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that every exhibition,
amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a
member of the Police Department to insure conformity with the provisions
concerning the amusements. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall make
the inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall be admitted free to every public show, theatrical,
carnival or other amusement in the city at every performance.
(1992 Code, § 112.17)
§ 112.18 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   Whether licensed under this chapter or not, it shall be unlawful for any
business, carnival, amusement or other activity:
   (A)   To permit more people than can be provided with seats to enter any
building for the purpose of witnessing any public amusement, exhibition or
theatrical;
   (B)   To gather the crowds in any building or premises as to cause danger to
the safety of the building or structure so as to endanger the health or safety
of any person;
   (C)   To give or exhibit any public show, exhibition or theatrical in any
building, structure or enclosure which is unsafe from any cause; or
   (D)   To cause or allow any exit from any building or enclosure to become
obstructed when people are inside the building or enclosure for the purpose of
witnessing any public amusement, exhibition or theatrical.
(1992 Code, § 112.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required; exceptions
   
113.03   Application for license; contents
   
113.04   Authority to acknowledge service of notice or process on behalf of
applicant
   
113.05   Bond required; insurance
   
113.06   Applicant to be of good moral character prerequisite to issuance of
license
   
113.07   Duration of permit
   
113.08   License fees
   
113.09   Police enforcement
   
113.10   Uninvited soliciting upon private premises prohibited; nuisance
   
113.11   Forms
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER or SOLICITOR. Any person, whether resident of the city or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not the individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the sale or whether he
or she is collecting advance payments on the sales or not, provided that the
definition shall not include any person who, for himself or for another person,
firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any
other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
   GARAGE SALE. A sale of used items, goods and wares legally owned at the time
the goods, items and wares are offered for sale by the persons actually
residing on the premises upon which the sale is held.
   GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE. Any and all items of tangible personal
property, except perishable, agricultural commodities.
   PEDDLER.   Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by
foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares and merchandise, offering and exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without
traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. One who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word PEDDLER
shall include the words HAWKER and HUCKSTER.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person,
firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a
resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in
furtherance of the purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, boat, public room in hotels,
lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within
the city, for the exhibition and sale of the goods, wares and merchandise,
either privately or at public auction, provided that this definition shall not
be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying
the temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for
the purpose of securing orders for future delivery. No person, firm or
corporation shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting the transient
business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer.
(1992 Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant,
itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as defined herein, to engage
in the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other article either on foot,
with motor vehicle, or wagon, or from an enclosed stand, without having
obtained from the city a license to do so.
   (B)   No person shall solicit door-to- door in any residential area in the
city without having first obtained a license. Such license, if issued, shall be
valid from 9:00 a.m. until sunset, 7 days per week, with no soliciting being
allowed outside of those hours.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be construed as applying to the following
situations:
      (1)   Any persons who hold a garage sale as defined herein, if the
duration of the sale is not more than 3 consecutive days and if no sale is held
on more than 2 separate occasions in any calendar year on the same premises.
      (2)   Any person under the age of 13.
      (3)   Any person who is soliciting funds or making sales, the entire
proceeds and profits for which are legally required to be transferred to an
entity which is tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code of the United
States.
      (4)   Any person who is soliciting funds or making sales if the entire
proceeds and profits thereof are legally obligated to go to a political party
within the meaning of the word political party as defined in the Illinois
Election Code.
      (5)   Any persons in the business of selling newspapers.
(1992 Code, § 113.02) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   Any persons wishing to obtain a license for the purpose of soliciting or
peddling or a similar occupation shall make application to City Hall stating:
the applicant’s name, address, and descriptive physical personal information to
ascertain identity; employment and commercial affiliations including corporate
address and supervisor contact information, vehicle information including make,
model, owner and license plate details; what articles, ware, merchandise, or
business he/she desires to hawk, solicit or peddle; and for what length of time
he/she wishes to conduct such activities. Valid photo identification must also
be provided. Upon payment, if required, to the city offices of such fees
required, the license shall be issued.
   (B)   City staff shall furnish to each person obtaining a license to peddle
on foot, from a wagon, motor vehicle, or cart, a peddler’s permit number which
shall be assigned to such license which shall be on their person to be shown if
asked during peddling by foot or placed upon such wagon, motor vehicle or cart
in such a manner as to be exposed to view. A new number shall be obtained for
each municipal year, provided only 1 person shall sell under any license and
only 1 person shall be entitled to use 1 wagon, vehicle or cart.
(1992 Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
§ 113.04 AUTHORITY TO ACKNOWLEDGE SERVICE OF NOTICE OR PROCESS ON BEHALF OF
APPLICANT.
   (A)   Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in
business as an itinerant merchant, transient merchant, itinerant vendor,
peddler, canvasser or solicitor as herein defined in the city, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the
Clerk, or the person performing the duties of the position, his or her true and
lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice or
process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected
with or arising out of the business transacted under the license and the bond
given as required by this chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of
the bond or for any breach thereof, which the instrument shall also contain
recitals to the effect that the applicant for the license consents and agrees
that service of any notice or process may be made upon the agent, and when so
made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the
person or persons applying for the license under this chapter, according to the
law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by
reason of the acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
   (B)   Immediately upon service of process upon the Clerk as herein provided,
the Clerk shall send to the licensee at his or her last known address, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the process.
(1992 Code, § 113.04) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977)
§ 113.05 BOND REQUIRED; INSURANCE.
   (A)   Before any license, as provided by this chapter, shall be issued in
the city the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond running to the
city in the sum of $1,000 executed by the applicant, as principal and 2
sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state; the bond to be
approved by the City Attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply
fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and state
statutes, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of
the ordinances or state statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments
and costs that may be recovered against him by any person or persons for damage
growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person
transacting the business with the applicant, whether the misrepresentations or
deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents,
or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any
advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference
to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof.
   (B)   Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use
of the aggrieved person. The bond must be approved by the attorney, both as to
form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon.
   (C)   Before any license, as provided in this chapter, shall be issued to
any transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler,
canvasser, or one of similar occupation, who shall provide such services on
public or city- owned property, the applicant shall provide to City Hall proof
of liability insurance for the operation of such business transactions during
the time period such license would be effective. Said insurance certificate
shall indicate the city as the certificate holder as well as list the city as
additionally insured under the policy.
(1992 Code, § 113.05) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
§ 113.06 APPLICANT TO BE OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF
LICENSE.
   No license to engage in the business of transient merchant, itinerant
merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall be issued to
or held by any person who is not of good moral character or whose license to
engage in the business of being a transient merchant, itinerant merchant,
itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor has been revoked during the
preceding 6 months; nor shall the license be issued to or held by any former
corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the
foregoing conditions. In determining good character, the issuing authority may
consider any conviction of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude if relevant to the license, the recency of the conviction and the
applicant’s conduct subsequent to the conviction.
(1992 Code, § 113.06) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977)
§ 113.07 DURATION OF PERMIT.
   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a period of 1 day, 1 week or
1 month. Licenses shall expire at the date noted on such license unless sooner
suspended or revoked.
(1992 Code, § 113.07) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
§ 113.08 LICENSE FEES.
   The fees charged for licenses shall be as follows:
   (A)   For a license of 1 day, there shall be a license fee paid of $10.
   (B)   For a license of 1 week, there shall be a license fee paid of $20.
   (C)   For a license of 1 month, there shall be a license fee paid of $40.
(1992 Code, § 113.08) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
§ 113.09 POLICE ENFORCEMENT.
   Copies of all peddling/solicitors applications and license documentation
shall be provided to the Police Department personnel at their request. The
license of any such transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor,
peddler, canvasser, or one of similar occupation, can be suspended or revoked
by a city Police Commissioner, Chief or officer at any time for due cause.
(Ord. 2018-MC06, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 113.10 UNINVITED SOLICITING UPON PRIVATE PREMISES PROHIBITED; NUISANCE.
   Any transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor, peddler,
canvasser, or one of similar occupation, shall be declared to be a public
nuisance and in addition to any other such penalties imposed herein, shall be
punished by a fine in the following situations:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter any private residence in
the city after the owner or occupant thereof has requested the person to leave.
2   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon a private property
when the owner or occupant thereof has displayed a “No Solicitors Invited” sign
on the premises.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, when the owner or occupant has
displayed an “Only Solicitors Licensed in the City of Villa Grove” sigh on the
premises, to be unable or unwilling to exhibit his/her license for inspection
by the owner or occupant.
(1992 Code, § 113.10) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 2018-MC06, passed
7-23-2018)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.11 FORMS.
   (A)   “Application for Solicitation License” for use by transient merchants,
itinerant merchants, itinerant vendors, peddlers, canvassers, or ones of
similar occupations, is attached to Ord. 2018-MC06 as Exhibit A.
   (B)   “License for Solicitation Within the City of Villa Grove” was created
for issuance to approved peddlers, attached to Ord. 2018-MC06 as Exhibit B.
(Ord. 2018-MC06, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 (not less than
$100 nor more than $750). Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered
a separate violation for the purposes of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 113.99) (Ord. 31477, passed 3-14-1977; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed
8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 114: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Editor's notes:
   Prior to January 1, 2003, the City of Villa Grove imposed a 5% Municipal
Telecommunications Tax and a 1% Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance
Fee, as authorized by state statutes. Those charges were the subject of §§
114.01 -
114.08 of this
Chapter 114.
   However, the State of Illinois enacted the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, effective July 1, 2002, to apply on and after
January 1, 2003, which replaced such prior taxes and fees, for which a
municipality could levy such tax at a rate not to exceed 6% of the gross charge
for telecommunications purchased at retail.
   Municipalities which, prior to the implementation of that Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, had adopted prior municipal
telecommunications tax charges confirmed by the State of Illinois Department of
Revenue, were not required to adopt an ordinance imposing the new Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax. Rather, that new tax at the rate determined
by the Illinois Department of Revenue, commenced on January 1, 2003.
   The City of Villa Grove was, pursuant to that procedure, duly notified by
the Department of Revenue that it would, effective January 1, 2003, have a 4.5%
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax.
   A municipality could however, by ordinance, change the rate of such new
January 1, 2003, tax from the rate determined by the Department of Revenue to
another rate selected by the municipality, not to exceed 6%.
   The City of Villa Grove Ordinance No. 092302A, adopted on September 23,
2002, amended the rate of such tax to 6% on January 1, 2003, and added §
114.09 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax to the City Code. Said
Ordinance was duly filed with the Department of Revenue and remains in effect.
   Since January 1, 2003, the provisions of the Illinois State statute
comprising the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-
1, et seq., apply in all respects to the imposition and collection of such tax
and the provisions of Villa Grove's 1998 §§
114.01 -
114.08 inclusive of
Chapter 114 were rendered inapplicable.
   However, since the prior §§
114.01 -
114.08 were the basis for the State's determination of the applicability of the
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax on January 1, 2003, the City
Attorney advised that the repeal of those prior provisions might appear to
affect the authority of the City to continue the imposition and collection of
said Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax.
   Accordingly, those provisions are still included in this Chapter, subject to
these Editor's Notes.
   Section
114.09 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax, adopted in Ordinance No.
092302A, on September 23, 2002, remains in effect as the basis for the
continuing imposition of such tax.
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Registration of telecommunications providers
   
114.03   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
   
114.04   Collection, enforcement, and administration of fees
   
114.05   Compliance with other laws
   
114.06   Existing franchises and licenses
   
114.07   Enforcement
   
114.08   Waiver and fee implementation
   
114.09   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax
 
   
114.98   Violations
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money, whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the
city, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within the city. However, gross charges shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
under:
         (a)   The fee imposed by this section;
         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under Public
Utilities Act, §§ 9-221 or 9-222 [see ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, §§ 9-202, 9-221,
9-222 and 9-222.1];
         (c)   Amounts collected under Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 8-11-17;
         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act [ILCS
Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.];
         (e)   911 surcharges; or
         (f)   The tax imposed by Internal Revenue Code § 4251;
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
city;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. The equipment includes, but
is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including the equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein the charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Chapter 220,
Act 5, § 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of the exemption and
during the period of time specified by the city;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering the services;
      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards, if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated
telecommunications devices; or
      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
Public right-of-way shall not include any real or personal city property that
is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
city buildings and other structures of improvements, regardless of whether they
are situated in the public right-of-way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. This term or any
like term means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether the retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one corporation to another corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the
customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless telecommunications as
hereinafter defined. Telecommunications shall not include value added services
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. Telecommunications shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. 521 et seq.) as now or
hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in
the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. Part 76.1550 et
seq.) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of- way that is used
or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of
business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes
adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to pay the fee upon all of the
gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the city.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services, as defined in Telecommunications Act of 1996 § 704
(C) (Pub. L. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended,
including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.02 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNI- CATIONS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this chapter shall
register with the city within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter
or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be
provided by the city; provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer
that has filed a return pursuant to §
114.04(C) shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city
pursuant to division (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by §
114.04(C), as the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications
provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.03 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all gross charges
charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the city
for telecommunications originating or received in the city.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public
rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any
fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in
§
114.04.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
Editor’s note:
   Fee may be imposed in quarter percent increments of not more than 1%.
§ 114.04 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEES.
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which
a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the city
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses
incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Council, which
shall contain the information as the City Council may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any infrastructure maintenance fee collected by the
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under division (A)
of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides the services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for the services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the City Council may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for the
credit. However, no claim for the credit may be made more than 3 years after
the date of the erroneous payment unless:
      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the city within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      (1)   Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act
[ILCS Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.];
      (2)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2;
      (3)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17;
      (4)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 2-202 of the Public
Utilities Act § 2-202.
   (G)   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by
the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. The sums shall be paid to
the city within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The City Council, or his or her designee, may promulgate the further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to §
114.02 of the regulations.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.05 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to the following:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with the generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.06 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
   Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of this chapter
regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and
for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.08 WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The city hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that
may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the city by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city franchise, license,
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver
shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance fee
provided for in this chapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city
has a franchise.   
   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this chapter
shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
90 days after the city provides written notice by certified mail to each
telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license, or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation under the
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during the time as the fee is
subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to
the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges
billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 114.09 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under
the provisions of Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act §§ 5-25 and
5-30 (P.A. 92-0526) is changed to 6%.
(Ord. 092302A, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 114.98 VIOLATIONS.
   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with §
10.99 of this Code.
(Ord. 122898A, passed 12-28-1998)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 115: OUTDOOR CAFES
Section
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   Permit required
   
115.03   Application and fee
   
115.04   Regulations
   
115.05   Restrictions
   
115.06   Enforcement; revocation
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTDOOR CAFÉ. An outdoor food service area operated adjacent to and in
conjunction with a restaurant. This definition shall include areas located on
public property and/or private property.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 115.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Outdoor cafes on public right-of-way. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this Code it is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
organization or association to operate an outdoor café in compliance with
Chapters 110 and
111 of this Code or to use the public right-of-way for outdoor seating, as an
extension of the establishment, or to provide entertainment in conjunction with
such outdoor cafes or outdoor seating without obtaining an outdoor café permit.
Outdoor café permits will be issued for outdoor cafes and/or outdoor seating on
public right-of-way only to business establishments. Such permits may be
purchased at any time during a calendar year, but all permits shall expire on
December 31 of the same calendar year. No permit shall be issued to any
business establishment which is not in compliance with all provisions of the
Municipal Code of the City of Villa Grove.
   (B)   Outdoor dining on private property. A permit for outdoor dining on
private property with a detailed site plan is required. No permit shall be
issued to any business establishment which is not in compliance with all
provisions of the Municipal Code of the City of Villa Grove. Outdoor dining is
to operate in compliance with §§
115.04 through
115.06 and §
115.99.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 115.03 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   All applicants for outdoor café permits and/or outdoor seating on the public
right-of-way permits must complete an application in a form approved by the
city which must be submitted to the City's Administrative and Billing Office
with an initial, non-refundable fee of $150 or a non-refundable renewal fee of
$50 for those renewing a permit from the previous year where no substantial
changes have been made to the site plan. Applicants applying for both permits
simultaneously may pay one $150 fee. All applications shall include the
following information:
   (A)   Name of the proprietor and the business establishment for which the
outdoor café permit and/or the outdoor seating on the public right-of-way
permit is sought.
   (B)   The address and phone number of the proprietor and the business
establishment.
   (C)   A detailed site plan showing all existing objects on the property and
on the public right-of-way adjacent to the business establishment including a
depiction of on-street parking adjacent to the business establishment, and the
proposed location of each chair and table. When music or other entertainment is
provided outdoors on the private property of the petitioner requesting the
permit, the site plan shall include the area and placement of said music or
entertainment.
   (D)   Permit applications for outdoor seating on the public right-of-way
must include Certificates of Insurance in the following amounts: 1) Commercial
General Liability Insurance - $1,000,000, showing the city and its officers,
employees, agents and volunteers as additional insureds, and containing a
statement that said policies shall not be changed or canceled without 30 days'
written notice to the City of Villa Grove; 2) Workers' Compensation statutory
amount; and 3) if alcoholic beverages will be consumed or sold, dram shop
insurance as required by the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, shall be
required.
   (E)   Permit applications for outdoor seating on the public right-of-way
must include a signed indemnification statement on the form provided by the
city. An inspection of the property to document existing conditions of public
improvements shall be performed by the city prior to issuance of an outdoor
café permit and/or an outdoor seating on the public right-of-way seating
permit. Applications should be filed at least two weeks prior to scheduled use
to allow sufficient time for such inspection.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 115.04 REGULATIONS.
   All permit holders shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   The outdoor café area and the outdoor seating on the public right-of-
way area and outdoor dining on private property area shall be maintained clean
and free from refuse or clutter at all times regardless of the source of such
refuse and clutter. Refuse from any outdoor seating area shall not be disposed
of in public waste receptacles.
   (B)   Outdoor seating elements (as defined in §
115.05 below) shall not be permanently attached and shall be removed when not
in use during cold weather months (generally October through March). Any
outdoor seating elements owned by the business establishment, that are intended
to be placed within the public right-of-way outside of established business
hours, shall be identified within the annual permit application, and shall be
subject to review by the City Administrator, or their designee. If approved,
the city reserves the right to require the establishment to remove or modify
the outdoor seating elements, if deemed necessary by the city at any time.
   (C)   For outdoor seating on the public right-of-way, all public
improvements shown on the site plan, including, but not limited to, pavers,
benches, light poles and trees shall be maintained in the condition in which
they existed immediately prior to the issuance of the permit, excluding normal
wear and tear. The permit holder shall immediately report any damage to such
public improvements to the Administrative and Billing Office. The city shall
repair or replace such public improvement at its discretion and shall charge
the cost of repair or replacement to the permit holder unless the damage can be
clearly shown to have resulted from a cause not related to the issuance of the
outdoor seating on the public right-of-way permit. All outdoor seating elements
of outdoor cafes on public rights-of-way and outdoor dining on private property
shall meet all provisions of the current Federal Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) Standard and the Illinois Accessibility Code.
   (D)   Activities involving the outdoor seating on the public right-of-way
shall be conducted in a manner that does not interfere with pedestrians,
parking or traffic.
   (E)   Outdoor café permits and/or outdoor seating on the public right-of-way
permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside the business
establishment.
   (F)   The source of music or other entertainment provided outdoors in
conjunction with an outdoor café or outdoor seating in the public right-of-way
permit or outdoor dining on private property permit, shall be located only on
the private property of the permit holder and shall be provided, with noise
levels maintained in strict compliance with the provision of §
94.01 or any other codes which may be established with regard to noise or
public nuisances. Furthermore, all outdoor music or entertainment shall cease
by 10:30 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and by 11:30 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
   (G)   Outdoor seating areas on private property shall be permitted for
establishments in which the designated seating area is on the same lot of
record as the business establishment and located within the buildable area of
the property. For outdoor seating within public rights-of-way, the outdoor
seating area shall be limited to the areas designated on the permit, and shall
not be located in front of any other business establishment or use unless the
permit holder provides authorization to the village, from the adjacent business
owner or occupant stating that he/she/it consents to the sidewalk seating
elements being placed in front of his/her/its business establishment or use.
   (H)   Business establishments must meet all provisions as set forth within
the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   (I)   Business establishments must provide public restrooms for patrons, as
required by this Code.
   (J)   Business establishments shall be entitled to remove or exclude persons
from the outdoor seating on the public right-of-way area during the hours of
business operation, and are authorized to give notice to any such persons to
prevent such entry, in the same manner as applicable to the non-public right-
of-way portion of the business establishment.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 115.05 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Tables, chairs, temporary fencing, decorations and umbrellas (the
"outdoor seating elements"):
      (1)   Shall be located so that a four-foot wide unobstructed walkway, as
measured from the outdoor seating element to any other obstructions on the
opposite side of the unobstructed walkway, is maintained at all times;
      (2)   Shall be located in accordance with the approved site plan, shall
generally be immediately adjacent to the building and in no instance less than
42 inches from the back of curb, except that outdoor seating elements can be
located closer than 42 inches from the back of curb when there is no parallel
parking adjacent to them (said modification to these requirements may be varied
by the City Administrator, or their designee, if granting such approval
provides for a better design and layout of the seating area);
      (3)   Shall not obstruct normal ingress and egress from the business's
establishment;
      (4)   Shall not be of a design and/or weight that will create a wind-
blown hazard; and
      (5)   Shall meet all provisions of the current Federal American with
Disabilities Act (ADA) Standard and the Illinois Accessibility Code.
   (B)   The following items or actions are prohibited in the outdoor seating
on the public right-of-way area and the outdoor dining on private property
area:
      (1)   Outdoor seating elements in locations not approved by the City
Administrator, or their designee; and
      (2)   Electrical appliances.
   (C)   The following provisions are required for business establishments
where the service or consumption of alcoholic beverages will take place in the
outdoor café or outdoor seating on the public right-of-way or outdoor dining on
private property:
      (1)   The business establishment shall have a valid liquor license issued
by the village, that allows for the service of the type of alcoholic beverages
being served;
      (2)   Alcoholic beverage consumption shall only be permitted within the
designated outdoor seating area, or any other portion of the business
establishment to which the liquor license relates. The permit holder shall not
allow or permit any customer, employee or other person to remove alcoholic
beverages from the area designated in the outdoor café or outdoor seating area
in the right-of-way permit or outdoor dining on private property permit, other
than to another location within the business establishment to which the liquor
license relates;
      (3)   To ensure that consumption of alcoholic beverages is limited to the
designated outdoor seating areas and operated in compliance with this Code,
outdoor cafes and outdoor seating areas on the public right-of-way and private
property shall be regularly monitored and bussed by an employee or contractor
of the business establishment;
      (4)   The hours during which patrons may occupy the outdoor café or
outdoor seating on the public right-of-way or outdoor dining on private
property shall not extend beyond the hours of operation of the other portions
of the business establishment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the outdoor café
or outdoor seating on the right-of-way or outdoor dining on private property
shall not be occupied during the following times: Between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday; between the hours of
1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday; and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. (noon) on Sunday; and
      (5)   Outside seating areas on private property, not in conjunction with
outdoor seating on the public right-of-way, shall be fenced or screened in a
manner that prevents patrons from congregating outside of the designated
seating area. Fencing shall be of a wood or metal design and may be permanently
secured to the ground or removable during the period in which outdoor seating
is not open. Said fencing shall also meet the design and ingress/egress
provisions as required by this Code. Modification to these requirements may be
varied by the City Administrator, or their designee, if granting such approval
provides for a better design and layout of the outdoor seating area.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 115.06 ENFORCEMENT; REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of §§
115.02,
115.03,
115.04 or
115.05 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each day on
which the violation occurs or continues to occur. In addition, the outdoor café
permit and/or the outdoor seating on the public right-of-way permit and/or the
outdoor dining on private property permit may be revoked as a result of any
such violation.
   (B)   The City Administrator, the Chief of Police, or their designees of the
city, upon determining that the method or manner of use of the outdoor café or
the outdoor seating or the conduct of persons serving within or using same pose
an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall have the
power and authority to cause the outdoor dining elements to be removed
immediately and to revoke the permit issued pursuant to §§
115.02 and
115.03.
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Revocation or termination of a Douglas County Board of Health permit
shall result in a concurrent termination of the city's license granted under
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §§
115.02 through
115.05 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2020-MC07, passed 5-26-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
   
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Failure to perform or doing any act forbidden by the code prohibited
   
130.02   Parties to an offense
   
130.03   Presumption of liability
   
130.04   Double jeopardy
§ 130.01 FAILURE TO PERFORM OR DOING ANY ACT FORBIDDEN BY THE CODE PRO-
HIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform
any act required in this code. This code does not affect any right or liability
to damages, penalty, forfeiture or other remedy authorized by law to be
recovered or enforced in a civil action for any conduct which this code makes
punishable; the civil injury is not merged in the offense.
(1992 Code, § 130.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 PARTIES TO AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who commits, attempts, or conspires to commit, or aids or abets
in the commission of any act declared to be an offense, whether individually or
in connection with one or more other persons or as principal, agent or
accessory, shall be guilty of the offense, and every person who falsely,
fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires,
permits or directs another to violate any provisions of this code is likewise
guilty of the offense.
(1992 Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.03 PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY.
   The occupant of any premises, and the owner of unoccupied premises, upon
which violation of this code is apparent, the owner of any object or material
placed or remaining anywhere in violation of this code or any applicable
ordinance of the city, and the occupant and owner of any premises served by any
excavation, connection, or structure illegally made or erected shall be deemed
prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced and subject to the
penalty provided therefor.
(1992 Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.04 DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than 1 recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense, provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
(1992 Code, § 130.05)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damaging city property
   
131.02   Defacing public or private property
   
131.03   Trespassing prohibited
   
131.04   Posting bills without permission; defacing fences, trees and buildings
prohibited
   
131.05   Reserved
   
131.06   Removal of property salvaged at fires
   
131.07   Throwing or propelling missiles prohibited on public streets or alleys
   
131.08   Public camping
§ 131.01 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall either intentionally, wilfully, negligently or
accidentally injure or damage any water meters, water mains and pipes, sewer
mains and pipes, fire hydrants, pavements, curbs, gutters, manholes, sidewalks,
trees, automotive equipment, buildings, or any other city property of any kind
or description shall immediately notify the Director of Public Works of the
time, place, nature and extent of the damage. In the event the Superintendent
is unavailable at the time the notification is required, then the person so
damaging the property shall immediately notify the Police Department of the
damage.
(1992 Code, § 131.01) (Am. Ord. 2005-MC13, passed 10-24-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.02 DEFACING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to wilfully or maliciously break, deface, destroy, or
otherwise injure any public property or any private property of any person,
firm or corporation.
(1992 Code, § 131.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.03 TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a
trespass upon either public or private property. Any of the following acts by
any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to constitute a trespass in
violation of the provisions of this code:
   (A)   Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
the case of private property in violation of any notice, warning or protest
given orally or in writing, by any owner or one legally in possession thereof;
   (B)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making
of an entry upon the land of another, including any public property, in
violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the premises
or at any point of approach or entry, or in the case of private property, in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or one legally in possession thereof; or
   (C)   A failure or refusal to depart from the private premises of another in
case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
one legally in possession thereof; or
   (D)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without
the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft
after being requested to leave by the person having the right.
(1992 Code, § 131.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.04 POSTING BILLS WITHOUT PER- MISSION; DEFACING FENCES, TREES AND
BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises, post, put up, stick or place any hand bill, placard, show bill or
notice upon any building, fence or other property; or to cut up, mark, scratch,
deface or otherwise injure any fence, gate or railing, tree or any part of any
building.
(1992 Code, § 131.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.05 RESERVED
§ 131.06 REMOVAL OF PROPERTY SALVAGED AT FIRES.
   No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession of
the Fire Department, saved from any fire, until proof of ownership is made to
the satisfaction of the Fire Chief or other officer in command and his or her
consent obtained thereto.
(1992 Code, § 131.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross reference:
   For provisions concerning the Fire Department, see
Chapter 34
§ 131.07 THROWING OR PROPELLING MISSILES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC STREETS OR
ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any ball, stone or other
missile on any public street or alley.
(1992 Code, § 131.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 131.08 PUBLIC CAMPING.
   (A)   Public camping as a nuisance. Public camping, as the term is defined
herein, is hereby declared to be a nuisance within the city for the reasons
identified in Ord. 2024-MC12.
   (B)   Regulation of public camping necessary to promote public health. In an
effort to address the public health concerns identified above, the City Council
hereby declares it necessary or expedient for the promotion of health or the
suppression of diseases, to regulate public camping, as that term is defined
herein, within the city's corporate limits.
   (C)   Public camping not intended use of public property. Except for those
parcels of property specifically designated by the city in any subsequent
ordinance, the city hereby declares that none of its property is permitted nor
intended to be used for public camping, as the term is defined herein.
   (D)   Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
      BEDDING. A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for bedding
purposes.
      CAMPSITE. Any physical space that is not within an established structure,
where bedding or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the
purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure, or any
vehicle or part thereof.
      EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items which would otherwise constitute personal
property under the terms of this section, but which (i) has no apparent utility
or monetary value; (ii) personal property which is unsanitary to store or
otherwise maintain; (iii) any weapon possessed illegally; (iv) drug
paraphernalia; (v) items appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be
evidence of a crime; (vi) items which the person cannot demonstrate the
requisite lawful authority to possess; and, (vii) any items of food which can
reasonably be expected to spoil or otherwise perish within the next 30 days.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a
person and having apparent utility or monetary value, except for exempt
personal property.
      PUBLIC CAMPING. To cause or participate in the establishment of, or the
act of remaining in or at, a campsite.
   (E)   Public camping prohibited.
      (1)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on a
public sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench,
or any other publicly-owned property, nor on or under any bridge or viaduct, at
any time.
      (2)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, in any
pedestrian or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a
public right-of-way.
      (3)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on any
real property owned or otherwise maintained by the city.
      (4)   No person may park a vehicle overnight within the city for the
purpose of sleeping or otherwise engaging in public camping in said vehicle.
      (5)   For the purposes of this section, the act of parking or leaving a
vehicle parked for 2 consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a public
vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of
public camping, for 2 consecutive hours without permission from the City
Council, between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., shall be considered a
violation of this section.
   (F)   Exceptions to prohibition. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not
be a violation to engage in public camping when done (i) in a manner
specifically authorized by this code; (ii) after a formal declaration of the
city in emergency circumstances; or, (iii) upon resolution of the City Council,
the same may exempt a special event from the prohibitions of this section, if
the City Council finds such exemption to be in the public interest and
consistent with the goals and objectives of the City Council, and with such
conditions imposed as the City Council or City Administrator deems necessary.
Any conditions
imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant provide evidence
of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the city for any
liability, damage or expense incurred by the city as a result of the activities
of the applicant. Any findings by the City Council shall specify the exact
dates and location covered by the exemption.
   (G)   Removal of campsite. Removal of a campsite in violation of this
section may occur under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Prior to removing a campsite, the city shall post a notice, 24-
hours in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the campsite is
deemed to be necessary for 1 of the reasons in divisions (G)(1)(a) through (1)
(d), below. If such immediate removal is undertaken, the basis for causing the
immediate removal of such campsite should be adequately documented by the
appropriate person(s).
         (a)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain
access to a property;
         (b)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of a property;
         (c)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the
campsite is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or,
         (d)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the
campsite poses a risk to the health and safety of the city and its residents.
      (2)   Upon any action pursuant to division (G)(1) above, the person
causing such action to be taken shall inform an appropriate agency delivering
social services to homeless individuals in the city, of the location of the
campsite and the persons found to be in violation of this section, so said
agency may determine whether or not it would be appropriate to offer its
services to those persons.
      (3)   If a 24-hour notice has been posted, and the 24-hour notice period
has passed, then the campsite, as well as all personal property thereon, shall
be removed by the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of the city.
      (4)   No portion of this section shall be construed to prohibit any
person found to be engaging in public camping from removing their personal
property from the campsite; however, such personal property that constitutes
exempt personal property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement
officer, exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that
said exempt personal property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or
otherwise appearing to be evidence of a crime, and/or items which the person
cannot demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained
and stored as evidence.
   (H)   Disposition and release of personal property.
      (1)   All personal property removed from any campsite which is not exempt
personal property shall be stored by the appropriate law enforcement agency of
the city, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
      (2)   All exempt personal property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the appropriate law enforcement agency of the city.
   (I)   Penalty; mitigation.
      (1)   The penalty for any person's first violation of this section within
a rolling 24 month period shall be $75.
      (2)   The penalty for any person's second violation of this section
within a rolling 24 month period shall be $150.
      (3)   The penalty for any person's third violation of this section within
a rolling 24 month period shall be $350.
      (4)   The penalty for any person's fourth violation of this section
within a rolling 24 month period shall be $500.
      (5)   The penalty for any person's fifth violation of this section within
a rolling 24 month period shall be $750.
      (6)   The penalty for any person's sixth or subsequent violation of this
section within a rolling 24 month period may be a monetary penalty of $750 or
incarceration for a period not exceeding the maximum time allowed pursuant to §
1-2-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9).
      (7)   As a substitute for any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
divisions (I)(1) through (I)(6), above, and if consented to by the city, the
penalty assessed to any person found in violation of this section may be that
said person must engage in public service by cleaning the rights-of-way and
other public facilities of the city for an amount of time that, if the person
found to have violated this section was being paid the minimum wage under
Illinois law, the amount paid for that person's labors would have been equal to
the monetary penalty assessed under this section.
      (8)   The city is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to it,
at law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person pursuant to
this section, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of said person
for a period of time that conforms with § 1-2-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9).
      (9)   In the imposition of any penalty pursuant to this section, the
penalty shall be mitigated by whether or not the person immediately removed all
personal property and litter, including but not limited to bottles, cans, and
garbage, from the campsite after the person was informed that the person was in
violation of this section.
      (10)   A separate offense of this section shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (11)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this section,
any person found in violation of this section may be immediately removed from
the premises where the campsite is located.
(Ord. 2024-MC12, passed 12-9-2024)
 
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Loitering; police order to disperse
   
132.02   Disturbing meetings
   
132.03   Disturbing the peace
   
132.04   Unlawful assemblies
   
132.05   Curfew
   
132.06   Gambling prohibited
   
132.07   Indecent, lewd or obscene conduct
Administration and Justice
   
132.20   Hindering, resisting or obstructing city officers
   
132.21   Impersonation of officer of the city
   
132.22   Interference with members of the Fire Department
   
132.23   Impersonation of members of the Fire Department
   
132.24   Failure to comply with police officer’s orders or directions
   
132.25   Abetting an escape
Weapons
   
132.35   Discharge of firearms
   
132.36   Carrying concealed weapons; discharging
   
132.37   Hunting prohibited; exception
   
132.38   Unlawful possession of bow
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 LOITERING; POLICE ORDER TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
another meaning.
      LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to
saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial
expression HANGING AROUND.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks and
sidewalks.
   (B)   Police order to disperse.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand
or remain idle, either alone and/or in consort with others, in a public place
in the manner so as to:
         (a)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to
hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians;
         (b)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress
and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
      (2)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in division (B)(1) above, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall
order that person to stop causing or committing the conditions and to move on
or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey the orders shall be guilty
of a violation of this section.
      (3)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $500. Any violation shall constitute a
separate offense on each successive day continued.
(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-1992)
§ 132.02 DISTURBING MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful to interrupt or disturb any funeral, school, religious,
City Council or other assembly of people met for a lawful purpose.
(1992 Code, § 132.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.03 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful to disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or
family by loud or unusual noises or offensive carriage, quarreling, challenging
to fight, or fighting.
(1992 Code, § 132.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Any 2 or more persons who shall assemble for the purpose of disturbing
the peace, or of committing an unlawful act, and who shall not disperse when
commanded or requested by any peace officer, shall each and severally be
subject to the penalties set out in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the
purpose of disturbing the peace, or of committing any unlawful act, or any
breach of the peace, or any riotous, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly
conduct or any loud or unusual noise or disturbance or obscene, offensive,
profane or unseemly language, to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation of
others, in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him under his or her
control, shall be subject to the penalties set out in §
10.99 
(1992 Code, § 132.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.05 CURFEW.
   (A)   Curfew offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits
the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
during curfew hours.
   (B)   Curfew defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (A)
that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
   (C)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in division (B) is present.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile crash, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN. To:
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (E)   Sentence. A violation of this section is a petty offense with a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $500, except that neither a person who has
been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, nor that
person’s legal guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or
instead of the fine imposed by this section, the court may order a parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of division (A) to
perform community service as determined by the court, except that the legal
guardian of a person subject to delinquency proceedings or who has been made a
ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may not be ordered to
perform community service. The dates and times established for the performance
of community service by the parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted
of a violation of division (A) shall not conflict with the dates and times that
the person is employed in his or her regular occupation. Fines and assessments,
such as fees or administrative costs, shall not be ordered or imposed against a
minor under the age of 18 transferred to adult court or excluded from juvenile
court jurisdiction under Article V of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, or the
minor’s parent, guardian, or legal custodian.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12C-60(a) - (e)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose curfew, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5
§ 132.06 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to play for money, or for any checks, chips,
counters or anything of similar kind intended to represent money or other
things of value, or for any other valuable thing, any game with cards,
dominoes, dice or billiards, or with any other article or instruments, thing,
or things whatsoever, which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting
upon for winning or losing money or to bet on any game when played by others.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation, either by himself or agent, shall keep
or suffer to be kept in his or her place of business or in any room, building,
or place adjacent thereto owned, managed, or controlled by him or his or her
agent, any table, tables, or other apparatus or service for the purpose of
playing at any game or sport, whether cards, dice or chips or any other
article, instrument or thing which may be used for the purpose of betting upon
or winning or losing money or other articles of value; nor shall suffer or
permit any games to be played therein. The provisions of this section do not
prohibit participation in the Illinois State Lottery or other activity licensed
by the state.
(1992 Code, § 132.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.07 INDECENT, LEWD OR OBSCENE CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful to place, open or expose to public view, write, mark,
draw, print, paste, stick, cut or make any indecent, lewd or obscene word,
sentence, design, figure, picture or poster.
(1992 Code, § 132.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND JUSTICE
§ 132.20 HINDERING, RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING CITY OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful to wilfully hinder, delay, resist or obstruct any
officer of the city or any person authorized by him in the discharge of his or
her duty, or to aid, abet or encourage any hindering, delaying, resisting or
obstructing, or to neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order of any officer.
(1992 Code, § 132.20)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.21 IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER OF THE CITY.
   It shall be unlawful to falsely represent oneself to be an officer of the
city, or to, without authority, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
powers, duties or functions of any city officer.
(1992 Code, § 132.21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.22 INTERFERENCE WITH MEMBERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder any officer, firefighter or
member of the Fire Department in the performance of duty while at a fire.
(1992 Code, § 132.22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions concerning fire prevention, see
Chapter 92
§ 132.23 IMPERSONATION OF MEMBERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   No person, not a member of the Fire Department, shall impersonate a
firefighter or officer of the Fire Department by wearing a cap or badge
thereof, or in any other way.
(1992 Code, § 132.23)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions concerning the Fire Department, see
Chapter 34
§ 132.24 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH POLICE OFFICER’S ORDERS OR DIRECTIONS.
   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer if the person knows that the person giving the
order or direction is a police officer and the order or direction is an
authorized act within the official capacity of the police officer giving the
order or direction.
(1992 Code, § 132.24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   For additional provisions concerning the Police Department, see
Chapter 33
§ 132.25 ABETTING AN ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful to rescue or attempt to rescue, or aid, abet or
encourage the rescue or escape of any person in the custody of any officer or
other person having him legally in charge, or to molest or interfere with any
officer or other person legally having any person in custody; or to in any
manner aid, abet or encourage the rescue or escape or the attempt to escape
from any prison of any person committed thereto; or to supply or attempt to
supply any person with any weapon or implement or means of escape; or for
attempting to escape.
(1992 Code, § 132.25)
Penalty, see § 10.99
WEAPONS
§ 132.35 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   Within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be unlawful to fire or
discharge any gun, cannon, pistol, B-B gun, pellet gun, or other fire arm
without a permit for the Mayor issued in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 132.35)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.36 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS; DISCHARGING.
   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons, revolver, pistol, club,
dagger, dirk, knife, metallic knuckles, billy, slingshot, or any razor, as a
concealed weapon, or in a threatening or boisterous manner, to display or
flourish any deadly weapon; or fire any weapon.
(1992 Code, § 132.36)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.37 HUNTING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal or bird
other than as prescribed by §
90.32 without a permit from the Mayor issued in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 132.37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF BOW.
   No person in the city shall have in his or her possession except within his
or her own domicile or residence, or carry or use, any bow made for the purpose
of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means. The foregoing
prohibition shall not apply on the premises of the owner of the instrument or
to a guest thereon under circumstances when the instrument can be fired,
discharged or operated in a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and
also in a manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or
space outside the limits or boundaries of the owner’s grounds or residence
property.
(Am. Ord. 122793B, passed 12-27-1993)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
   
152.   HISTORICAL SITES AND BUILDINGS
   
153.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
   
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
155.   ZONING CODE
   
156.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
   
157.   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Fire limits established
   
150.02   Requirements for dwelling houses
   
150.03   Smoke and fire alarms
   
150.04   House numbering
   
150.05   Requirements for fences
Building Code
   
150.15   Adoption of building codes
   
150.16   Definitions
   
150.17   Fees to be paid before issuance of permit; validity
   
150.18   Steel buildings to bear underwriters’ seal
   
150.19   Record of inspection
Plumbing Code
   
150.30   Title
   
150.31   Reserved
   
150.32   Plumbing inspector
   
150.33   Inspection
   
150.34   Violations
   
150.35   Stop work order
   
150.36   Notice of approval
   
150.37   Permit application and fees
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.50   Condemnation of unfit or unsafe buildings
   
150.51   Vacation of condemned buildings
   
150.52   Hearing granted to affected persons
   
150.53   Demolition of buildings by owner
   
150.54   Demolition of buildings by city
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.65   Office of Building Official established
   
150.66   Building Official; duties
   
150.67   Liability for enforcement of regulations
   
150.68   Right of entry
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of the alley between Oak Street and Main Street
with Harrison Street as a point of beginning; thence south with the center of
the alley to its intersection with Railroad Street; thence east along Railroad
Street to its intersection with Sycamore Street; thence north with Sycamore
Street to Jefferson Street; thence west on Jefferson Street one-half block to
the alley; thence north up the alley to Harrison Street; thence west to the
point of beginning.
(1992 Code, § 150.01)
§ 150.02 REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLING HOUSES.
   It is intended that the requirements under this section modify those under
the National Building Code; where maximums or minimums under the National
Building Code are in conflict with those stated herein, the requirements listed
herein shall control.
   (A)   Single-story building. The “top” of footings for single story
buildings shall be placed a minimum of 32 inches below the surface of the
ground. The footings shall be a minimum of 16 inches in width and a minimum of
8 inches in depth of concrete. The footings shall have at least two -inch
reinforcing rods.
   (B)   Two-story building. The “top” of footings for two-story buildings
shall be placed a minimum of 32 inches below the surface of the ground. The
footings shall be a minimum of 24 inches in width and a minimum of 10 inches in
depth of concrete. The footings shall have at least four -inch reinforcing rods
and the number of reinforcing rods shall increase proportionately as size
increases.
   (C)   Both single- and two-story buildings:
      (1)   Center pier. Center piers shall have a minimum spacing of 8 feet.
The base of the center piers shall be a minimum of 4 square feet and be located
at the same depth as the concrete footing.
      (2)   Floor joists.
         (a)   Floor joists shall be placed 16 inches on center and shall have
a maximum span as listed below:
 
           Maximum Span (feet)
2 by 8     12
2 by 10    16
2 by 12  20
 
         (b)   Bridging shall be required for any span of over 7 feet.
      (3)   Studs. Studs shall be a minimum of 2 by 4 inches on 16-inch
centers.
      (4)   Ceiling joists. Ceiling joists shall be a minimum of 2 by 6 inches
with a maximum run of 16 feet and shall be on 16-inch centers.
      (5)   Trusses.
         (a)   1.   Where “W” trusses are used, the following maximums are
allowed for cords:
 
Span(feet)
Up to 28   2 by 4
30         top cord 2 by 6, 2 feet on center
36         2 by 6
 
            2.   All material used to construct the “W” may be 2 by 4 up to 26
feet span.
         (b)   Where king post trusses are used, the following maximums are
allowed for cords:
 
Span(feet)
Up to 24   2 by 4
24         2 by 6
 
      (6)   Rafters. Rafters shall be a minimum of 2 by 6-inch with a maximum
run of 16 feet, on 16-inch centers. 2 by 4-inch may be used if pitch of more
than ¼.
      (7)   Sub-floor. Sub-flooring shall be a minimum of ½-inch plywood or ¾-
inch board, both must be sheeted with a minimum of ¼-inch underlayment.
      (8)   Roof sheeting. Roof sheeting shall be a minimum of ½-inch plywood
or ¾-inch board.
      (9)   Roof material. Roof material shall have a minimum weight of 225
pounds per square.
         (10)   Bearing walls. All bearing walls shall be a minimum of 2 by 12
headers or equal on all openings.
         (11)   Wall plates. Wall plates shall be a minimum of double 2 by 4's
with no joints aligned.
         (12)   Concrete work. Concrete subject to vehicle traffic shall have a
minimum depth of 4 inches of concrete over 6-inch wire and fill. Walkways shall
have a minimum depth of 4 inches of concrete over fill. The fill shall be of
sand or fill gravel and at the 6 and 4 inch level, respectively, after being
compacted or water filled.
         (13)   Siding. Finished siding must be applied within 90 days of
occupancy or 9 months after storm sheeting is applied to a non-occupied
structure.
         (14)   Fire requirements. Structures located within the fire limits
must have ceilings and walls with a minimum of 1-hour fire resistance. Any
building used for dwelling purposes shall have at least 2 doors for fire exits.
         (15)   Concrete slab floors. Concrete slab floors with a floor space
in excess of 750 square feet shall be referred to the Building Official for
approval. If truss rafters are not used for slab floor, then center footing
shall be put under bearing wall. Slab floors used in construction of dwellings
shall be bounded by rat-guard footings.
   (D)   Materials used in the construction of dwellings. Wood materials used
in the construction of dwellings shall be new lumber and dimensional lumber of
construction grade #1200 fiber test minimum. No splicing shall be made on floor
joists, studs, ceiling joists or rafters with ¼ pitch or less. Buildings which
will have more than ¼ pitch to the rafters must be approved by the Building
Official.
   (E)   Use of used or old lumber. Used or old lumber shall not be used in the
construction, alteration or repair of any dwelling which was constructed or
under construction after the adoption of these building regulations or in the
construction of a new dwelling unless approval is obtained from the Building
Official with the consent of the majority of the City Council for the use for
the purposes.
(1992 Code, § 150.02)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.03 SMOKE AND FIRE ALARMS.
   Owners of commercial buildings, multiple-family residential units and mobile
homes which are hereafter moved into the city, or changed from 1 location to
another within the city, shall be required to install at least 1 smoke and fire
alarm per unit therein.
(1992 Code, § 150.03) (Am. Ord. 042682C, passed 4-26-1982)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.04 HOUSE NUMBERING.
   All lots, buildings and structures within the city shall be numbered in
accordance with the following:
   (A)   North and south numbers shall commence at Monroe Street;
   (B)   East and west numbers shall commence at Main Street;
   (C)   Even numbers shall be on the west and north sides of streets;
   (D)   Odd numbers shall be on the east and south sides of streets; and
   (E)   The numbers shall commence with 1 and there shall be 1 number to every
25 feet of frontage within the area defined by the city’s fire limits in §
150.01, and 1 number to every 50 feet of frontage within all other areas.
(1992 Code, § 150.03)
§ 150.05 REQUIREMENTS FOR FENCES.
   All fences newly-built, repaired or constructed as replacement of an
existing fence shall adhere to the following:
   (A)   All fence construction must adhere to the visibility triangle rules as
set forth in §
96.21 herein.
   (B)   Fences must be built no less than 2 feet (minimum) inside a property's
boundary line so that said outer area can be maintained without trespass onto a
neighboring property. Property owners should take appropriate measures to
ascertain the exact boundary lines before beginning construction of a fence.
   (C)   Fences along the front boundary of a home shall be no higher than 4
feet above the ground.
   (D)   Privacy fences shall not extend beyond the front edge of the home, and
cannot be higher than 6 feet above the ground.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to place, maintain
or keep a fence, railing or guard of any kind constructed of barbed wire, iron
spikes or other sharp-pointed, metallic instruments. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to barbed wire strands placed on top of another type of
fence and no less than 7 feet above the ground.
   (F)   Homeowners shall be responsible for securing a fence permit
application at the office of the City Clerk, along with payment of the permit
fee as defined in §
150.17(B)(5).
   (G)   Signature of the Building Inspector (or Mayor if there is a vacancy of
that office) on said application shall construed as the approval of and
issuance of said permit. Construction shall not begin at any time prior to the
executed fence permit being issued and received by the homeowner.
(Ord. 2007-MC15, passed 12-10-2007)
Penalty, see § 150.99
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.15 ADOPTION OF BUILDING COD ES.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the 2018 edition of the International Building Codes, as published by the
International Code Council (“the IBC”), is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the city. The IBC shall control all matters concerning the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, use, location, occupancy, maintenance of all
buildings and structures, other than 1- and 2-family dwellings, and shall apply
to existing or proposed building and structures, except if such matters are
otherwise provided for in the ordinance
from which this chapter is derived or in other ordinances or statutes or rules
or regulations of the city. The IBC shall also govern the removal and
demolition of all building and structures, including 1- and 2-family dwellings.
   (B)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the Mechanical Code (“the IMC”) being the 2018 edition is hereby adopted
as the International Mechanical Code of the city.
   (C)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (“the NFPA 101") being the 2018 edition is
hereby adopted as the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code of the city.
   (D)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the International Property Maintenance Code (“the IPMC”) being the 2018
edition is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city.
   (E)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the International Fire Code being the 2018 edition is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code of the city.
   (F)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the International Residential Code (“the IRC”) being the 2018 edition is
hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the city.
   (G)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the National Electrical Code (“the NEC”) being the 2017 edition is hereby
adopted as the Electrical Code of the city.
   (H)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the Illinois Plumbing Code being the current edition is hereby adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the city.
   (I)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the 2018 Illinois Accessibility Code is hereby adopted as the
Accessibility Code of the city.
   (J)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the International Existing Building Code (“the IEBC”) being the 2018
edition is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the city.
   (K)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, the Illinois Energy Conservation Code (“the IECC”) being the 2021 edition
is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the city.
(Ord. 2025-MC11, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 150.16 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Building Code, it shall
be held to mean the City of Villa Grove, Douglas County, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term CORPORATION COUNSEL is used in the Building Code, it
shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
(1992 Code, § 150.16)
§ 150.17 FEES TO BE PAID BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; VALIDITY.
   (A)   No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the
fee prescribed in this chapter shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to
a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in
the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid.
   (B)   Fees for a permit for the construction or alteration of a building or
structure shall be as follows:
      (1)   For construction of a new residential building or any additions: a
fee equal to $0.25 per square foot of the home or addition determined from its
exterior dimensions.
      (2)   For a garage: a fee equal to $0.15 per square foot of the square
footage of said garage building determined from its exterior dimensions.
      (3)   For all other buildings, including but not limited to commercial,
industrial and recreational buildings, except those covered by division (B)(4)
hereof: a fee equal to $0.35 per square foot of the building determined from
its exterior dimensions.
      (4)   For all buildings owned by a not-for-profit entity which has a
documented tax exempt status under Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3), or
a comparable status: a flat fee of $250 for any new structures or additions to
an existing building. A comparable status could include evidence of other real
estate tax exemptions, or state sales tax exemption, or that subject property
will, when improved, quality for real estate taxation exemption.
      (5)   For construction of a newly-established or replacement of an
existing fence: a flat fee of $25.
      (6)   For construction of an outbuilding or exterior deck, attached or
not: a flat fee of $25.
      (7)   For any and all communication towers: a fee of $1 per foot in
height of the proposed tower.
   (C)   For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot
to another, the fee shall be at the rate of $2 per $1,000 of the estimated
value of the building or structure in its completed condition after removal.
   (D)   For a permit for the removal of a building or structure to a new
location within the same lot, the fee shall be at the rate of $1 per $1,000 of
the estimated cost of moving, of new foundations and of work necessary to put
the building or structure in usable condition in its new location.
   (E)   For a permit for the demolition of a building or structure the fee
shall be $50. The demolition must be accomplished in 30 days.
   (F)   The term ESTIMATED COST as used in this section, means the reasonable
value of all services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other
appliances or devices entering into and necessary to the prosecution and
completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided that the cost of
excavation or grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely
for embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building
or structure, is not deemed a part of the estimated cost.
   (G)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for
1 year from date of issuance. Permits may be renewed for 2 six-month periods at
the cost of $100 per renewal. The provisions herein shall apply to new
construction or new additions only. The builder must obtain the permit and the
permit holder will be liable for any penalties assessed.
(1992 Code, § 150.17) (Am. Ord. 102797A, passed 10-27-1997; Am. Ord. 051401A,
passed 5-14-2001; Am. Ord. 051401B, passed 5-14-2001; Am. Ord. 051401D, passed
5-14-2001; Am. Ord. 101403A, passed 10-14-2003; Am. Ord. 112204A, passed 11-22-
2004; Am. Ord. 2006-MC11, passed 12-11-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-MC13, passed 12-10-
2007)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.18 STEEL BUILDINGS TO BEAR UNDERWRITERS’ SEAL.
   All steel buildings shall bear an underwriters’ seal in order to satisfy the
requirements of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 150.18)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.19 RECORD OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   A record of inspection shall be required for all building permits,
with inspections being done after each of the following steps:
      (1)   Footing;
      (2)   Framing;
      (3)   Plumbing;
      (4)   Electric;
      (5)   Finish.
   (B)   Only after inspections 1 through 5 have been successfully completed
will a certificate of issuance be issued.
(Am. Ord. 051401C, passed 5-14-2001)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.30 TITLE.
   The title of this subchapter shall be the “Plumbing Code” and any reference
to the code within this article shall refer to this subchapter.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 150.31 RESERVED.
§ 150.32 PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Appointment. There is hereby created the position of Plumbing
Inspector. The Inspector shall be appointed to a 1-year term, annually, by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The Plumbing Inspector shall devote
the time as is required from time to time to accomplish his or her duties as
designated by these provisions. The Plumbing Inspector shall not be directly or
indirectly interested in the plumbing business in any way and shall not be
directly or indirectly interested in any plumbing contractor business, plumbing
supply business, plumbing material business, or insurance business dealing with
plumbing contractors.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Plumbing Inspector shall have at least a
journeyman’s plumber’s license and 4 years’ experience in plumbing and sewer
construction work.
   (C)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to see to the
enforcement of all provisions of this code relating to plumbing and plumbing
equipment and to make inspections and perform the tests as may be necessary in
the enforcement of the code.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 150.33 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with ordinances. The Plumbing Inspector may make plumbing
inspections to ascertain compliance with this code and shall have authority to
investigate complaints involving plumbing.
   (B)   Specific inspections. The Plumbing Inspector or his or her authorized
representative shall, after proper identification, inspect any and all plumbing
work which occurs during the following: new construction and alterations
amounting to major remodeling which shall be defined as the addition of rooms,
baths or the rearrangements or enlargements thereof, but shall not include
solely the replacement of appliances or fixtures. Whether the inspections are
required by this subchapter shall be determined by the Plumbing Inspector at
the time of application for a plumbing permit.
   (C)   Right of entry. The Plumbing Inspector or his or her authorized
representative shall, after proper identification, have the right, subject to
constitutional limitations, to enter any premises for the purpose of enforcing
this code.
   (D)   Liability. The provisions of this code shall not be construed to
affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating,
controlling or installing any plumbing fixture or system for damages to persons
or property caused by any defect in the fixture, equipment, or system, nor
shall the city or its employees be held to assume the liability by reason of
the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or any certificate of approval
issued as provided herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
fixture, equipment or system authorized herein.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994; Am. Ord. 092396A, passed 9-23-1996)
§ 150.34 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful to install, extend, alter, repair,
or maintain plumbing systems in or adjacent to buildings except in conformity
with this code.
   (B)   Notice. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order
to the person responsible for the installation of plumbing work in violation of
the provisions of this code, or in violation of a detailed statement or a plan
approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code. The order shall direct the discontinuance of the
illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
   (C)   Prosecution. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly,
the code official shall request the legal council of the jurisdiction to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful use of any plumbing system in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this code or failing to comply with any order issued pursuant to
this section shall be subject to the penalties set out in §
10.99, as amended.
   (E)   Abatement. The imposition of the penalties set out in §
10.99, as amended, shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting
appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or
structure on or about any premises.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 150.35 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Notice. Upon notice from the code official that work on any building
or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this code or in
an unsafe and dangerous manner, the work shall be immediately stopped. The stop
work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work.
   (B)   Unlawful continuance. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop work order, except the work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to the penalties set
out in §
10.99, as amended.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 150.36 NOTICE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval. After the prescribed tests and final inspection indicate the
work complies in all respects with this code, a certificate of approval shall
be issued by the code official.
   (B)   Temporary occupancy. Upon the request of the holder of a permit, the
code official shall issue a temporary authorization before the entire work
covered by the permit has been completed, provided the portion or portions will
be put into service safely prior to full completion of the building or
structure without endangering health or public welfare.
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 150.37 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Application for permit. Application for a plumbing permit shall be
made on forms provided by the Plumbing Inspector or the City Clerk. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees calculated from the
plumbing permit fee schedule found in division (C) below.
   (B)   Permit fees. No permit shall be valid until the fees required by this
code have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the
additional fees, if any, have been paid to the city.
   (C)   Plumbing fee schedule. Fees for plumbing permits shall be charged at a
per fixture rate with a $20 minimum computed from the following table and shall
be nonrefundable.
Permit Type Fee
Permit Type              Fee
Water closet             $5
Bath tub                 $5
Lavatory                 $5
Shower bath              $5
Kitchen sink             $5
Slop sink                $5
Pair laundry trays       $5
Dishwasher               $5
Garbage disposal         $5
Urinal                   $5
Floor drain              $5
Clothes washer           $5
Grease trap              $5
Dental cuspidor          $5
Soda fountain            $5
Drinking fountain        $5
Water heater             $5
Water service connection $5
 
(Ord. 121294C, passed 12-12-1994)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.50 CONDEMNATION OF UNFIT OR UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   Any dwelling, dwelling unit or building which is found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation or as a
danger to the public health and shall be so designated and placarded by the
Building Official.
   (A)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested as to create a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants thereof or of the public.
   (B)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants thereof or of the
public where the facilities or protection are not in good working condition.
   (C)   One which, because of its general condition or location, is
unsanitary, unsafe or otherwise hazardous to the health or safety of the
occupants thereof or of the public.
(1992 Code, § 150.30)
§ 150.51 VACATION OF CONDEMNED BUILDINGS.
   Any dwelling, dwelling unit or building so condemned and so designated and
placarded by the Building Official shall be vacated within a reasonable time,
not to exceed 60 days, as ordered by the Building Official. No dwelling,
dwelling unit or building shall again be used for human habitation until the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding were based have
been eliminated and written approval has been secured from and placard removed
by the Building Official. No persons shall deface or remove the placard from
any condemned dwelling, dwelling unit, or building except as provided in this
section.
(1992 Code, § 150.31)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.52 HEARING GRANTED TO AFFECTED PERSONS.
   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or building may request and shall be
granted a hearing before the City Council on the matter within 15 days after
the date of the order and placarding.
(1992 Code, § 150.32)
§ 150.53 DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS BY OWNER.
   A dwelling or building which is subject to condemnation and placarding may
be ordered demolished by the Building Official if it is determined by the
Official that the defects upon which the condemnation order is based cannot be
economically remedied. Demolition according to requirements listed below, may
be required by the owner within a reasonable period of time, the period of time
to be not less than 60 days after notice is served on the owner. The demolition
shall have the effect of fulfilling the requirements of removing defects if the
structure is raised to ground level and any subsurface area is filled with
solid materials to ground level.
(1992 Code, § 150.33)
§ 150.54 DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS BY CITY.
   A dwelling or building which has been condemned as unfit for human
habitation or as a danger to the public health and ordered demolished and which
has not been demolished by the owner within the time specified in the
demolition order, may be demolished at the expense of the owner in accordance
with the provisions of Illinois Municipal Code, Article 11, Division 31.
(1992 Code, § 150.34)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.65 OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The office of Building Official is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the Building Official. The Building
Official shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with §
31.30 of this Code.
   (B)   During temporary absence or disability of the Building Official the
Mayor shall designate an Acting Building Official. The Acting Building Official
shall receive the same compensation as provided for the Building Official.
   (C)   The compensation paid the Building Official shall be as established
from time to time by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 150.45)
§ 150.66 BUILDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce all laws relating
to the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and
structures and also to collect, record and report monthly to the City Council
all fees and charges required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 150.46)
§ 150.67 LIABILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   The Building Official or any employee charged with the enforcement of these
building regulations acting in good faith and without malice for the city in
the discharge of his or her duties shall not thereby render himself liable
personally and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required
or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any
suit brought against the Building Official or employee, because of the act or
omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provisions of these
regulations, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final
termination of the proceedings.
(1992 Code, § 150.47)
§ 150.68 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Official, in the discharge of his or her official duties and
upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
(1992 Code, § 150.48)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalty for violation
of any provision or requirement of this chapter shall be the general penalty
provisions of §
10.99 hereof.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the building
regulations hereby adopted or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as
affirmed or modified by the Building Official or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
violation and noncompliance respectively, be deemed in violation of these
building regulations and shall have city utilities discontinued. The imposition
of 1 penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations
or defects within a reasonable time and when not otherwise specified, each 10
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(1992 Code, § 150.99) (Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Base flood elevation
   
151.04   Duties of the Building Inspector
   
151.05   Development permit
   
151.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
151.07   Protecting buildings
   
151.08   Subdivision requirements
   
151.09   Public health and other standards
   
151.10   Carrying capacity and notification
   
151.11   Variances
   
151.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city
by the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-
2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
151.03.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles  and travel trailers installed on a site for more than
180 days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      (2)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days per year;
      (4)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      (5)   Construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
      (6)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other alterations of the ground surface; or
      (7)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUB- DIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood  hazard area (SFHA) within
a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the city, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be
annexed into the city, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the Embarras River, Jordan Slough and West Ditch are generally
identified as such on panel number(s) 17041C0068D, 17041C0069D, 17041C0181D and
17041C0182D of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Douglas County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated May 24, 2011.
Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the
community.
      (2)   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Douglas County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance
rate map prepared for Douglas County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated May 24, 2011.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway shall be according to the best data available from
federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. Illinois Department of Natural Resource
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream
serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. Construction
on these streams requires a permit from the Department. (Ill. Admin. Code tit.
17, pt. 3700.30). The Department may grant approval for specific types of
activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the standards defined
in §
151.06.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
151.07.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See definition of BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes REPETITIVE
LOSS BUILDINGS (see definition in this section).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term
does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Embarras River, Jordan
Slough and West Ditch shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in
the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Douglas County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated May 24, 2011.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
Zone" or AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Douglas County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Douglas
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by
the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Douglas County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as delineated on
the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Douglas County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated May 24, 2011.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.04 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the general administration
of this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, the Building Inspector shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
151.05;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
151.06;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
151.07 are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
151.08;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
151.09;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
151.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
151.13 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
151.07; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Building Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey
elevation to be below the base flood elevation. Any development located on land
that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood
elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first
flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to
the requirements of this chapter. In addition, any development located on land
shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a
flood source, but not identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance
rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Building Inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
      (3)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state,
and local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement*:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide Permit Number 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility
lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet and raising
buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any other
activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13; and
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
§
151.06, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of
this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
151.02.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material; and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation; and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris:
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice;
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B) of this section; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) of this
section unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet;
      (6)   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain;
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage of shed must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits;
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area;
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $15,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 576 square feet (24'x24');
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The city shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
151.06 and
151.07. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
151.06 and
151.07 the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
151.07.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Board of Appeals for a
variance. The Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of §
151.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic structures. Variances to the building protection requirements
of §
151.07 which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in §
151.02, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§§
151.06 and
151.07 subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; or
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture.
      (1)   Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as
those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and
the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
         (a)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
         (b)   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
         (c)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures,
the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation,
wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base
flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance
with §
151.07.
         (d)   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in
accordance with §
151.07. All of the building's structural components must be capable of
resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
         (e)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with §
151.07.
         (f)   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to
the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with §
151.07(B).
         (g)   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of §
151.06. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any
designated floodway.
         (h)   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.13 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including:
2005-MC01 passed on January 10, 2005. However, this chapter does not repeal the
original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program.
Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the city may determine that
a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The city shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The city shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter;
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each offense;
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      (4)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (2)   The city is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board
of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 2011-MC03, passed 5-9-2011)
CHAPTER 152: HISTORICAL SITES AND BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Purpose of chapter
   
152.02   Provisions to be supplemental
   
152.03   Designation of certain areas; Historic Preservation District
   
152.04   Appearance of original exterior and interior to be retained
   
152.05   Maintenance of designated area
Permit Requirements
   
152.15   Permit required; application
   
152.16   Issuance or denial of permit
   
152.17   Appeals
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.30   Powers of City Council relative to designated area
   
152.31   Notice of violation; contents
   
152.32   Time limitation for correction; removal of violation
   
152.33   Right of owner to request rehearing
   
152.34   Appeal from decision determining violation
   
152.35   Fair and responsible judgment in determination of violation
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   In order to promote public welfare of the inhabitants of the city, through
the protection, preservation and continued utilization of certain areas,
buildings, places, structures and other objects having special historical,
community, architectural and aesthetic interest or value, the City Council
deems it necessary to designate certain areas, buildings, places, structures
and other objects having a special historical, community, architectural and
aesthetic interest and in connection therewith to provide special conditions,
to impose regulations governing construction, alteration, demolition and use,
and to adopt other additional measures appropriate for their preservation,
protection, enhancement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, perpetuation or use,
and the other additional measures as are provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.02 PROVISIONS TO BE SUPPLEMENTAL.
   This chapter supplements and is in addition to those provisions set forth in
the building regulations of the city and nothing herein shall be construed as
repealing any requirement relating to the proper wiring, plumbing or
construction of any building or structure. All work is to be in conformity with
the building regulations as now in effect or as provided by any other
applicable ordinance. In every instance the applicant shall comply with all
applicable provisions.
(1992 Code, § 152.02) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.03 DESIGNATION OF CERTAIN AREAS; HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Certain areas of the city shall be designated as having certain
special historical, community, architectural and aesthetic value.
   (B)   Buildings in the city designated as having certain special historical,
community, architectural and aesthetic value are:
      (1)   The Depot - C&EI-MOPAK;
      (2)   The Gladys Henson Home;
      (3)   The William Morrow Home;
      (4)   The John Henson Home;
      (5)   The Baptist Church;
      (6)   The Community Building; and
      (7)   The High School Building of the Villa Grove School Buildings.
   (C)   This area may be referred to as the Historic Preservation District.
(1992 Code, § 152.03) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.04 APPEARANCE OF ORIGINAL EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR TO BE RETAINED.
   All property within the designated areas will retain, insofar as possible,
the exterior appearance of the period in which it was built or constructed and
any new construction, alterations or repairs in the designated area shall be
designed and constructed with essentially the same exterior appearance as was
the original structure that was located on the same premises. Great latitude
shall be allowed as to interior construction so long as it is not inconsistent
with this chapter or any other applicable ordinance of the city passed by the
City Council.
(1992 Code, § 152.03) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.05 MAINTENANCE OF DESIGNATED AREA.
   All property, real estate or improvement thereon within the area official
described in §
152.03, whether owned or controlled privately or by any public body, shall
receive reasonable care, maintenance and upkeep appropriate for the
preservation, protection, enhancement, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
perpetuation or use in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 152.05) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
Penalty, see § 152.99
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.15 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No construction, alteration, demolition or use of any real estate or
improvements thereon within the areas officially designated in §
152.03 shall be started, commenced, undertaken or done without first complying
with the terms of this chapter. Before any construction, alteration, demolition
or use of any real estate or improvements thereon within the area is started,
commenced, undertaken or done, an application to do the same shall be filed
with the City Clerk in substantially the following form:
      (1)   Street address of the property involved;
      (2)   Legal description of the property involved;
      (3)   Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property;
      (4)   Detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition or
use proposed together with any architecture drawings or sketches if those
services have been utilized by the applicant and if not, a sufficient
description of the construction, alteration, demolition and use to enable
anyone to determine what the final appearance and use of the real estate will
be;
      (5)   Developer, if difference than owner;
      (6)   Architect.
   (B)   The application for the permit shall be submitted in conjunction with
the application for a building permit where required in
Chapter 150 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 152.15) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.16 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The application for a permit required by §
152.15 shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for action. The applicant or
anyone on his or her behalf may, by so designating on his or her application,
be present before the Commission with his or her attorney, architect,
contractor or any other person he or she may choose to have. The Commission
shall have the power to grant or deny the permit as submitted or as modified.
(1992 Code, § 152.16) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.17 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision, including any property owner of the
designated area, may appeal the decision of the Plan Commission to the City
Council, whose decision in that matter shall be final subject only to judicial
review as provided by general law.
(1992 Code, § 152.17) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.30 POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL RELATIVE TO DESIGNATED AREA.
   The City Council, by resolution of a majority of the Council present at any
regular or special meeting shall have authority:
   (A)   To make leases and subleases either as lessee or lessor of any
property, for the periods and upon the terms as the City Council shall deem
appropriate;
   (B)   To induce by contract or other consideration, the creation of
covenants or restrictions binding the land;
   (C)   To acquire by eminent domain or by other contract or conveyance of all
or any part of or interest in property so designated, and the reconstruction,
operation or transfer by the city of any property subject to any conditions
reasonable and appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
   (D)   To exercise appropriate and reasonable control of the use or
appearance of adjacent and immediate surrounding private property within public
view;
   (E)   To acquire by eminent domain or by other contract or conveyance of
immediate surrounding private property, or any part thereof or interest
therein, the alteration or clearance of which is important for the proper
preservation, reconstruction or use of the designated property;
   (F)   To cooperate, including the acceptance of gifts, contract and convey
appropriate to the purpose of this chapter by and between the city and any
other governing body or agency and by and between the city and nonprofit
organizations which have as 1 of their objects the preservation or enhancement
of buildings or areas of historic architectural or aesthetic interest.
(1992 Code, § 152.30) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.31 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; CONTENTS.
   The Plan Commission shall give written notification of any violation of this
chapter to the owner or lessor of or the trustee or other legally responsible
party for the property, stating in the notification that they have inspected
the property and have found it in violation of this chapter. They shall state
in the notification in clear precise terms a description or explanation of the
violation. The property owner, trustee, lessor, or legally responsible party
shall have 30 days in which to correct the violation or to give satisfactory
evidence that they have taken steps that will lead to correcting the violation
within a stated period of time, which time must be agreeable to the Commission
as being fair and reasonable.
(1992 Code, § 152.31) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.32 TIME LIMITATION FOR CORRECTION; REMOVAL OF VIOLATION.
   The owner, trustee, lessor or other legally responsible party shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter if after 30 days the violation has
not been corrected or is not in the process of being corrected within a
reasonable length of time or time in which correction will be made has not been
approved by the Plan Commission.
(1992 Code, § 152.32) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.33 RIGHT OF OWNER TO REQUEST REHEARING.
   The owner, lessor, trustee or legally responsible party who is deemed to be
in violation of this chapter by the Plan Commission may on his or her own
behalf or anyone on his or her behalf may request in writing to the Commission,
to be present before the Commission, with his or her attorney, architect,
contractor or other person he or she may choose to have and ask for a rehearing
by the Commission.
(1992 Code, § 152.33) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.34 APPEAL FROM DECISION DETERMINING VIOLATION.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision, including the owner, lessor, trustee
or legally responsible party of or for the property or area deemed in violation
of this chapter may appeal the decision of the Plan Commission, whose decision
in this matter shall be final subject only to judicial review as provided by
general law.
(1992 Code, § 152.34) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.35 FAIR AND RESPONSIBLE JUDGMENT IN DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Plan Commission shall use reasonable and fair judgment in
determining any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Commission to be governed by certain principles.
   (C)   The Commission and the City Council in their deliberation shall be
governed by the following principles:
      (1)   To be consistent in their judgment with the purpose of this chapter
and any master plan for the physical development of the city which the City
Council may adopt, including any area outside the area described in §
152.03 or outside the prevailing city boundaries then in existence which bears
relation to this chapter and is adjacent and immediately surrounding the area
within public view;
      (2)   To take into judgment all factors that have a bearing on the
purpose of this chapter and the master plan for the city’s development;
      (3)   To be reasonable in their judgment so as to not bring any undue
hardship to any property owner. Hardship shall be limited to present use and
shall not be deemed to extend to any new use, exploitation, development,
advantage or benefits not engaged in or enjoyed on the effective date of this
chapter;
      (4)   To be reasonable in their judgment so that the terms of compliance
with this chapter in particular would not be so excessive as to cost so as to
constitute a taking of private property without due and just compensation.
(1992 Code, § 152.35) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Each day of violation shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $750, and each day the correction has not been made will be deemed a
new violation.
(1992 Code, § 152.99) (Ord. 71276, passed 7-12-1976; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed
8-12-2002)   
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
153.01   Plats to be submitted to city
   
153.02   Recording plat before approval prohibited
   
153.03   Selling lots before approval of map, plat or subdivision prohibited
§ 153.01 PLATS TO BE SUBMITTED TO CITY.
   Any person who shall survey or plat any addition to the city, or any lands
adjoining or within the same, into lots, blocks or other subdivisions, or shall
resubdivide any block, lot, sublot or part thereof, within the city, shall
submit the map, plat or subdivision thereof to the Plan Commission and thence
to the City Council for its approval in accordance with the provisions of §§
32.40 through
32.47 of this code; and no map, plat or subdivision shall be valid, or be
admitted to record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Douglas
County, until the same has been so submitted and approved by the City Council.
If the City Council approves any map or plat of any addition or subdivision
submitted to it, as herein provided, a certificate of the approval shall be
endorsed upon the map or plat, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City
Clerk.
(1992 Code, § 153.01)
§ 153.02 RECORDING PLAT BEFORE APPROVAL PROHIBITED.
   Any person who shall, as owner of the land so surveyed or platted, or as the
agent of any owner, cause to be recorded in the Recorder’s Office of Douglas
County, any map, plat or subdivision mentioned in §
153.01 above, without having the same submitted to and approved by the City
Council before filing the same in the Recorder’s Office for record, shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 153.02)
§ 153.03 SELLING LOTS BEFORE APPROVAL OF MAP, PLAT OR SUBDIVISION PRO- HIBITED.
   Any person who as owner of the land so surveyed or platted or as the agent
of any owner shall sell, or offer for sale any lot, block subdivision or part
thereof, in any addition, division or subdivision of lands as mentioned in §
153.01 above, before the map, plat or subdivision thereof has been approved by
the City Council shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 153.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Title
   
154.03   Application and jurisdiction; compliance
   
154.04   Interpretation
   
154.05   Definitions
Plat Procedure; Requirements
   
154.15   Procedure for filing
   
154.16   Preliminary plat; filing; approval; fee
   
154.17   Final plat; filing; approval; fee
   
154.18   Agreements
Design Standards
   
154.30   Conformance to Comprehensive Plan
   
154.31   Street plan
   
154.32   Street improvements
   
154.33   Alleys
   
154.34   Easements
   
154.35   Block standards
   
154.36   Lots
   
154.37   Building setback lines
   
154.38   Parks, schools and public areas
Required Land Improvements
   
154.50   Minimum requirements for improvements prerequisite to subdivision
approval
   
154.51   Utilities design standards
   
154.52   Monuments and markers standards
   
154.53   Sidewalks
   
154.54   Landscaping
   
154.55   Soil investigations
   
154.56   Street lighting
   
154.57   Excavation, trenches and backfill
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.70   Inspection by City Engineer; subdivider to pay cost of inspection
   
154.71   Notice of violations; stop work order; appeals
   
154.72   Issuance of building permit; requirements
   
154.73   Granting of occupancy permit; requirements
   
154.74   Blasting
   
154.75   Recordation of plat only upon approval
   
154.76   Records of plats
   
154.77   Variances and exceptions
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   These regulations are adopted pursuant to Illinois Municipal Code, Article
11, Division 12, as amended, for the following purposes.
   (A)   To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth and to safeguard the interests of the subdivider, the investor and the
city.
   (B)   To provide pedestrian and vehicular access, water, sewerage and
draining systems and other improvements and facilities sufficient to serve the
proposed subdivision.
   (C)   To establish reasonable design and construction standards in order to
further the orderly and safe use of land.
   (D)   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the city and the developer.
   (E)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(1992 Code, § 154.01) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations
of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
(1992 Code, § 154.02) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.03 APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION; COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the city
or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within 1½
miles of the nearest limits of the city, except in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations. The subdivision plans and plats, proposed
improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all
respects be in full compliance with the regulations herein.
   (A)   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within
the incorporated limits of the city, or within contiguous territory not more
than 1½ miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the city, the subdivider
thereof or his or her agent shall submit both a preliminary and a final
subdivision plat to the city for its approval. The subdivision plats and all
procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with
these regulations.
   (B)   Until plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
      (1)   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land;
      (2)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale, nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or
given;
      (3)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service,
lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by
any owner or owners or his or her or their agent, or by any public service
corporation at the request of the owner or owners or his or her or their agent;
      (4)   Land subject to flooding or poor drainage. No plat will be approved
for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor
drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the lots and
streets impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements
which will make the area completely safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot
and street drainage, the subdivision may then be approved.
   (C)   All offerings or dedication of land to the city for use as streets,
highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public uses shall be
referred to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation before being
accepted by the City Council or by any other governing authority of the city.
   (D)   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger,
logical subdivision unit in relation to the city as a whole, the Plan
Commission may, before approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire
area or neighborhood, the plan to be used by the Commission as an aid in
judging the proposed plat. The City Engineer shall cooperate with the
Commission in the preparation of this plan and shall furnish the surveys and
data as may be necessary.
(1992 Code, § 154.03) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.04 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
use of land are either higher in standard or lower in standard than comparable
conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
(1992 Code, § 154.04) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily for vehicular traffic along the
side or in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting properties.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore
lines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the city.
      BUILDING. Any permanent structure designed, built, or intended for the
shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plats of the proposed subdivision, between which line and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of a
building is prohibited.
      CITY ENGINEER. The person or firm charged with the responsibility of
municipal engineering matters.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Reference to COMPREHENSIVE PLAN shall mean the
approved Comprehensive Plan of the city.
      CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way located across a block to provide
pedestrian access to adjacent streets or alleys.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having 1 open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by
the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
      FLOOD PRONE AREA. That area designated as a Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA) generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership, lease, or for building development.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along
2 substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The map showing the streets, highways and parks,
theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or
additions thereto resulting from City Council action or the approval of
subdivision plats.
      PARKWAY. A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and
whose right-of- way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character.
      PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the city.
      PLAT. A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plans for
the subdivision of land is presented and which he or she submits for approval
and intends to record in final form.
      PLAT, FINAL. The drawings and documents presented for final approval as
described in §
154.17.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The drawings and documents presented for tentative
approval as described in §
154.16.
      ROADWAY. The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for
vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
      STREET. An area which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets. The word
STREET refers to the public right-of-way and not to the roadway or paving or
other improvements within the street.
      STREET, APPROVED. Any streets, whether public or private, meeting
standards and specifications of the city.
      STREET, MAJOR. A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of the
city.
      STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
highways and major streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways
and major streets.
      STREET, MINOR. A street intended primarily as access to abutting
properties.
      STREET, PUBLIC. Any major or secondary street or minor street which is
shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated for public use.
      STREET, SECONDARY or COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance streets of
residential development and streets for circulation within the development.
      STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
public street.
      SUBDIVIDER. The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording
the plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in these regulations.
      SUBDIVIDER’S ENGINEER. The person or persons registered under the
Illinois Professional Engineering Act, 1945, as amended, whose conditions of
employment by the subdivider include responsibility for the preparation of all
specifications pertaining to the construction, alteration, rehabilitation or
repair of any real property in a subdivision.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of land into 2 or more parts.
   (B)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary. The word MAY is
permissive. The word LOT shall include the words PLOT, PIECE and PARCEL. The
phrase USED FOR shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED FOR, INTENDED
FOR, MAINTAINED FOR, and OCCUPIED FOR.
(1992 Code, § 154.05) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
PLAT PROCEDURE; REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.15 PROCEDURE FOR FILING.
   (A)   Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the city or
within 1½ miles of the corporate limits on unincorporated land, wishing to
divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for the purpose of sale or
assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other lands for
public use, shall follow the procedures and requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   Previous to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary
subdivision plan, the subdivider shall request a meeting with the Plan
Commission in order to discuss his or her plans and particular problems. At the
pre-application conference, the subdivider shall submit an Area General Plan
signed by the owner/subdivider showing contiguous and adjacent parcels owned
wholly or in part by the owner or subdivider or for which the owner or
subdivider has an option to purchase or any other interest, and the area 500
feet from the boundaries of the tract proposed to be shown on the preliminary
plat. The area general plan shall identify proposed land uses and shall show as
appropriate, the following:
      (1)   Existing zoning and the boundaries thereof;
      (2)   The city limits;
      (3)   Topography and contours at not less than 5-foot intervals; natural
features, (for example, drainage channels, flood prone area, flood hazard
boundaries);
      (4)   Location and width of existing streets, alleys and rights-of-way
within the proposed subdivision and within 500 feet of the proposed
subdivision;
      (5)   Existing and available utilities, storm and sanitary sewers;
      (6)   General street layout of the proposed subdivision;
      (7)   General drainage plan;
      (8)   Existing and proposed covenants;
      (9)   Number of lots, typical lot width and depth;
      (10)   Business, school, playground and park areas.
(1992 Code, § 154.15) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.16 PRELIMINARY PLAT; FILING; APPROVAL; FEE.
   (A)   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, which
plat shall include all of the property owned or controlled by the applicant,
which properties are adjacent to or considered to be contiguous to the
property, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as
specified below.
      (1)   Existing conditions. Topographic data required as a basis for the
preliminary plat, in division (B) below, shall include existing conditions as
follows, except when otherwise specified by the Plan Commission:
         (a)   Boundary lines;
         (b)   Easements; location, width, purpose and legal description;
         (c)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract; name or right-of-way and
location, type, width and elevation of street surfacing; any legally
established centerline elevations, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, and the
like;
         (d)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract; location, size of
sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains. If water
mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction
and distance to and the size of nearest useable facilities;
         (e)   Other conditions on the tract; water courses, marshes, rock
outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees 1-foot or more in diameter,
houses, barns, shacks and other significant features;
         (f)   Other conditions on adjacent land; approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses of adverse influences; and owners of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date, and number, and show approximate percentage of build-up,
typical lot size, and dwelling type);
         (g)   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract;
         (h)   Key plan showing location of the tract;
         (i)   Title and certificates. Present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the County Recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale north arrow;
         (j)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on the mean sea level
datum. For land that slopes less than .50%, show not less than 1-foot contours;
for land that slopes .50% to 2%, show not less than 2-foot contours; and for
land that slopes more than 2%, show not less than 5-foot contours.
      (2)   Proposed conditions. Preliminary plat shall be at a scale of 100
feet to the inch, or if the area of the subdivision is more than 200 acres, 200
feet to the inch. It shall show all existing conditions required in division
(A) herein, topographic data and shall show all proposed conditions, including
the following unless otherwise specified by the Plan Commission.
         (a)   Street; names, right-of-way and roadway widths, approximate
grades and gradients, similar data for alleys, if any.
         (b)   Other rights-of-way or easements; location, width and purpose.
         (c)   Location of utilities, including overhead lines if not shown on
other exhibits.
         (d)   Lot lines with scaled lot dimensions and total number of lots.
         (e)   Sites, if any for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry, or other non-public uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
         (f)   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public uses.
         (g)   Proposed building setback lines.
         (h)   Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot
size, acres in parks, etc., layout, numbers and dimensions of lots and blocks.
         (i)   Proposed name of the subdivision.
         (j)   Location by section, township and range.
         (k)   Name and address of the developer and name and address of owner.
         (l)   Name and address of the planner or engineer.
         (m)   Certification of title showing that applicant is land owner.
         (n)   1.   A statement that the proposed subdivision (where
contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the city.
            2.   A preliminary plan for sewer, water and storm sewers shall be
provided indicating whether the water supply is public or private; showing the
location of storm sewer drains, if required, and methods to be employed to
overcome particular problems that may be encountered with the development of
the proposed subdivision.
            3.   Where the sanitary sewage facilities are proposed to be
provided by individual septic systems, percolation tests shall be made on the
property and a report on these tests prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer. These tests shall be made at a frequency of 1 test hole
for each 5 lots or each 3 acres, whichever requires the greater number of test
borings.
         (o)   Title, scale, north point and date.
         (p)   Formal certificates. A certificate shall appear on all plats
submitted to the Plan Commission as follows:
VILLA GROVE PLAN COMMISSION
Recommended to the City Council of Villa Grove for preliminary approval,
subject to the conditions and recommendation, if any, as here attached.
   DATE                                                      
            Chairman - Plan Commission
   ATTEST:                        
         Secretary
   (B)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified shall be submitted to the City Clerk at the first regular meeting of
the City Council.
      (1)   The City Council shall, by motion, refer the preliminary plat to
the Plan Commission and shall, at the same time, instruct the City Engineer to
collaborate with the Commission in assembling plans for the design and
construction of streets and the other public improvements as are required by
these regulations or any other applicable ordinances of the city. The
Commission and the City Engineer shall review the preliminary plat for
compliance with these regulations and any applicable ordinances of the city and
the Commission shall, within 30 days from referral, unless an extension is
approved by the City Council:
         (a)   Approve or disapprove the proposed preliminary subdivision plat
and submit its written recommendations, which shall include the recommendations
of the City Engineer, to the City Council; or
         (b)   If the Plan Commission finds that changes, additions or
corrections are required on the preliminary plat, the Commission shall so
advise the subdivider in writing. The subdivider may resubmit the revised
preliminary plat to the Commission without paying an additional fee for its
consideration at the next regular meeting of the Commission. The Commission
shall at the meeting approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and submit its
recommendations in writing, which shall include the recommendations of the City
Engineer, to the City Council and the subdivider.
      (2)   If the plat is approved by the Plan Commission, the City Council
shall accept or reject the plat within 30 days after its next regular stated
meeting following the action of the Commission. The applicant and the City
Council may mutually agree to extend the 30-day period.
      (3)   The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
preliminary plat.
         (a)   Approval of a preliminary plat by the Plan Commission and City
Council is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the
layout as submitted.
         (b)   The Plan Commission and City Council may require the changes or
revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of the needs of the community
or attaining the purposes set forth in this chapter.
         (c)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a
maximum period of 1 year unless, upon application of the developer, the Plan
Commission and the City Council grant an extension. The application for the
extension shall not require an additional filing fee, or the submittal of
additional copies of the plan of subdivision.
   (C)   Fee for the approval of preliminary plats. Ten dollars for each
preliminary plat plus $1 for each lot within the proposed subdivision, with a
minimum total charge of $15. All the fees shall be payable to the city by
certified check or money order.
(1992 Code, § 154.16) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.17 FINAL PLAT; FILING; APPROVAL; FEE.
   (A)   General. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record and
develop at the time. However, the portion conforms to all requirements of these
regulations.
      (1)   Final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth on sheets not to
exceed 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be at a scale no smaller than 100 feet
to the inch. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final
plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the Plan Commission. The final plat shall show the following:
         (a)   Primary control points, approved by the City Engineer, or
descriptions and “ties” to the control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearing, and similar data on the plat shall be referred;
         (b)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements,
and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other
sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii,
arches, and central angles of all curves;
         (c)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other rights-of-
way;
         (d)   Location, dimensions, and purpose of any easement;
         (e)   Number to identify each lot or site and block;
         (f)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use with the purposes indicated thereon and of
any area to be reserved by deed or covenant for the common use of all property
owners;
         (g)   Locations and description of all survey monuments;
         (h)   Certification by a registered state land surveyor certifying to
accuracy of the survey and plat;
         (i)   Protective and/or restrictive covenants, whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the
proposed development in form for recording;
         (j)   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments
due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full;
         (k)   Proper form for the approval of the City Council, with space for
signature as follows:
   VILLA GROVE CITY COUNCIL
Approval of final plat for the                    subdivision is hereby granted
by the City Council of Villa Grove.
   DATE                        
                                  
      Mayor
   ATTEST:                               
         City Clerk
         (l)   Approval by signature of city, county and state officials
concerned with the specifications of utility installations;
         (m)   1.   Approval by signature of the Plan Commission. The approval
shall be as follows:
Approved by the Plan Commission of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois, this
        day of             , 20    .
                                      
   Chairman
   ATTEST:                                  
         Secretary
            2.   This approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way or space shown on the plat;
         (n)   A notarized statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way
and any sites for public use;
         (o)   Name of subdivision;
         (p)   Location by section, township and range;
         (q)   Title, scale, north arrow and date;
         (r)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on mean sea level datum.
For land that slopes less than .50%, show not less than 1-foot contours; for
land that slopes .50% to 2%, show not less than 2-foot contours; and for land
that slopes more than 2%, show not less than 5-foot contours;
         (s)   Other data. The other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
dedications as may be required by the Plan Commission in the enforcement of
these regulations;
         (t)   Cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved
by the City Engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to scales approved by the
Engineer and elevations shall be based on mean sea level datum;
         (u)   A subsidiary drainage plat showing; ditches, swales, storm
sewers, culverts and indicating designed discharge capacity.
   (B)   Procedure for approval of final plat.
      (1)   Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee as required in
these regulations. The application shall be submitted at least 20 days prior to
the meeting at which it is to be considered. The Clerk shall submit the
application and plat to the Plan Commission for its review and recommendations
and approval or disapproval.
      (2)   Ten copies of the final plat required for approval shall be
prepared as specified and shall be submitted to the Clerk within 1 year after
approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the approval shall become null and
void unless application for an extension of time is made to and granted by the
City Council. The extension will not require an additional fee or filing of
additional copies of the plat.
      (3)   Within 30 days after application for approval of the final plat,
the Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove it. If the Commission approves,
it shall affix upon the plat the certifying signature of its Chairperson. If it
disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the
applicant with a copy.
      (4)   Filing.
         (a)   After approval of the final plat by the Plan Commission and the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, the final plat of the
subdivision shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.
         (b)   Action must be taken by the City Council within 30 days after
the final plat and all drawings, maps and other documents required have been
submitted for its approval. The applicant and the City Council may mutually
agree to extend the 30-day period.
         (c)   Upon approval by the City Council, the subdivider shall record
the plat with the County Recorder within 3 months. If not recorded within this
time, the approval shall be null and void. Immediately after recording, the
original tracing shall be returned to the city.
   (C)   Fee for the approval of final plats. One dollar for each lot within
the subdivision plat submitted, with a minimum fee of $5.
(1992 Code, § 154.17) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.18 AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The final plat shall be approved by the Plan Commission and the City
Council before recording and the approval shall not be given until the
subdivider has complied with the requirements of this section. No building
permit shall be issued until the final plat has been recorded.
      (1)   After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may present
plans and specifications for all improvements to the City Engineer for
approval. Upon approval by the Engineer, and by all other pertinent
authorities, the subdivider may construct and install all the improvements. On
approval and certification of completion by the Engineer of the improvements
and within 1 year after approval of preliminary plat, the final plat shall be
submitted as herein provided for approval, and upon approval, shall be
recorded. If engineering plans require substantial changes from the preliminary
plat as approved, the subdivider shall revise and resubmit the preliminary
plat, prior to constructing the improvements, for re-approval and the
resubmission shall not require the payment of additional fees.
      (2)   In lieu of actual construction of the improvements, as provided in
division (A)(1) above, the subdivider may post with the City Clerk, cash, or a
surety bond with securities acceptable to the Commission and the City Council
running to the city, in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of the
improvements as estimated by the Engineer. Upon acceptance of the bond,
approval of plans and specifications for all improvements by the Engineer, and
approval by the Commission and City Council of the final plat, the plat may
then be recorded.
   (B)   The subdivider shall in all cases be responsible for the maintenance
of all improvements for 1 year following their acceptance by the city and shall
guarantee the maintenance by posting cash or surety bond with the sureties
approved by the Commission and the City Council in the amount of 20% of the
cost of the improvements. The fulfillment of this requirement is a condition to
approval of the final plat and is in addition to the requirement of division
(A) above.
(1992 Code, § 154.18) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.30 CONFORMANCE TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade and location of all highway, streets, alleys, crosswalks,
easements, sites for parks, playgrounds and schools, or other land to be
dedicated for public use, shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the city,
approved by the Plan Commission and adopted by the City Council and other
responsible governmental bodies of the city.
(1992 Code, § 154.30) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.31 STREET PLAN.
   (A)   All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety
and in their relation to proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets.
   (B)   Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted
by the Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impractical.
   (C)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed highway
or major thoroughfare, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the Commission may
require marginal access streets; double frontage with screen planting contained
in a non-access reservation at least 10 feet wide, along the rear property
line; deep lots with rear service alleys, or the other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the
Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
the railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. The distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach and future
grade separations.
   (F)   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or
alleys shall be prohibited.
   (G)   All street intersections and confluences should be constructed in a
manner to insure safe traffic flow.
   (H)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
   (I)   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure clear sight distances (see division (Q) below, Table of
Minimum Standards).
   (J)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
   (K)   Street right-of-way widths shall be as specified in division (Q)
below, Table of Minimum Standards.
   (L)   Half-streets shall be prohibited with the following exception.
Wherever an existing half- street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the
other half of the street shall be platted within the tract.
   (M) Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac), designed to be so permanently, shall not
be longer than 500 feet from the intersection of the origin through the center
of the circle of the end of the right-of-way, and shall be provided at the
closed end with a paved turnaround having an outside pavement diameter of at
least 90 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 120 feet.
   (N)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected
wherever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission and City Council.
   (O)   Street gradients and horizontal curves shall be as specified in the
Table of Minimum Standards.
   (P)   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the
first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots.
   (Q)   The table of minimum standards is as follows.
TABLE OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
       Right- Pavement Radius of  Maximum   Minimum   Clear
Street of-Way Width    Horizontal Gradient  Gradient  Sight     Pavement
       Width  (feet)*  Curves     (Percent) (Percent) Distance  Specifications
       (feet)          (feet)                         (feet)
TABLE OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
           Right- Pavement Radius of  Maximum   Minimum   Clear
Street     of-Way Width    Horizontal Gradient  Gradient  Sight    Pavement Specifications
           Width  (feet)*  Curves     (Percent) (Percent) Distance
           (feet)          (feet)                         (feet)
                                                                   Only portland cement concrete as outlined in §
Major      100    48**     500        5         0.5       500      154.32(B). Curbs and gutters required as per specifications in §
                                                                   154.32(C).
                                                                   Minimum portland cement concrete as outlined in §
Collector  80     40       400        5         0.5       400      154.32(B); combination curbs and gutters required as per
                                                                   specifications in §
                                                                   154.32(C).
Minor      60     28       100        6         0.5       200      See *** below
Cul-de-sac 60     28       200        6         0.5       200      See *** below
Marginal                                                           Only portland cement concrete as outlined in §
access     40     24       200        6         0.5       200      154.32(B). Curbs and gutters required as per specifications in §
                                                                   154.32(C).
In
Business                                                           Only portland cement concrete as outlined in §
and        80-100 54       500        2         0.5       500      154.32(B). Curbs and gutters required as per specifications in §
Industrial                                                         154.32(C).
Districts
* Pavement widths are measured face to face of curb where curb and gutters are used.
** Or 2 24-foot roadways, divided by a median strip.
*** Any subdivision having an average density per acre of more than 3.5 dwelling units shall provide portland cement concrete streets
or bituminous pavement in accordance with the standards outlined in §
154.32. Combination curbs and gutters shall be provided in accordance with §
154.32. Any subdivision having an average density per acre of 3.5 dwelling units or less shall provide, at minimum, oil and chip
streets in accordance with the standards outlined in §
154.32.
 
(1992 Code, § 154.31) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.32 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Street improvements shall be in accordance with the Table of Minimum
Standards, as set forth in §
154.31(Q).
   (B)   Wherever ground is encountered which, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, is unstable either before preparation of detailed plans or during the
construction phase of the proposed improvements, no paving for public or
private streets shall be placed thereon until the unstable materials shall be
removed in their entirety and shall be replaced with satisfactory material
which shall be adequately compacted or made useable all in accordance with
recommendations by the Engineer.
      (1)   Streets shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of this
Code, the Comprehensive Plan and the “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction.”
      (2)   Portland or equal quality cement concrete pavement shall conform to
the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” with the
following exceptions:
         (a)   The maximum slump of portland cement concrete shall be 4 inches.
         (b)   Portland cement concrete shall contain a minimum of 6 sacks of
cement per cubic yard.
         (c)   Alternate mix designs for portland cement concrete may be
approved by the City Engineer, if requested in writing prior to construction.
         (d)   Beams shall be taken at a minimum rate of 2 per day. A modulus
of rupture of not less than 650 psi shall be required on the fourteenth day
following the pour in accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction.”
         (e)   The subdivider shall protect the pavement against all traffic,
including that of his or her own employees or other workers on the site, until
test specimens have attained a flexural strength of 650 psi when tested in
accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
         (f)   Portland cement concrete shall be constructed to a strength and
thickness greater than or equal to 6 inches (unreinforced) for minor streets
and 7 inches (unreinforced) for collector, business, commercial, marginal
access, and industrial streets. If pavement strength or thickness is deficient,
the subdivider or his or her agents shall take remedial action, the action to
be selected from the following options:
            1.   Removal and replacement of the deficient pavement sections to
the planned thickness and/or strength.
            2.   Bituminous concrete overlay of the pavement in lengths not
less than 1 block or 500 feet, whichever is less. Overlay thickness shall be
specified by the City Engineer. Pavement deficiencies in thickness and/or
strength in excess of 10% shall be removed and replaced to planned thickness
and/or strength.
         (g)   Pavement cores shall be taken at the rate of 1 per 250 feet per
lane at locations designated by the City Engineer. If modulus of rupture tests
do not meet the minimum requirements set forth in this section, the subdivider
shall furnish the results of compressive strength tests of pavement cores.
         (h)   Joints in all local residential streets shall be constructed in
accordance with Standard No. BLR-10, Bureau of Local Road, State Department of
Transportation, with the following exceptions:
            1.   Sawed longitudinal joints shall be constructed with No. 4
deformed bars 2-feet, 6-inches long at 2-feet, 6-inch centers.
            2.   Integral curb details at sidewalks and crosswalks shall
conform to the sidewalk requirements set forth in this section.
            3.   Expansion joints shall be constructed in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction” using ¾-inch dowel
bars, 18-inches long at 12-inch centers, coated with heavy grease, pinch stop
with 1-inch minimum taper.
         (i)   Joints in residential streets, business, commercial, and
industrial streets shall conform to “Highway Standards,” State Department of
Transportation.
      (3)   All joints in portland cement concrete pavements shall be filled in
accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
      (4)   Uncontrolled cracking which appears in portland cement concrete
pavement prior to approval by the City Engineer shall be cleaned and filled in
accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
      (5)   Bituminous pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
         (a)   Minimum bituminous pavement thickness for all minor streets
shall be as follows:
            Bituminous Surface Course
            3-inch bituminous concrete surface course
            Base Course
            5-inch bituminous aggregate mixture or
            8-inch aggregate base course type B
Materials which according to the “Pavement Design Manual,” State of Illinois,
Bureau of Local Roads, are of equal strength to those above, may be used, if
approved by the City Engineer.
         (b)   Minimum bituminous pavement thickness for collector streets, and
business, commercial and industrial streets, shall be as follows:
            Bituminous Surface Course
            1½-inch bituminous concrete surface course and 1½-inch bituminous
concrete binder course - total 3 inches
            Base Course
            8-inch bituminous aggregate mixture or
            10-inch aggregate base course, type B
Materials which according to the “Pavement Design Manual,” State of Illinois,
Bureau of Local Roads, are of equal strength to those above, may be used, if
approved by the City Engineer.
         (c)   Tests of the surface and base courses shall meet the
requirements set forth in the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction,” except that:
            1.   Tests shall be taken at a rate of 1 per 250 feet per lane at
locations designated by the City Engineer.
            2.   Field cement content tests and sieve analysis tests shall be
taken at a rate of 1 per 500 feet per lane when cement aggregate mixture is
used.
         (d)   Cores shall be taken at locations specified by the City Engineer
at a rate of 1 per 250 feet per lane. At the request of the Engineer, the
subdivider shall cause Marshall Stability Density tests to be performed on the
cores and shall furnish the results of the tests to the Engineer.
         (e)   1.   Bituminous pavement shall be constructed to a strength and
thickness greater than or equal to that required by this section and approved
in the engineering plans and specifications. If pavement strength or thickness
is deficient, the subdivider or his or her agents shall have the following
options:
               a.   Removal and replacement of the deficient pavement sections
to the planned thickness and/or strength.
               b.   Class I overlay of the pavement to a thickness to be
approved by the City Engineer.
            2.   Pavement deficiencies in thickness and/or strength in excess
of 10% shall be removed and replaced to planned thickness and/or strength.
         (f)   Cracks shall be cleaned and sealed in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
      (6)   Oil and chip pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
         (a)   Oil and chip surfaced streets shall be constructed over a type B
aggregate base course no less than 8 inches thick.
         (b)   Oil and chip surface shall be type A-3 in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
   (C)   Combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete of the roll, vertical face or battered type, having an overall width
of not less than 18 inches. Concrete used for curb and gutter construction
shall have a minimum 28 day compressive strength of 3500 psi and shall contain
not less than 4% nor more than 7% entrained air. Slump shall be not less than 2
inches nor more than 4 inches. Curb and gutter of the roll type shall have a
curb exposure of not less than 3 inches. Curb and gutter of the vertical face
or battered type shall have a curb exposure of not less than 6 inches nor more
than 8 inches. Elevations for curbs and gutters shall be approved by the City
Engineer. Combination curbs and gutters shall be provided on all streets in the
subdivision where storm sewers are used.
   (D)   All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius of not
less than 20 feet except not less than 25 feet at major street intersections.
In industrial and commercial areas the radius of curb returns shall be not less
than 25 feet and shall be increased to 30 feet at major intersections.
   (E)   Street signs as per city specifications shall be installed at each
intersection and shall indicate the street names as shown on the final plat.
Street signs shall be set as directed by the City Engineer.
   (F)   The Plan Commission may make recommendations as to variations and
modifications of the foregoing provisions in this section to the City Council
which may in turn approve the recommendations. However, a two-third vote of the
City Council shall be required for approval.
(1992 Code, § 154.32) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.33 ALLEYS.
   (A)   In commercial, business and industrial districts, definite and assured
provisions shall be made for service access such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent and adequate for the uses proposed. If in the
opinion of the Plan Commission the facilities are not adequate, the Plan
Commission may permit or require the dedication and improvement of a public
alley.
   (B)   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where
deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
   (C)   The width of an alley, where permitted or required, shall be 20 feet
in residential areas, and 30 feet in commercial, business and industrial
districts.
   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided.
   (E)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end as
determined by the Plan Commission.
   (F)   The minimum right-of-way width of all alleys shall be paved. Alleys
shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum standards for street
construction as set forth in §
154.32, with the exception that inverted crowns will be permitted.
(1992 Code, § 154.33) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.34 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
   (B)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
   (C)   Where subdivisions and/or parcels abut a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, storm water easements or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of the water course shall be provided. The easement
shall have an adequate width approved by the City Engineer.
(1992 Code, § 154.34) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.35 BLOCK STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulations, control and safety of
street traffic;
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide shall be required
where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission to provide for pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation
and other community facilities.
   (D)   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use
shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas
to provide for parking, loading docks, and other the facilities.
(1992 Code, § 154.35) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.36 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the
Zoning Code. Residential lots not served by public sanitary sewers shall be not
less than 100 feet wide at the building line and not less than 20,000 square
feet in area. Where sanitary sewers and sewage treatment is provided, a lot
shall be not less than 80 feet wide and not less than 9,600 square feet in
area. Where both sanitary sewers and sewage treatment and water supply is
provided,
Chapter 155 herein shall govern.
   (C)   Lots abutting a water course, drainage way, channel or stream shall
have a minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site
and to afford the minimum useable area required in this chapter or the Zoning
Code for front, side and rear yards.
   (D)   All corner lots shall have a minimum width of 85 feet and contain not
less than 10,000 square feet in area. A minimum building setback line shall be
maintained on both streets.
   (E)   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
   (F)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways
or primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, and across
which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the
rear lot lines of lots abutting the highways and major thoroughfares.
   (G)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines, unless otherwise approved by the Plan Commission.
(1992 Code, § 154.36) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.37 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall
conform to the front yard provisions of the Zoning Code, except that in no case
shall the building setback line be less than 25 feet from the front property
line.
(1992 Code, § 154.37) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.38 PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   Whenever the reasonable requirement provided by the Comprehensive Plan
indicates the necessity for providing for a school site, park site, or other
public lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval has been
requested, and no provision has been made thereof, the governing authorities
may require that land be designated for the public purpose before approving the
plat. Whenever a final plat subdivision, or part thereof, has been approved by
the governing authorities as complying with the Comprehensive Plan and there is
designated therein a school site, park site or other public land, the governing
authorities having jurisdiction of the use, be it a school board, park board or
other authority, shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence
proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within 1 year from the date of
approval of the plat; and if it does not do so within the period of 1 year, the
land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner
consistent with these regulations including the Comprehensive Plan and the
Zoning Code.
   (B)   In subdividing any land within the city or within 1½ miles of the
corporate limits, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as
tree growth, water courses, historic spots, or similar conditions which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the proposed development.
(1992 Code, § 154.38) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.50 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS PREREQUISITE TO SUB- DIVISION
APPROVAL.
   No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Plan Commission without the
subdivider submitting a statement signed by the City Engineer certifying that
the improvements described in the subdivider’s plans and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of this chapter and any
applicable ordinances of the city.
(1992 Code, § 154.50) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.51 UTILITIES DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   All residential, commercial, industrial and community facilities,
structures or buildings shall be served by a complete system of sanitary sewer
facilities, and the system shall be installed in accordance with the “Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois” and the rules and
regulations of the city.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the
regulations and specifications of the city. No oxidation ponds, seepage lagoons
or holding lagoons will be constructed except upon specific approval of the
City Engineer. Sanitary and storm sewers shall not be combined. Sanitary sewers
shall have a minimum inside diameter of 8 inches and shall be constructed of
vitrified clay pipe or cement asbestos pipe or of any acceptable substitute
material which has been approved by the Engineer. Sewer service stubs, having
an internal diameter of not less than 4 inches, shall be installed to serve
each structure prior to the construction of street pavements.
      (3)   Subdivider will extend sanitary sewer lines to the nearest city
facility.
      (4)   All sanitary lines with 2 or more services shall be terminated with
a manhole.
      (5)   Sewers may be placed only in public rights-of-way or in easements,
including easements in private streets. If the sewers cross beneath existing or
proposed pavement, all trenches caused thereby will be filled and properly
compacted to 90% maximum density at optimum moisture as indicated by standard
Proctor test or modified AASHO requirement 180-57.
   (B)   Storm water sewerage. There shall be provided a storm water sewerage
or surface drainage system to adequately serve the area being platted.
      (1)   Any subdivision having an average density per acre of more than 3½
dwelling units shall provide an underground storm sewer system installed in
accordance with “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction
in Illinois,” and consideration should be given to the following:
         (a)   The recommendations of the Plan Commission and the City
Engineer;
         (b)   The volume and frequency of water to be handled;
         (c)   Utilization of existing water courses.
      (2)   Any subdivision having an average density per acre of 3½ dwelling
units or less may utilize ditches, swales and culverts in accordance with the
following standards:
         (a)   With grades to 4%, ditches may have sod bottom and banks;
         (b)   With grades from 4% to 8%, ditches must have ditch checks;
         (c)   With greater than 8% grades, ditches must have rip-rap or be
paved;
         (d)   Culverts must be provided at all street or driveway
intersections sized to eliminate flooding or ponding of water, and with a
minimum diameter of 12 inches or as approved by the City Engineer. Curbs and
gutters will not be required in subdivision if ditches and swales are used in
accordance with this division (B)(2).
      (3)   In any subdivision where multiple family dwellings and/or business,
industrial or commercial establishments are planned, the subdivider or the
subdivider’s engineer will provide plans and specifications of the storm
drainage plan with both the preliminary plat and final subdivision plat
submitted to the city for approval under §
154.03(A).
   (C)   Water supply.
      (1)   All residential, commercial, industrial, and community facilities,
buildings or structures shall be served by complete water supply and
distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the State Department of Public Health and the rules and
regulations of the city.
      (2)   Water distribution facilities shall include pipe, fittings,
hydrants, valves, valve vaults, valve boxes, water service and other needful
appurtenances. Water mains shall have a minimum internal diameter of 6 inches
and shall be arranged so as to avoid dead ends wherever possible. If dead ends
cannot be avoided, a flushing assembly shall be installed. Fire hydrants with
shut off valves shall be installed on mains of a minimum internal diameter of 6
inches throughout the entire system at intervals that the distance between any
structure within the subdivision and a fire hydrant shall not exceed 250 feet.
Water service connections shall be provided to serve each structure in the
subdivision and shall be constructed on type K copper, cement asbestos, or cast
iron pipe, or of plastic pipe approved by the Engineer, having a minimum
internal diameter of 3/4 inch. The service shall be equipped with all necessary
fittings and shall be installed before roadway pavement is constructed. Gate
valves with valve boxes or valve vaults shall be installed on the water
distribution system at appropriate intervals.
      (3)   Water mains shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or cement
asbestos pipe or of other materials approved by the Engineer. If cast iron pipe
is used, the pipe shall have either mechanical, approved double-sealing single-
gasket, or lead- caulked type joints. All fittings shall have corresponding
joints of the above type. All materials used for the water distribution system
shall conform to the applicable specifications of the American Waterworks
Association or the American Standard Association.
      (4)   Water mains may be placed only in public rights-of-way or in
easements, including easements in private streets. If constructed beneath
proposed or existing pavement, all trenches caused thereby shall be backfilled
and properly compacted to 90% maximum density at optimum moisture as indicated
by standard Proctor test or modified AASHO requirement 180-57.
   (D)   Conditions relating to installation of utilities. In all cases where
private central sanitary sewer systems are to be used, the developer shall
secure the necessary permits for installation and operation of the system.
Subdivider shall submit to the Engineer 2 copies of “as built” plans and
profiles showing the locations of utilities, (gas, water, electric, telephone,
and the like) within public rights- of-way or easements. In flood prone areas,
proposed public utilities shall be shown on a utility plan and shall be located
or elevated so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage. All public utility
lines for telephone and electric service shall be placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area. The conduits or cables shall be placed within
easements or dedicated public ways, in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so
as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(1992 Code, § 154.51) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978; Am. Ord. 012797A, passed
1-27-1997)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.52 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the
outside boundary but no further than one-quarter mile apart. The monuments
shall be of concrete, not less than 6 inches in diameter and 36 inches deep,
with a center copper dowel 3 inches long cast in place. Iron pipe or steel bars
not less than ½ inch in diameter and 24 inches long shall be set at the
intersection of street center lines and at all corners of lots.
   (B)   The monuments and markers shall be set level with the finished grade.
(1992 Code, § 154.52) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.53 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be provided in the following areas.
   (A)   Subdivisions or portions of subdivisions zoned for industrial,
commercial, and business establishments shall provide concrete sidewalks 5
inches thick and a minimum of 5 feet wide.
   (B)   Any subdivision having an average density per acre of more than 3½
dwelling units shall provide sidewalks on each side of each street that are 4
inches thick and 4 feet wide and located one foot from the property line. The
sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete and have a minimum
28-day compressive strength of 3500 psi. Sidewalks shall contain not less than
4% nor more than 7% entrained air. Slump shall be not less than 2 inches or
more than 4 inches. Elevation for sidewalks shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
   (C)   Any subdivision having any average density per acre of 3½ dwelling
units or less shall not be required to provide sidewalks.
   (D)   Sidewalks which cross driveways or alleys shall be 6 inches thick and
reinforced with wire mesh.
(1992 Code, § 154.53) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.54 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   All unpaved areas within the street rights- of-way shall be seeded or
sodded. Before the release of the 12-month maintenance bond can be recommended
by the City Engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of the road pavement
and the right-of-way line must support an adequate mat of grass. Provisions
shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.
   (B)   The planting of the following varieties of trees shall be prohibited:
Soft Maple     (Acer dasycarpum) In variety
Poplar         (Populus)         All varieties
Willow         (Salix)           All varieties
Box Elder      (Acer Negundo)    All varieties
Catalpa        (Catalpa)         All varieties
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus)       All varieties
Mountain Ash   (Sorbus)          All varieties
Mulberry       (Morus Alba)      In varieties
 
(1992 Code, § 154.54) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.55 SOIL INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   If the subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of the questionable material, the
owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of a
competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations.
   (B)   Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing laboratory
shall be filed with the Engineer.
   (C)   The Engineer shall have no liability for costs connected with the
tests, borings or interpretations of results of the work.
(1992 Code, § 154.55) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.56 STREET LIGHTING.
   (A)   Any subdivision having an average density per acre of more than 2.9
dwelling units shall provide street lights in accordance with the standards and
requirements established by the City Council.
   (B)   Any subdivision having an average density per acre of 2.9 dwelling
units or less shall not be required to provide street lights.
   (C)   Any subdivision platted, zoned, planned or used for the development of
business, commercial, industrial or multiple family dwelling units shall
provide street lights in accordance with the standards and requirements
established by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 154.56) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.57 EXCAVATION, TRENCHES AND BACKFILL.
   Any trenches, excavations or underground improvements shall be backfilled
with screened aggregates of the character as to prevent sinking and undermining
of surface improvements such as streets, curbs and sidewalks.
(1992 Code, § 154.57) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.70 INSPECTION BY CITY ENGINEER; SUBDIVIDER TO PAY COST OF INSPEC- TION.
   (A)   All public improvements proposed to be made according to these
regulations shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer or a duly designated deputy.
   (B)   During the course of construction of the improvements, the subdivider
shall be required to notify the Engineer 48 hours before each of the following
operations in order that the Engineer or a duly designated deputy may make
required inspections:
      (1)   Before base material is deposited in place for inspection of all
street subgrades;
      (2)   Before bituminous topping is placed on the base material, for
inspection of the base construction;
      (3)   Before any backfilling operations whatsoever following the
installation of water, sanitary or storm sewers or any other underground public
improvements.
   (C)   The subdivider shall pay the cost of all inspection upon being billed
by the city. The fee shall be established from time to time by the City
Council.
(1992 Code, § 154.70) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.71 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; STOP WORK ORDER; APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall, by registered mail, serve a written notice of
violation and order upon any person responsible, in whole or in part, for the
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, or removal of public
improvements, in violation of engineering plans and specifications approved
pursuant to these regulations, or in violation of any permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter, or otherwise in violation of these regulations. The
order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and
the abatement of the violation.
   (B)   Upon notice from the Engineer that work on any public improvements is
being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of these regulations or of this
chapter or is being prosecuted in an unsafe or dangerous manner, the work shall
be immediately stopped. The notice stopping work, a stop-work order, shall be
in writing and shall be served upon or otherwise given to the subdivider, or
the subdivider’s engineer, or to any person in charge of or performing work on
public improvements in the subdivisions, or to an agent of any of the
foregoing. The order shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed. No person shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop-work order, except the work as is directed to be performed to remove a
violation or dangerous or unsafe condition, as provided in the order.
   (C)   The subdivider, subdivider’s engineer, any person in charge of or
performing work on public improvements in the subdivision may appeal to the
Plan Commission from a decision of the Engineer issuing a notice of violation
or stop-work order pursuant to these regulations. The appeal shall be in
writing setting forth the reasons for the appeal and shall be filed with the
City Clerk within 10 days after receipt of the notice or stop-work order. The
Commission shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, not more than 20
days following the receipt of the appeal by the Clerk. The filing of an appeal
shall not operate as a stay of a notice of violation or stop-work order.
(1992 Code, § 154.71) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.72 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.
   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or any lot
within a subdivision as defined herein, which has been approved for platting or
replatting, until all requirements have been fully complied with.
(1992 Code, § 154.72) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.73 GRANTING OF OCCUPANCY PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.
   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use
of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or replatting until
required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the
property and until roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots have
been constructed or are in the course of construction.
(1992 Code, § 154.73) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.74 BLASTING.
   No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision
until appropriate city authorities have been notified and the appropriate city
regulations complied with.
(1992 Code, § 154.74) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.75 RECORDATION OF PLAT ONLY UPON APPROVAL.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the County
Recorder’s Office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the
manner prescribed herein.
(1992 Code, § 154.75) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.76 RECORDS OF PLATS.
   All of the plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and
approved, as provided in these regulations, shall be copied upon a book of
plats of the city and shall be filed and kept by the city among the records of
the city.
(1992 Code, § 154.76) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.77 VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The Plan Commission may recommend variations from these requirements in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan. Requests
for the variations shall be made in writing to the Commission by the
subdivider. The recommendations of the Commission shall be communicated to the
City Council who may then approve variations from these regulations in specific
cases which, in their opinion, do not affect the general plan or the spirit of
these regulations.
(1992 Code, § 154.74) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $750 for each offense. Each day that a violation shall exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, § 154.99) (Ord. 061278, passed 6-12-1978; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed
8-12-2002)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Interpretation; purpose
   
155.003   Compliance required
   
155.004   Definitions
Zoning Districts; Zoning Map
   
155.015   District classifications
   
155.016   Zoning maps
   
155.017   Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways and railroads
   
155.018   Boundary lines
   
155.019   New or annexed land
Agricultural Districts
   
155.030   A-1 Agricultural District
Residential Districts
   
155.040   Purpose
   
155.041   R-1 One-Family Dwelling Districts
   
155.042   R-2 General Residence District
Business Districts
   
155.050   Purpose
   
155.051   B-1 Limited Retail Business District
   
155.052   B-2 General Retail Service and Wholesale Business District
Manufacturing Districts
   
155.060   Purpose
   
155.061   M-1 Manufacturing District
Flood Plain District
   
155.070   F-1 Flood Plain District
Mobile Home Park District
   
155.080   Purpose
   
155.081   Definitions
   
155.082   Development plan; contents; approval
   
155.083   Use regulations
   
155.084   Community buildings regulations
   
155.085   Water supply
   
155.086   Sewage disposal
   
155.087   Mobile homes; location where permitted; conformance to surrounding
neighborhood; existing mobile homes
   
155.088   Trailers; where permitted
   
155.089   Mobile homes and trailers as nonresidential structures
   
155.090   Compliance required
   
155.091   Parking; storage of mobile home
   
155.092   Tiedowns
   
155.093   Rezoning of unused mobile home park
   
155.094   Moving mobile homes
   
155.095   Management; maintenance of mobile home parks
   
155.096   Licensing of mobile home parks
   
155.097   Parking regulations
   
155.098   Sign regulations
   
155.099   Building Official; responsibility
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
   
155.110   Scope of requirements
   
155.111   Enlargements, extensions; alterations
   
155.112   Abandonment of use
   
155.113   Ordinary repairs and maintenance permitted
   
155.114   Applicability of subchapter; exceptions
Special Uses
   
155.125   Purpose
   
155.126   Authority
   
155.127   Conditions of approval
   
155.128   Procedure
Accessory Uses and Buildings
   
155.140   General regulations
   
155.141   Location
   
155.142   Erection prior to establishment of main building prohibited
Signs
   
155.150   Signs permitted in certain districts
   
155.151   Fees to be paid before issuance of permit
Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities
   
155.160   Purpose
   
155.161   Parking and loading; general requirements
   
155.162   Use of parking facilities
   
155.163   Joint parking facilities
   
155.164   Control of off-street facilities
   
155.165   Permitted districts for accessory parking
   
155.166   Nonresidential parking in residential districts
   
155.167   Design and maintenance
   
155.168   Special use public parking areas
   
155.169   Loading; design standards
   
155.170   Location of parking areas; extent of control
   
155.171   Schedule of parking requirements
   
155.172   Off-street loading and unloading facilities
Board of Appeals
   
155.185   Establishment; membership
   
155.186   Meetings
   
155.187   Jurisdiction
   
155.188   Appeal and review
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.200   Commission of Public Works to enforce Zoning Code
   
155.201   Occupancy permits
   
155.202   Plats
   
155.203   Presentation to City Council of recommendations or no recommendations
of Plan Commission to City Council
   
155.204   Changes and amendments
   
155.205   Fees
Standards for Solar Energy Systems
   
155.215   Definitions
   
155.216   Building permit requirements and fees
   
155.217   Setback requirements
   
155.218   Height requirements
   
155.219   Other requirements
   
155.220   Design standards
   
155.221   Obligated airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA
   
155.222   Approved solar components
   
155.223   Compliance with Building Code
   
155.224   Compliance with State Electric Code
   
155.225   Compliance with State Plumbing Code
   
155.226   Compliance with State Energy Code
   
155.227   Utility notification
   
155.228   Principal uses
   
155.229   Rooftop gardens permitted
   
155.230   Ground-mount gardens
   
155.231   Stormwater
   
155.232   Interconnection
   
155.233   Other standards
   
155.234   Liability insurance and indemnification
Large/Commercial Storage Containers
   
155.250   General regulations for shipping container storage units
   
155.251   Permanent use
   
155.252   Temporary use
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Code of the City
of Villa Grove, Illinois, of 1969.
(1992 Code, § 155.001) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.002 INTERPRETATION; PURPOSE.
   It is not intended by the Zoning Code to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way, impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or any applicable
ordinance of the city relating to the use of buildings or premises, now in
force and effect in relation thereto; nor is it intended by the Zoning Code to
interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties. However, where the Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises than are imposed or required by the
existing provision of law, ordinance, rules, regulations, permits, easements,
covenants or agreements, the provisions of the Zoning Code shall control.
(1992 Code, § 155.002) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.003 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Compliance with regulations, except as provided by the Zoning Code and
except after a building permit shall have been issued by the appropriate
authority which permit shall state that the proposed building or use of land
complies with all the provisions of the Zoning Code, it shall be unlawful
within the corporate limits of the city and the surrounding 1½-mile
jurisdictional area:
   (A)   To establish any use of a building or land either by itself or in
addition to another use;
   (B)   To excavate for or build any foundation;
   (C)   To expand, change or re-establish any nonconforming use;
   (D)   To erect or establish a new building or part thereof, except signs of
the class permitted in the “R-1" District;
   (E)   To rebuild, structurally alter, add to, enlarge or relocate any
building or part thereof;
   (F)   To reduce the yard space or plot area required for a building, or to
include any yard space or plot area as that required for an adjoining building;
and
   (G)   To erect more than 1 main building on 1 lot.
(1992 Code, § 155.003) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the Zoning Code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE. A subordinate building or use which is located on
the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of the
building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. An ACCESSORY USE
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A children’s playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
      (2)   A garage, shed, carport or building for domestic storage;
      (3)   Incinerators incidental to residential use;
      (4)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless the storage is excluded by the
district regulations;
      (5)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities,
on the same lot or parcel of ground with the activities, unless the storage is
excluded by the district regulations;
      (6)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities;
      (7)   Signs as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated
herein;
      (8)   Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines,
their supports and incidental equipment;
      (9)   Private swimming pools;
         (10)   Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building
is a part of the wall of the main building or where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner as by a roof, the
accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building.
   ACREAGE. Any tract or parcel of land which has not been subdivided and
platted.
   AGRICULTURE. All of the growing of crops in the open and the raising and
feeding of livestock and poultry, including farming, farm buildings and farm
dwellings; truck gardens, flower gardens, apiaries, mushroom growing,
nurseries, orchards, forestry, dairying, greenhouses and commercial vegetables.
   ALLEY. A public way not more than 30 feet wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for
each apartment.
   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. A building or portion thereof where automobiles are
washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower or steam-cleaning device.
   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (SELF-SERVICE). A building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing more than 2 automobiles, using self-service mechanical
devices.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and
motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of
automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises and
including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including
major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no chain
conveyor, blower or steam-cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing,
sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of
a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a PUBLIC GARAGE.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any place where 2 or more motor vehicles not in
running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of the motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles or merchandise.
   BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half of
its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement
shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display official court
or public office notices or signs advertising the sale or lease of the premises
on which the sign is located.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the city.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are
provided for compensation to 4 or more persons, but not more than twelve, who
are not members of the keeper’s family.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or
streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or
shore lines of waterways or a corporate boundary line of the city.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements have been complied with.
   BUILDING. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to
the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows, or openings;
and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of
persons, animals, or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally
accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, and other similar structures are
not considered as buildings. The word BUILDING shall include the word
STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or
its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set
back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. Whenever the term BUILDING OFFICIAL is used, it shall
mean the Building Official of the city, appointed by the Mayor and City Council
or his or her duly appointed representative.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in the Zoning Code.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. A legally existing building which fails to comply
with the regulations set forth in the Zoning Code applicable to the district in
which the building is located.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main use of the
zoning lot on which it is situated.
   BULK. The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of
buildings and other structures, as to size; height; coverage; shape; location
of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center line of streets, to
other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures; and to
all open spaces relating to the building or structure.
   CARPORT. A roofed-over area attached to the principal building for vehicle
storage which may be open on 3 sides.
   CELLAR. A cellar is a story having more than one-half of its height below
the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurements.
   CITY. The City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE.
      (1)   An association of persons for some common purpose which is jointly
supported and meets periodically, but not including groups organized primarily
to render services which are customarily carried on as a business.
      (2)   It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on the premises
provided that adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available.
The sale of alcoholic beverages to the members and their guests may be allowed
in conjunction with the operation of a dining room for the purpose of serving
food and meals, though the beverages may be served in a separate room or rooms,
and provided that the sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the
applicable federal, state and city laws.
   CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. An establishment where patients are
admitted for special study and treatment by 2 or more licensed physicians and
their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
   COMMISSION. The Villa Grove Plan Commission.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of the front. Where a building faces on more than 1
street, the CURB LEVEL shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the
center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building
shall be considered the CURB LEVEL.
   DISTRICT or ZONE. A section of the territorial jurisdictional area of the
city for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size and
intensity of use of buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are
established by these standards.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer
or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-
family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a residential structure or apartment
hotel, designed for occupancy by 1 family, for living and sleeping purposes.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy
by 1 family and entirely separated from any other dwelling by space.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or altered to provide dwelling
units for occupancy by 2 families.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed or altered
for occupancy by 3 or more families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, ROW (PARTY WALL). A row of 2 to 8 attached, one-family, party-wall
dwellings, not more than 2½ stories in height, nor more than 2 rooms in depth
measured from the building line.
   DWELLING GROUP. Two or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on 1 zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior
college, college or university, other than trade or business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a
group of not more than 5 persons (excluding servants) who need not be related
by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common
household, but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
   FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on 1 side of a street between the
nearest intersecting streets or between a street and a right-of-way, waterways
or other similar barrier.
   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of 3
or more passenger motor buses or motor coaches used in public transportation,
including school buses.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory, building or portion of the principal
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger automobiles of the occupants of the premises, and 1 truck of not more
than 1½ ton capacity.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and commercial vehicles
exceeding 1½ ton capacity.
   GARAGE, TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles
exceeding 1½ ton capacity.
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same premises with the principal building, for use by temporary guests of
the occupants of the premises. The quarters shall have no kitchen facilities
nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof; and provided that no article is sold or offered for sale
except such as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediately
family. Business conducted primarily for online goods or services, in which
inventory is not routinely kept at the dwelling and where no traffic is
increased for such receipt or delivery, shall be deemed to be a home
occupation. Hospitals, barber shops, beauty parlors, dress shops, millinery
shops, animal hospitals, kennels, among others, shall not be deemed to be home
occupations.   
   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution open to the public in which patients
or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of
contagious diseases or incurable patients.
   HOTEL, APARTMENT. A building containing dwelling units or individual guest
rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor service
may be provided but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building in which more than 5 rooms or suites are reserved
to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary guests.
   JUNK YARD. Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses
taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which 4 or more domestic animals,
at least 4 months of age, are kept, boarded for compensation, or kept or bred
for sale.
   LABORATORY (COMMERCIAL). A place devoted to experimental study such as
testing and analyzing, manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not
included within this definition.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF- STREET. An open hard-surfaced area of land
other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. The space
shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 45 feet in length and 14 feet in
height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
   LODGING or ROOMING HOUSE. A building with not more than 5 guest rooms where
lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements but not
open to the public or to overnight guests.
   LOT. The word LOT when used alone shall mean a ZONING LOT unless the context
of these standards indicate otherwise. The word LOT shall include the word
PLOT.
   LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land situated at the intersection of 2 or more
streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a
public street; for a corner lot, the owner may elect either street line as the
front lot line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The front property line of a zoning lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly
parallel to and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front
or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot
lines.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on 2 parallel or approximately parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
   MANUFACTURE. The making of anything by any agency or process.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building in which freight, brought to such
building by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and
interstate shipment by motor truck.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a
use or lawfully established at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Code or
amendments hereto, which does not conform after the adoption of these standards
or amendments hereto with the use regulations herein.
   NURSING HOME or REST HOME. A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for
surgical care.
   NURSERY, DAY. An institution providing care for 3 or more children under the
age of 4 years, for periods of more than 4 hours but not exceeding 24 hours.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An institution providing day care services for children from
4 to 6 years of age.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open, hard- surfaced area, other than a street or
public-way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under 1½ tons capacity and available to the public whether
for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard- surfaced area of land, other than a
street or public way, designed, arranged, and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings
for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking area of
not less than 162 square feet (8½ feet by 19 feet), exclusive of access drives
or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of 1
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under 1½ ton capacity.
   PORCH. A roofed-over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a
main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations,
train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water
towers.
   SHALL is mandatory and not directory.
   SIGN.
      (1)   A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which
is affixed to, or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure, tree, rock or other object, or piece of land and which
directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business.
      (2)   However, a sign shall not include any display or official court or
public office notices nor shall it include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a
nation, political unit, school or religious group. A sign shall not include a
sign located completely within an enclosed building unless the context shall be
exposed to view from a street. Each display surface of a sign shall be
considered to be a sign.
   SPECIAL USE. Any use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted
herein, subject to the provisions of §§
155.125 through
155.128.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of
a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story
for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.
   STORY, HALF. A half-story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip
or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least 2 opposite exterior
walls, are not more than 4½ feet above the finished floor of the story. In the
case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings, less than 3 stories in height, a half-story in a sloping roof shall
not be counted as a story for the purpose of the Zoning Code. In the case of
multiple-family dwellings 3 or more stories in height, a half-story shall be
counted as a story.
   STREET. A public way other than an alley, which affords a primary means of
access to abutting property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change other than incidental repairs which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   TAVERN or LOUNGE. A building or part thereof, where liquors are sold to be
consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants where the primary
business is serving food.
   TRAILER. A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living,
sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels,
blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, which does not meet building code
requirements and has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other
devices for transporting the structure from place to place. The term TRAILER
shall include mobile home, camp car and house car. A permanent foundation shall
not change its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance
with prevailing city laws.
   TRAILER CAMP or PARK. Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate 1 or
more families living in an automobile house trailer or mobile home or the
parking of 1 or more trailers for business purposes.
   TRUCK PARKING AREA or YARD. Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceed 1½ tons
in capacity.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged,
or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
   USED CAR LOT. A zoning lot on which used cars, trailers or trucks are
displayed for sale or trade.
   VARIANCE. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Code where
the variances will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Code would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship. As used in the Zoning Code, a variance is authorized only
for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces;
establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in the Zoning Code, and which extends
along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in
the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and
lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of a building.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
   YARD, SIDE. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the
principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front
yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the
required rear yard.
   ZONING LOT. A plot of ground, made up of 1 or more parcels, which is or may
be occupied by a use, building or buildings, including the open spaces required
by the Zoning Code.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated herein as a part hereof.
(1992 Code, § 155.004) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 2020-MC03, passed 3-12-
2020)
ZONING DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP
§ 155.015 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of these standards, the
city is hereby divided into the following districts.
   (A)   Agricultural District (A-1). The A-1 Zone in which agriculture and
certain related uses are encouraged as the principal land use. The specific
intent is to facilitate the proper use of lands best suited for agriculture by
preventing the mixture of urban and rural uses which creates incompatibility
and conflict, places unbalanced tax loads on agricultural lands to help pay for
urban services, and contributes to the premature termination of agricultural
pursuits. This zone is also designed to prevent the illogical placement of
residential uses in the otherwise open countryside.
   (B)   Residential districts.
      (1)   One-Family Dwelling District (R-1). The R-1 Zone is established to
recognize areas presently existing or proposed for single-family dwellings.
These standards recognize the need for providing adequate space for buildings,
open areas and off-street parking.
      (2)   General Residence District (R-2). The R-2 Zone is established to
recognize areas presently existing or proposed for either single-family, two-
family or multiple-family dwellings. These standards recognize the need for
properly regulated areas for higher density residential uses. The standards
reflect the corresponding space requirements of higher density residential
uses.
   (C)   Business districts.
      (1)   Limited Retail Business District (B-1). The B-1 Zone is established
to protect compatible limited retail business uses. The uses as clothing,
variety, drug and jewelry stores are generally compatible when located in
proximity to one another. Deleterious commercial uses should be separated from
the limited retail uses.
      (2)   General Retail, Service and Wholesale Business District (B-2). The
B-2 Zone is established to permit those commercial uses excluded from the
limited retail business district. These uses are of the type that generally
require more space or are incompatible with limited retail business uses.
   (D)   Manufacturing District (M-1). The M-1 Zone is established to protect
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the
community by the proper allocation of land for industrial use. It is also the
aim of the M-1 Zone to protect and promote the economic base of the city by
regulating manufacturing development in appropriate locations.
   (E)   Mobile Home Park District (M-P). The M-P Zone is established to
recognize areas presently existing or proposed for mobile home parks. These
standards recognize the need for providing adequate and secure space, open
areas and off-street parking for mobile homes.
(1992 Code, § 155.015) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.016 ZONING MAPS.
   The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown
upon the zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into these standards. The
zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown
thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be a part hereof and shall have the
same force and effect as is the zoning map, together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and
described herein.
(1992 Code, § 155.016) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.017 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND RAILROADS.
   All streets, alleys, public-ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same use
district as the property immediately abutting upon the alleys, streets, public-
ways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley,
public-way or railroad rights-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning
of the areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be
the same as that of the abutting property up to the center line.
(1992 Code, § 155.017) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.018 BOUNDARY LINES.
   Wherever any uncertainty the boundary of any use district as shown on the
zoning map, incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys, or similar rights-of-ways they shall be construed as following the
center lines thereof.
   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
   (C)   Where a lot held in 1 ownership and of record at the effective date of
these standards is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district; provided that this
construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted
portion of the lot by more than 20%.
(1992 Code, § 155.018) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.019 NEW OR ANNEXED LAND.
   Submerged land heretofore reclaimed or which may be reclaimed hereafter, and
land heretofore annexed or which may be annexed to the city hereafter, and
which is not shown on the zoning map made a part hereof, shall be classified in
the R-1 One- Family Dwelling District until such time as the City Council
designates the permitted use of the land in accordance with the provisions of
these standards.
(1992 Code, § 155.019) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.030 A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Generally. The provisions of these standards shall not be exercised so
as to impose regulations or require permits with respect to land used or to be
used for agricultural purposes, or with respect to the erection, maintenance,
repair, alteration, remodeling or extension of buildings or structures used or
to be used for agricultural purposes upon the land, except that the buildings
or structures for agricultural purposes may be required to conform to building
or setback lines. In the event that the land ceases to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, then and only then shall the provisions of these
standards apply.
   (B)   Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted.
      (1)   All uses commonly classed as agriculture, horticulture, or
forestry, including crop and tree farming, truck farming, gardening, nursery
operation, dairy farming, stock raising, domestic animals and poultry breeding
and raising, and forestry operations together with the operation of any
machinery or vehicles incidental to the above uses.
      (2)   Temporary roadside stands for the display, sale or offering for
sale of agricultural products grown or produced on the property, provided that
no structure is located less than 10 feet from the highway right-of-way.
      (3)   One-family detached dwellings, subject to the requirements of §
155.030(D).
      (4)   Home occupations.
      (5)   Schools, elementary and high, and including playgrounds, school bus
garage, athletic fields and other uses auxiliary thereto.
      (6)   Churches, rectories and parish houses.
      (7)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation.
      (8)   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned
and operated.
      (9)   Golf courses, including ancillary uses provided, such as
restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, residential uses for
guests, manager and other employees, but not including commercially-operated
driving ranges or miniature golf courses; and provided that no club house or
accessory building shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any dwelling on
another zoning lot.
         (10)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not
to exceed 1 year.
         (11)   Accessory uses, as defined herein and as regulated by §§
155.140 through
155.143.
         (12)   Signs, as permitted or required in §
155.150.
         (13)   Public utility facilities as defined in the State Act, entitled
“An Act Concerning Public Utilities.”
      (14)   Active solar energy systems, building integrated solar energy
systems, gird-intertie solar energy systems, off-grid solar energy system,
passive solar energy system, photovoltaic systems, solar collectors, solar
energy system, solar energy system additions, solar farms, solar gardens, solar
heat exchangers, solar hot air systems, and/or solar hot water systems,
installed in compliance with this ordinance and in compliance with applicable
local, state and federal law shall be an allowable use, in addition to all
others, in the Agricultural District except that solar farms shall require a
special use permit.
   (C)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
in accordance with the provisions of §§
155.125 through
155.128.
      (1)   Mining, loading and hauling of sand, gravel, topsoil or other
aggregate or minerals, including equipment, buildings or structures for
screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage, provided that:
         (a)   No open pit or shaft is less than 300 feet from any public road,
nor less than 500 feet from an existing residences or residence district
established herein.
         (b)   All buildings or structures for the screening, crushing,
washing, mixing or storage are located not less than 1,000 feet from an
existing residence or any residence district established herein;
         (c)   The borders of the entire property are fenced with a solid fence
or wall at least 6 feet in height; and
         (d)   A plan of development for the reclamation of the land is
provided as part of the application for special use.
         (e)   The plan of development shall be accompanied by a written
agreement between the owner or his or her agent and the city, and a performance
bond in an amount equal to the cost of the reclamation of the land as set forth
in the development plan.
      (2)   Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including
classification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
      (3)   Airports or aircraft landing fields.
      (4)   Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction
therewith if not located within 500 feet of any dwellings.
      (5)   Private recreational areas or camps.
      (6)   Radio and television towers, commercial.
      (7)   Gun clubs, if located not nearer than 1,000 feet to any residence
other than that of the owner or lessee of the site, and if not so operated as
to withdraw the land from its primary agricultural use.
      (8)   Filling of holes, pits, quarries or lowland with noncombustible
material free from refuse and food wastes.
      (9)   Sanitary land fill, when supervised by the Building Official or the
City Engineer.
      (10)   Rest homes, nursing homes, assisted living centers, hospitals and
sanitariums, institutions for the aged and for children, for human beings only.
      (11)   Fur bearing animal farms.
      (12)   Dog kennels and animal hospitals.
      (13)   Public service uses, such as, filtration plant, pumping station
and water reservoir; sewage treatment plant; police and fire stations; and
other governmental uses.
      (14)   Penal and correctional institutions.
      (15)   Agricultural implement and machinery sales, service and repair.
      (16)   Animal feed, storage, preparation, grinding and mixing, wholesale
and retail.
      (17)   Blacksmith or welding shop.
      (18)   Fertilizer sales, including bulk storage and mixing.
      (19)   Commercial feeding of poultry and livestock.
      (20)   Grain elevators and storage.
      (21)   Greenhouses, wholesale and retail.
      (22)   Milk depots.
      (23)   Milk processing and distribution, including pasteurizing and
manufacture of ice cream, but not including the process or manufacture of
cheese.
      (24)   Sales yard, wholesale or retail, for agricultural products,
including but not necessarily limited to, fruits, vegetables, flowers, plants,
and the like.
      (25)   Livestock depots and sales yards.
      (26)   Truck parking areas, the prime purpose of which is the loading and
shipping of farm products, livestock, poultry, fertilizer, and the like.
   (27)   Wind energy conversion systems subject to compliance with
Chapter 157.
   (D)   Lot size.
      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be
located on a zoning lot having an area of not less than 3 acres, and a width at
the established building line of not less than 150 feet. All or part of the
zoning lot may be devoted to permitted agricultural uses.
      (2)   All other permitted uses shall be on a tract of land having an area
of not less than 1 acre and a width at the established building line of not
less than 100 feet.
      (3)   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and
conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no
case shall any such lot have an area of less than 20,000 square feet and a
width at the building line of 100 feet.
   (E)   Building setback line.
      (1)   No building or structure, other than permitted signs, hereafter
erected shall be placed closer than 50 feet to the nearest right-of-way line of
any public street, road or highway upon which the subject property abuts, or
closer than 50 feet to the nearest right-of-way line of any proposed public
street, road or highway set forth in officially adopted plans and upon which
the subject property would abut.
      (2)   Buildings or structures may be placed up to 25 feet from the
nearest right-of-way line of any public street, road or highway upon which the
subject property abuts, provided that the structures do not create or
perpetuate traffic hazards or hazardous conditions in adjoining R-1 or R-
2 Zoning Districts, and further provided that all restrictions relative to
signing and parking which may be imposed by the Plan Commission and approved by
the City Council are observed.
(1992 Code, § 155.030) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord 112877B, passed 11-28-
1977; Am. Ord. 122794B, passed 12-27-1994; Am. Ord. 2021- MC02, passed 2-8-
2021; Am. Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
Penalty, see § 155.999
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.040 PURPOSE.
   The Residential Districts set forth herein are established in order to
protect public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity, and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes.
   (A)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare and other
objectionable factors.
   (B)   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in
each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through
traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.
   (C)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulation of the bulk of buildings.
   (D)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
   (E)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development.
   (F)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
   (G)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character and desirable development and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the city.
(1992 Code, § 155.040) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.041 R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 One-Family
Dwelling District.
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings.
      (2)   Home occupations as defined herein.
      (3)   Truck gardening and other horticultural uses where no buildings are
involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises.
      (4)   Churches.
      (5)   Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by
not more than 15 persons.
      (6)   Transitional uses - two-family dwellings, principal offices of
physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate brokers, and other
professional occupations, when conducted in a residential structure used
primarily as a home and when located on lots having a side line adjoining a lot
in a business or manufacturing district; or on lots having a side lot line
adjacent to a railroad right-of- way or directly across a street or alley from
a business or manufacturing district, provided that:
         (a)   The lot on which the transitional use is located does not extend
more than 75 feet from the adjoining business or manufacturing district, or
more than 120 feet in depth from the street line in cases where the lot does
not adjoin but faces a business or manufacturing district;
         (b)   There is a minimum lot area of 8,700 square feet for each two-
family dwelling;
         (c)   The home occupations are conducted in conjunction with the use
of a dwelling unit as a home by the occupant thereof, with not more than 2
employees other than members of the related family, and that the residential
character of the exterior of the dwelling is not changed.
      (7)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period
not to exceed 1 year.
      (8)   Accessory buildings, as defined herein, and as regulated by §§
155.140 through
155.143.
      (9)   Signs, as regulated by §
155.150.
      (10)   Off-street parking facilities, as required or permitted by §§
155.160 through
155.172.
      (11)   Active solar energy systems, building integrated solar energy
systems, grid-intertie solar energy systems, off-grid solar energy systems,
passive solar energy system, photovoltaic systems, solar collectors, solar
energy system, solar energy system, additions, solar heat exchangers, solar hot
air systems, and/or solar hot water systems of ten kilowatts or less, installed
in compliance with this ordinance and in compliance with applicable local,
state and federal law shall be an allowable use, in addition to all others, in
R-1 One Family Dwelling and R-2 General Residence Districts.
   (B)   Height of buildings. The maximum height of buildings permitted shall
be as follows:
      (1)   One-family detached dwellings: 25 feet and not over 2½ stories.
      (2)   Churches: 75 feet for towers or steeples, and not more than 45 feet
for the main structure.
   (C)   Lot sizes.
      (1)   Every 1 family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 6,000 square feet,
and a width at the established building line of not less than 60 feet; provided
however that lots existing at the time of the passage of the Zoning Code whose
width is not less than 50 feet at the established building line and whose total
area is less than 6,000 square feet may be used in conformance with and for the
purposes permitted under this R-l zoning classification.
      (2)   Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 10,000
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than 75 feet.
   (D)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building,
structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall
have a front yard of not less than 25 feet. Where lots comprising 40% of the
frontage between 2 intersecting streets are developed with buildings having
front yards with a variation of more than 15 feet in depth, the average of the
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage. In no case, shall a front yard of more than 50 feet be required.
      (2)   Side yards.
         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, there shall be
a side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than 10% of the
width of the lot. The combined total of side yards shall be not less than 15
feet. On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than 10
feet on the side adjacent to the street, and in the case of a reversed corner
lot there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than
50% of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of the corner lots, but
the setback need not exceed 15 feet. No accessory building on the reversed
corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to
the rear, nor be located nearer than 5 feet to the side lot line of the
adjacent lot, nor less than 10 feet from a principal building on an adjacent
lot.
         (b)   On lots upon which a church is constructed or extensions made to
an existing church, there shall be a side yard of not less than 10 feet on each
side of the main structure and a combined total of side yards of not less than
25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
   (E)   Permitted obstructions. The following shall not be considered as
obstructions when located within or over required yards:
      (1)   Open terraces;
      (2)   Awnings and canopies;
      (3)   Steps;
      (4)   Chimneys not exceeding 2% of the width of the yard;
      (5)   Arbors and trellises;
      (6)   Fences or walls (rear yards only). Side yard privacy fences shall
not extend past front corners of home. Fencing of front yards shall not
restrict view of traffic;
      (7)   Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only);
      (8)   Open parking areas.
(1992 Code, § 155.041) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 010578, passed 1-5-1978;
Am. Ord. 122794A, passed 12-27-1994; Am. Ord. 102698A, passed 10-26-1998; Am.
Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.042 R-2 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 General
Residence District.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-1 One- Family Dwelling District.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
      (3)   One-family row dwellings (party-wall type) with not more than 6
dwelling units in a building.
      (4)   Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
      (5)   Offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate
brokers, and other professional occupations, including funeral homes when
conducted in a residential structure, providing the residential character of
the building is not altered extensively.
      (6)   Signs, as defined and regulated in §
155.150.
      (7)   Boarding and lodging houses.
      (8)   Active solar energy systems, building integrated solar energy
systems, grid-intertie solar energy systems, off-grid solar energy systems,
passive solar energy system, photovoltaic systems, solar collectors, solar
energy system, solar energy system, additions, solar heat exchangers, solar hot
air systems, and/or solar hot water systems of ten kilowatts or less, installed
in compliance with this ordinance and in compliance with applicable local,
state and federal law shall be an allowable use, in addition to all others, in
R-1 One Family Dwelling and R-2 General Residence Districts.
   (B)   Height of buildings. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered to exceed 3 stories nor shall it exceed 45 feet in height.
   (C)   Lot size.
      (1)   No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in this R-
2 General Residence District shall have a total lot area of less than 6,600
square feet, nor have a total lot width of less than 66 feet. Every building
hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling of more
than 2 dwelling units shall provide a lot area per dwelling unit of 1,500
square feet. One-family row houses hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall have a total lot area of 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit except that
corner and end dwelling units of a row unit building shall have not less than
2,500 square feet of total lot area.
      (2)   Lots whose width is not less than 50 feet and whose total lot area
is not less than 6,200 square feet may be used in conformance with and for the
purposes permitted under this R-2 zoning classification; provided however that
the lots existed at the time of the passage of the Zoning Code.
   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any
building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the
following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with
the structure or enlargement.
      (1)   Front yard. For multiple-family dwellings other than one-family row
dwellings, there shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. For row
dwellings, two-family dwellings and one-family dwellings, the same regulations
shall apply as required in the R-1 District.
      (2)   Side yards.
         (a)   Multiple-family dwellings. On interior lots there shall be a
side yard on each side of the principal building equal to not less than 10% of
the width of the lot and a combined total of side yards of not less than 15
feet for all multiple-family dwellings of not more than 2 stories in height. On
corner lots, the side yard on the intersecting street side shall be not less
than 10 feet, except in the case of a reversed corner lot, where there shall be
a side yard on the street side of the corner lot of not less than 50% of the
front yard required in the lots in the rear of the corner lot. No accessory
building on the reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line
required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than 5 feet to
the side lot line of the adjacent lot.
         (b)   One-family dwellings. The same regulations shall apply as
required in the R-1 District.
         (c)   Two-family dwellings. The same regulations shall apply as
required in the R-1 District.
         (d)   One-family row dwellings. The same regulations as govern side
yards of multiple- family dwellings, except that there may be not less than 15
feet between adjacent row buildings.
      (3)   Rear yard. For multiple-family dwellings, other than one-family row
dwellings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet for interior
lots nor less than 15 feet for corner lots. For other type dwellings, the same
rear yard regulations shall apply as required in the R-1 District.
   (E)   Permitted obstructions. The same regulations shall apply as required
or permitted in the R-1 District.
(1992 Code, § 155.042) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 010578, passed 1-5-1978;
Am. Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 155.050 PURPOSE.
   The business districts set forth herein are established to protect public
health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare,
and to protect the economic base of the city and the value of property. These
general purposes include, among others, the following specific objectives.
   (A)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well
considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate locations for
the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the
economic base of the city.
   (B)   To place in separate districts those businesses which may create
noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness, or which may generate excessive traffic.
   (C)   To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to or
inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or
convenience to the areas to offset the disadvantage.
   (D)   To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible
business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable
and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the
alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.
   (E)   To provide for the establishment of off-street parking facilities,
permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity.
(1992 Code, § 155.050) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.051 B-1 LIMITED RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-1 Limited
Retail Business District.
      (1)   Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and
above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on
the ground floor.
      (2)   Art and school supply stores.
      (3)   Auto accessory store, where there is no driveway entrance across
the sidewalk into the principal building.
      (4)   Bakery shop, including the baking and processing of food products,
when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions.
      (6)   Barber shop, beauty parlor, chiropody, massage or similar personal
service shop.
      (7)   Cook and stationery stores.
      (8)   Meeting halls, lodge halls, fraternal organizations and clubs,
provided they are located in a basement or above the first floor and above a
business use permitted in this section, or the uses may be located on the
ground floor when permitted business establishments occupy street frontage
except for an entrance way to the rear use.
      (9)   Candy and ice cream shops.
      (10)   Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sale.
      (11)   Coin and philatelic stores.
      (12)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair when
conducted for retail sales on the premises only.
      (13)   Currency exchanges.
      (14)   Department stores.
      (15)   Drug stores.
      (16)   Dry-cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing
facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than 1,750 pounds of dry
goods per day and when using nonflammable solvents approved by the Fire
Department.
      (17)   Dry-goods store.
      (18)   Electric appliance store and repair, but not including appliance
assembly or manufacturing.
      (19)   Florist shop and conservatory for retail trade on the premises
only.
      (20)   Food and fruit stores.
      (21)   Frozen food store.
      (22)   Furniture store and upholstery when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the main use.
      (23)   Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
      (24)   Garden supplies and seed stores.
      (25)   Gift shops.
      (26)   Hardware shops.
      (27)   Haberdashery.
      (28)   Hobby stores.
      (29)   Hotels, including dining and meeting rooms, when business uses
occupy the street frontage except for an entrance-way to the hotel lobby.
      (30)   Household appliance store.
      (31)   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of
draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles, when conducted as part of
the retail operations and secondary to the main use.
      (32)   Jewelry store and watch repair.
      (33)   Launderette and laundromat.
      (34)   Leather goods and luggage store.
      (35)   Liquor stores and taverns (subject to local regulations).
      (36)   Loan offices, when located above the first floor and above a
business use permitted in this section.
      (37)   Meat markets.
      (38)   Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
      (39)   News stand.
      (40)   Notions store.
      (41)   Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.
      (42)   Optician, optometrist.
      (43)   Paint and wallpaper store.
      (44)   Photography studio, including the developing of film and pictures
when conducted as a part of the retail business on the premises.
      (45)   Plumbing showroom without shop or repair facilities.
      (46)   Postal substations (finance stations and contract stations).
      (47)   Public utility collection offices.
      (48)   Restaurant, tea room or café, when the establishment is not of the
drive-in type where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles.
      (49)   Savings and loan association.
      (50)   Sewing machine sales and service.
      (51)   Shoe store.
      (52)   Signs, as defined and regulated in §
155.150.
      (53)   Sporting goods store.
      (54)   Stationery store.
      (55)   Telegraph office.
      (56)   Tobacco shop.
      (57)   Toy store.
      (58)   Travel bureau and transportation ticket office.
      (59)   Typewriter and adding machine sales and service.
      (60)   Variety store.
      (61)   Wearing apparel shop.
      (62)   Any other similar type retail store not specifically listed
herein, and which has economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining
properties.
      (63)   Any use permitted in the B-2 Business District may also be
permitted in this district, provided it is located in the basement or above the
first floor.
      (64)   All activities, except for automobile off- street parking
facilities as permitted or required in this B-1 District, shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building.
      (65)   B-1 Business, B-2 Business, General and Wholesale, and B-3 Highway
Business Districts. Active solar energy systems, building integrated solar
energy systems, grid-intertie solar energy systems, off-grid solar energy
systems, passive solar energy system, photovoltaic systems, solar collectors,
solar energy system, solar energy system additions, solar heat exchangers,
solar hot air systems, and/or solar hot water systems, installed in compliance
with this ordinance and in compliance with applicable local, state and federal
law shall be an allowable use, in addition to all others in B-1 Business, B-
2 Business, General and Wholesale, and B-3 Highway Business Districts.
   (B)   Height of building. No building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 3 stories, nor shall it exceed 35
feet in height. Parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads,
stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above the
maximum height of 35 feet, provided they are constructed in accordance with all
building regulations and any applicable ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Yard areas. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building.
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   General. No front yard shall be required when all frontage
between 2 intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots
within this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in a residential
district, all of which front upon the same street between 2 intersecting
streets, there shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the
frontage as has been established in the residential districts.
         (b)   Exception. When existing buildings located in this district have
already established a building line at the street line or at a depth less than
required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line,
except for the first 50 feet of B-1 District frontage adjacent to a residential
district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than 10
feet.
      (2)   Side yards. No side yard is required, except for a corner lot whose
rear lot line abuts upon a residential district or upon an alley separating
this district from a residential district. There shall then be provided a side
yard equal to one-half the front yard required in the abutting residential
district, but in no case more than 10 feet. The setback shall also apply if the
business building fronts the intersecting street, commonly referred to as the
side street.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.
However, a one-story accessory building may be located thereon, except for the
5 feet adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley line, for the
storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and loading of vehicles under roof,
as provided herein.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (C)(2) and (3) hereof,
when existing buildings located in this district have already established a
building line at a depth less than required by divisions (C)(2) and (3) hereof,
any extensions or enlargements thereof may conform to the same building line
provided the extension or enlargement shall not interfere with the safety and
general welfare of the public.
(1992 Code, § 155.051) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 091487A, passed 9-14-
1978; Am. Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.052 B-2 GENERAL RETAIL SERVICE AND WHOLESALE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B-2 Retail
Service and Wholesale Business District.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-1 District.
      (2)   Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and
above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on
the ground floor.
      (3)   Agricultural implement sales and services.
      (4)   Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
      (5)   Antique shops.
      (6)   Art galleries and studios.
      (7)   Automobile sales and service, but not including automobile body
repair and rebuilding or painting of automobiles.
      (8)   Automobile and truck (under 1.5 ton capacity) minor motor repair
and service shop, but not including body repair and rebuilding or painting.
      (9)   Automobile and truck repair (major), painting, upholstering,
reconditioning, and body and fender repairing when done within the confines of
a structure.
      (10)   Automobile service stations.
      (11)   Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors,
blowers and steam-cleaning.
      (12)   Battery and tire service stations.
      (13)   Beverage, non-alcoholic, bottling and distributing.
      (14)   Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
      (15)   Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
      (16)   Billiard and pool rooms, bowlingalleys, dance halls and
gymnasiums.
      (17)   Boat showroom.
      (18)   Book binding.
      (19)   Building materials sales, when conducted wholly within a building.
      (20)   Catering establishments.
      (21)   Clubs and fraternal organizations.
      (22)   Contractors’ offices and shops, where no fabricating is done on
the premises and where all storage of material is within a building or enclosed
area.
      (23)   Costume rental shop.
      (24)   Employment agency.
      (25)   Exterminating shop.
      (26)   Feed and seed store.
      (27)   Garages, public, for storage of private passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under 1½ tons capacity.
      (28)   Glass cutting and glazing establishments.
      (29)   Greenhouse, wholesale growers.
      (30)   Household appliance repair shop.
      (31)   Laboratories, commercial (medical, dental, research, experimental
and testing), provided no production or manufacturing of products takes place.
      (32)   Locksmith.
      (33)   Orthopedic and medical appliance store, but not including the
assembly or manufacture of the articles.
      (34)   Parcel delivery station.
      (35)   Pawn shop.
      (36)   Pet shops, kennels or animal hospitals when conducted wholly
within an enclosed building.
      (37)   Picture framing when conducted for retail trade on the premises
only.
      (38)   Plumbing showroom, heating and roofing supply shops.
      (39)   Photograph developing and processing.
      (40)   Poultry and rabbit killing for retail sale on the premises only.
      (41)   Printing, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals,
books, stationery and other reading matter.
      (42)   Processing or assembly limited to the following, provided that
space occupied in a building does not exceed 7,500 square feet of total floor
and basement space, not including stairwells, or elevator shafts; and provided
the processing or assembly can be conducted without noise, vibration, odor,
dust or any other condition which might be disturbing to occupants of adjacent
buildings. When manufacturing operations of the same or similar products demand
space exceeding 7,500 square feet, they shall then be located in the M-
1 Manufacturing District:
         (a)   Advertising displays;
         (b)   Awnings, venetian blinds and window shades;
         (c)   Bakers, wholesale;
         (d)   Brushes and brooms;
         (e)   Cosmetics, drugs and perfumes;
         (f)   Electrical equipment appliances;
         (g)   Food processing, packaging and distribution;
         (h)   Jewelry;
         (i)   Medical and dental supplies;
         (j)   Optical goods and equipment;
         (k)   Pattern-making;
         (l)   Products from finished materials such as plastic, bone, cloth,
cork, feathers, felt, fibre, paper, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, precious
or semi-precious stone, rubber, shell or yarn.
      (43)   Public auction rooms.
      (44)   Radio and television broadcasting stations.
      (45)   Recreation places, including bowling alley, dance hall, gymnasium,
skating rink, archery range, golf practicing range, miniature golf course, or
other similar places of amusement or entertainment when operated for pecuniary
profit.
      (46)   Restaurants (drive-in car service).
      (47)   Riding academies.
      (48)   Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade.
      (49)   Second-hand stores and rummage shops.
      (50)   Silver plating and repair shop.
      (51)   Smoking and processing of meat products.
      (52)   Theater, indoor.
      (53)   Undertaking establishments.
      (54)   Used passenger automobile sales (used car lot) on an open lot or
within a building.
      (55)   Wholesale business, excluding a building, the principal use of
which is for a storage warehouse.
      (56)   B-1 Business, B-2 Business, General and Wholesale, and B-3 Highway
Business Districts. Active solar energy systems, building integrated solar
energy systems, grid-intertie solar energy systems, off-grid solar energy
systems, passive solar energy system, photovoltaic systems, solar collectors,
solar energy system, solar energy system additions, solar heat exchangers,
solar hot air systems, and/or solar hot water systems, installed in compliance
with this ordinance and in compliance with applicable local, state and federal
law shall be an allowable use, in addition to all others in B-1 Business, B-
2 Business, General and Wholesale, and B-3 Highway Business Districts.
   (B)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 3 stories, nor shall it exceed 35
feet in height.
   (C)   Yard areas. No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building.
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   No front yard shall be required when all frontage between 2
intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots within this
district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in a residential district, all of
which front upon the same street between 2 intersecting streets, there shall be
established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been
established in the residential district.
         (b)   Exceptions. When existing buildings located in this district
have already established a building line at the street line or at a lesser
depth than required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same
building line, except for the 50 feet of B-2 District frontage adjacent to the
residential district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not
less than 10 feet.
      (2)   Side yard. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the B-1 Business District.
      (3)   Rear yard. The same rear yard regulations shall apply as required
or permitted in the B-1 Business District.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (C)(2) and (3) hereof,
when existing buildings located in this district have already established a
building line at a depth less than required by divisions (C)(2) and (3) hereof,
any extensions or enlargements thereof may conform to the same building line,
provided the extension or enlargement shall not interfere with the safety and
general welfare of the public.
(1992 Code, § 155.052) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 091487A, passed 9-14-
1987; Am. Ord. 072897A, passed 7-28-1997; Am. Ord. 2021- MC12, passed 12-13-
2021)
Penalty, see § 155.999
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 155.060 PURPOSE.
   The Manufacturing District set forth herein is established to protect public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare, and to protect
the economic base of the city as well as the value of real estate by regulating
manufacturing development in appropriate locations. These general objectives
include, among others, the following specific objectives.
   (A)   To protect established residential areas, and the health of families
living therein, by restricting those nearby manufacturing activities which may
create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire
hazards and other objectionable influences to those areas which are appropriate
therefor.
   (B)   To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for all types of
manufacturing and related activities so that economic structure of the
community may be strengthened and that employment opportunities may be found in
the interest of public prosperity and welfare.
   (C)   To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations
accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw materials,
finished products and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a
minimum of danger to public life and property.
   (D)   To establish proper standard of performance, which will restrict
obnoxious manufacturing activities, while at the same time encourage and permit
the manufacturing activities which had adopted facilities for the processing of
finished products without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas.
   (E)   To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land by
prohibiting the use of the space for new residential development, thereby
preserving the land for a more appropriate use in accordance with the plans for
city improvement and development.
   (F)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well
considered plan of land use for all of the city, to conserve the use of
property, to promote stability of manufacturing activities and related
development, and to protect the character and established development in each
area of the community, to enhance and stabilize the value of land and to
protect the tax base of the city.
(1992 Code, § 155.060) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.061 M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Since most uses permitted in this district will be in
proximity to residential districts, it is hereby declared that performance
standards will be high and that all manufacturing, processing or assembly of
materials and products must be carried on in a manner not injurious or
offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission of
odors, fumes or gases, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations, or fire hazards.
Permitted uses are as follows.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the business district, but not including
residences or apartments, except the dwelling accommodations as may be needed
to house a caretaker or watchman employed on the premises and their families.
      (2)   Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
      (3)   Batteries, manufacture and rebuilding.
      (4)   Bedspring and mattress manufacture.
      (5)   Belting manufacture.
      (6)   Bicycle manufacture.
      (7)   Brooms and brush manufacture.
      (8)   Boat building and repair.
      (9)   Building equipment yards, yards for building materials, lumber,
coal, sand and gravel yards; yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or
operating equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or
equipment of similar nature.
      (10)   Bus line shops and garages.
      (11)   Canning and preserving.
      (12)   Canvas and canvas products manufacture.
      (13)   Carpet and rug cleaning.
      (14)   Carpet manufacture.
      (15)   Cartage (local), express hauling or storage yards.
      (16)   Cement block manufacture.
      (17)   Ceramic products, pottery, and glazed tile manufacture.
      (18)   Chick hatcheries.
      (19)   Cleaning and dyeing establishments when employing facilities for
handling more than 1,000 pounds of dry goods per day.
      (20)   Cigarette and cigar manufacture.
      (21)   Coated fabrics, except rubberized, manufacture.
      (22)   Cork and cork products manufacture.
      (23)   Creameries and dairies.
      (24)   Drapery and bedding manufacture.
      (25)   Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacture.
      (26)   Electric motors and generators manufacture.
      (27)   Engraving.
      (28)   Felt manufacture.
      (29)   Fur goods manufacture, but not including tanning or dyeing.
      (30)   Glass products, from previously manufactured glass.
      (31)   Grain storage and drying facilities
      (32)   Heating appliances and sheet metal products, including stoves and
ranges, manufacture.
      (33)   Hosiery manufacture.
      (34)   Ice cream and ice manufacture.
      (35)   Kennel and outdoor pens and runs.
      (36)   Laundries, more than 1,000 pounds daily capacity.
      (37)   Machine shops and metal products manufacture, when not equipped
with heavy (exceeding 50-ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines or any other equipment which may create noise, vibration,
smoke, odors, heat, glare or fire hazards.
      (38)   Metal polishing and plating.
      (39)   Motor freight terminal, private.
      (40)   Musical instruments manufacture.
      (41)   Pianos and organs manufacture.
      (42)   Perfumes and cosmetics manufacture.
      (43)   Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw
materials, manufacture.
      (44)   Public utility electric substations and distribution center, gas
regulation centers and underground gas holder stations.
      (45)   Rubber products (small) manufacture, such as washers, gloves,
footwear, and bathing caps, but excluding rubber and synthetic rubber
processing.
      (46)   Shoes and boots manufacture.
      (47)   Storage of household goods.
      (48)   Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements and other similar
equipment on an open lot.
      (49)   Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture.
      (50)   Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oil in tanks, each of 50,000
gallons or less capacity, but only after the location and protective measures
have been approved by local governing officials.
      (51)   Stone, marble and granite grinding and cutting.
      (52)   Textiles - spinning, weaving, dyeing and printing.
      (53)   Tools and hardware, such as hand tools, bolts, nuts, screws,
cutlery, house hardware, locks and plumbing appliances, manufacture.
      (54)   Tool and die shops.
      (55)   Truck terminals, including exchange and handling of freight.
      (56)   Toys and children’s vehicles, manufacture.
      (57)   Wire brush manufacture.
      (58)   Any other manufacturing establishment that can be operated in
compliance with the requirements of this section, without creating
objectionable noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes or vapor, and that is a use
compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
      (59)   M-1 and M-2 Manufacturing Districts. Active solar energy systems,
building integrated solar energy systems, gird-intertie solar energy systems,
off-grid solar energy system, passive solar energy system, photovoltaic
systems, solar collectors, solar energy system, solar energy system additions,
solar farms, solar gardens, solar heat exchangers, solar hot air systems, and/
or solar hot water systems, installed in compliance with this ordinance and in
compliance with applicable local state and federal law shall be an allowable
use, in addition to all others, in the M-1 and M-2 Manufacturing Districts.
   (B)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall be erected or
structurally altered to exceed a height of 4 stories, nor shall it exceed 45
feet in height, except as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Area. The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall not be
more than 75% of the area of the lot or tract.
   (D)   Yard areas.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 25 feet wherein there shall be no structure of any kind, open storage of
materials or equipment, or the parking of vehicles. Where established building
line is less, the established building line governs the front yard.
      (2)   Side yards. There shall be no side yard required, except where the
property is adjacent to a residential district, there shall be a side yard of
not less than 25 feet on the side nearest to the residential lots. The parking
of private automobiles may be permitted within the side yard areas, but not
closer than 5 feet to any lot zoned for residential use.
      (3)   Rear yard. A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts
upon a residence district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less
than 35 feet, and no storage of materials or equipment, or the parking of
automobiles shall take place within the 10 feet closest to any residential lot
or lots.
      (4)   Existing buildings. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (D)
(2) and (3) hereof, when existing buildings located in this district have
already established a building line at a depth less than required by divisions
(D)(2) and (3) hereof, any extensions or enlargements thereof may conform to
the same building line, provided the extension or enlargement shall not
interfere with the safety and general welfare of the public.
(1992 Code, § 155.061) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 051479, passed 5-14-
1979; Am. Ord. 042682, passed 4-26-1982; Am. Ord. 091487A, passed 9-14-1987;
Am. Ord. 122793K, passed 12-27-1993; Am. Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13- 2021)
Penalty, see § 155.999
FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
§ 155.070 F-1 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   This district is created to protect the public health and to reduce
the financial burden imposed on the city, its governmental units and its
individuals, which may result from improper use of lands having excessively
high water tables or are subject to frequent and periodic floods. As the lands
are adequately drained or sufficiently protected from the risk of overflow,
they shall be removed from the Flood Plain District and reclassified into an
appropriate use district. The determination and reclassification shall be made
by the Plan Commission in accordance with the §§
155.200 through
155.205.
      (2)   The Flood Plain Zone shall be considered as all land below 647.0
feet mean sea level which is the limit for a 20 to 25 year flood.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted.
      (1)   Open type uses such as loading and unloading areas, parking lots,
storage of motor vehicles (new and used) for not more than 24-hour periods and
gardens, auxiliary to uses permitted in an adjoining district.
      (2)   Storage yards for equipment and materials in movable containers and
not subject to major damage by flood, provided the uses are permitted in an
adjoining district, but not including acids, caustics, flammable liquids,
trash, rags, bottles, scrap metal or any other materials commonly referred to
as “junk.”
      (3)   Open-type public and private recreational facilities, such as
public parks, forest preserves, golf clubs, golf driving ranges, drive-in
theaters, recreational lakes and other similar recreational uses, subject to
all other provisions of the Zoning Code.
      (4)   Agricultural uses, including farming, grazing and livestock
raising, provided the uses are permitted in an adjoining district.
      (5)   Any other uses customarily accessory or incidental to the above
uses.
      (6)   Railroad rights-of-way and trackage.
      (7)   Planned single-family residential developments in unsubdivided
areas only, provided that subsequent conditions of use have been satisfied.
      (8)   Single-family residences on lots of record prior to the
effectuation date of the Zoning Code, provided that subsequent conditions of
use have been satisfied.
   (C)   Special uses. The following special uses are permitted:
      (1)   Storage yards for equipment and materials in movable containers and
not subject to major damage by flood, provided the uses are permitted in an
adjoining district, but not including acids, caustics, flammable liquids,
trash, rags, bottles, scrap metal or any other materials commonly referred to
as “junk.”
      (2)   Planned single-family residential developments in unsubdivided
areas only, provided that subsequent conditions of use have been satisfied.
      (3)   Single-family residences on lots of record prior to the effective
date of the Zoning Code, provided that subsequent conditions of use have been
satisfied.
   (D)   Conditions of use. In the F-1 District, the following conditions of
use shall pertain.
      (1)   No filling of land shall be permitted except when approved by the
Plan Commission and following a report from the city and subject to the
conditions as may be stipulated to protect the public interest.
      (2)   The natural drainage grade shall not be substantially altered.
      (3)   Any structures permitted shall be placed on the lot so as to offer
the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be firmly anchored to
prevent the structure from floating away and thus threatening to further
restrict bridge openings and other restricted sections of the stream.
      (4)   Where, in the opinion of the Commission, topographic data,
engineering data and other studies are needed to determine the effects of
flooding on a proposed structure of the effect of the structure on the flow of
water, the Commission may require the applicant to submit the data or other
studies prepared by competent engineers or other technicians.
      (5)   All uses permitted shall be subject to approval of the Commission
and to the conditions as may be stipulated to protect the public interest.
      (6)   No basement or other floor shall be constructed below ground level.
      (7)   No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building
or structure shall be moved unless the main floor elevation of the building or
structure is established with a finished first floor elevation not less than 2
feet above the level of the 10-year flood recurrence interval.
      (8)   Planned single-family residential developments, where permitted
shall contain adequate storm drainage or other facilities capable of protecting
the area from flooding.
      (9)   All planned single-family residential developments shall be subject
to the final approval of the City Council, based on recommendations from the
Commission and the City Engineer that all of the foregoing requirements of this
division (D) have been complied with.
   (E)   Flood plain fringe areas. Areas lying outside of and immediately
adjacent to the Flood Plain District, as shown on the zoning map, shall be
subject to the following regulations.
      (1)   No basement floor or other floor shall be constructed below or at a
lower elevation than the elevation of the high water mark for the 10-year flood
recurrence interval.
      (2)   Land may be filled within the flood plain fringe areas, provided
the fill shall extend at least 25 feet beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon.
      (3)   Foundations of all structures shall be designed to withstand floor
conditions at the site. Structural designs of foundations shall be approved by
the City Engineer, who shall certify in writing that the foundations shall
withstand specific flood conditions.
(1992 Code, § 155.070) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
Cross reference:
   For provisions concerning flood control, see
Chapter 151
MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
§ 155.080 PURPOSE.
   The Mobile Home Park District set forth herein is established to protect
public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity and the general welfare, and to protect the economic base of the
city as well as the value of real estate by regulating mobile home park
development in appropriate locations. These general goals or objectives
include, among others, the following specific objectives.
   (A)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for mobile home park expansions.
   (B)   To promote the best use and development of land in accordance with a
comprehensive land use plan.
   (C)   To protect and promote public health and comfort by providing for
ample space, light and air to mobile homes and the windows thereof.
   (D)   To protect and promote public welfare and safety by providing for
adequate drainage, limitations of density, off-street parking, proper set up
and location of mobile homes and for recreation and storage facilities in
mobile home parks.
(1992 Code, § 155.080) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOME. A residential structure, assembled in total or in not more than
3 sections at a factory and transported over the road by truck or temporary
wheel carriage to its destination.
   MOBILE HOME-SINGLE WIDE. A mobile home as defined above and being of a width
not more than 16 feet measured between the permanent sidewalks thereof with or
without an expandable room not exceeding 7 feet in width and 70 feet in length.
   MOBILE HOME-DOUBLE WIDE. A mobile home as defined above and having been
built in 2 sections at the factory, which 2 sections are transported over the
road separately with assembly into 1 structure of a width not less than 20 feet
occurring at the destination.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land containing suitable drives, utilities and
other supporting elements and devoted to the sole purpose of conveying in fee
the individual lots for the location of mobile homes on a permanent or semi-
permanent basis.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. That area of land within a mobile home park set aside for
use as a site for 1 mobile home, including the open spaces around the mobile
home, as are required in this subchapter.
   MODULAR HOME. A residential structure assembled in total or in several
sections at a factory and transported over the road by truck to its
destination. A modular home as distinct from a mobile home shall have exterior
building materials and appearance similar to the customary single-family
structure and shall be permanently situated on a concrete slab or foundation.
   MOVING PERMIT. A written order issued by the city allowing for the location
of a mobile home. The order will contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of permittee;
      (2)   Model and year of mobile home;
      (3)   Intended location of mobile home;
      (4)   Date of issuance of permit.
   TRAILER. A vehicle equipped with wheels and normally towed over the road
behind an automobile or light truck.
   TRAILER, ADVERTISING. A trailer as defined above but carrying, or having
attached thereto, a sign, billboard or other media for advertising purposes,
the advertising being the prime purpose and use of the trailer.
   TRAILER, CAMPING. A trailer as defined above and equipped with an enclosure
for sleeping while on vacation or other trips of short duration. The camping
trailers may also contain cooking, bath and sanitary equipment. Size and
furnishing of the camping trailers may vary widely, but in no case shall they
be considered structures for residential use of a temporary or permanent nature
for purposes of this subchapter.
   TRAILER, HAULING. A trailer as defined above and designed and normally used
for over the road transportation of belongings, equipment, merchandise,
livestock and other objects, but not equipped for human habitation.
   TRAILER PARK. A tract of land containing sites for the overnight or short
term parking of camping trailers.
(1992 Code, § 155.081) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.082 DEVELOPMENT PLAN; CONTENTS; APPROVAL.
   Construction of a mobile home park within the city shall begin only after
special use permit has been granted by the City Council in compliance with the
Zoning Code. No permit shall be granted, however, until a development plan for
the proposed mobile home park has been prepared and submitted by the developer
to the Plan Commission and found satisfactory by the Commission and further
submitted to the City Council with a recommendation for approval.
   (A)   The plan shall be accurately drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch
equals 100 feet and shall show the following:
      (1)   Contours at intervals of 1 foot unless specified otherwise by the
Commission;
      (2)   Proposed streets and drive patterns;
      (3)   Proposed mobile home spaces and their dimensions;
      (4)   Any existing streets in or abutting the property;
      (5)   Location and size of parking spaces;
      (6)   Location and size of park and playground area;
      (7)   Screening and landscaping;
      (8)   Legal description of the tract;
      (9)   Name of the developer and the firm preparing the plan;
      (10)   North point, scale and date;
      (11)   Drainage plat.
   (B)   The Commission shall upon submission of 3 copies of the plan and an
application for a special use permit, publish notice and hold a hearing on the
proposal, in conformance with the Zoning Code. The decision of the Commission
to recommend approval or denial of the proposed mobile home park shall be based
upon the following criteria:
      (1)   The proposed property will be in harmony, in general, with existing
land use in the city;
      (2)   Safe and efficient ingress and egress of vehicles and pedestrian
traffic and an adequate level of utility and other services is assured;
      (3)   A safe and healthful living environment will exist for the
occupants of the park.
   (C)   Upon hearing and consideration of the project, the Commission shall,
within reasonable time, submit its recommendation and an endorsed copy of the
plans to the City Council for final action.
   (D)   After 24 months from the date of approval of a special use permit by
the City Council, if the mobile home park is not improved in accordance with
the plans to the extent that utilities, surfaced drives and occupied mobile
home spaces exist over at least 20% of the area of the approved park, the
special use permit shall expire and further development and additional
occupancy of the park shall be prohibited. All mobile homes shall be removed
within 6 months of the date of expiration of a special use permit. The owner or
his or her agent may apply for a new special use permit in the case of
expiration or cancellation under procedures set out in the Zoning Code.
(1992 Code, § 155.082) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.083 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. In a M-P District, no structure or land shall be used, and no
structure shall be altered, enlarged or erected, which is arranged, intended,
or designed for other than 1 of the uses listed in the use regulations of this
District.
   (B)   Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall be subject to the following
regulations.
      (1)   The tract to be used for a mobile home park shall not be less than
3 acres in area.
      (2)   The mobile home park shall be under 1 ownership land control and
individual occupants other than the owner shall not purchase or own any piece,
parcel or portion of the park.
      (3)   Mobile home parks shall be located on a well-drained site, properly
graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
      (4)   Mobile home parks hereafter approved shall have a maximum density
of 8 mobile homes per gross acre and a minimum area of 4,000 square feet shall
be provided for each mobile home space.
      (5)   Each mobile home space shall be at least 40 feet wide.
      (6)   Mobile homes shall be located on each space so as to maintain a
minimum setback of 30 feet from any public street, highway right-of-way, or M-
P District boundary, as to maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from the edge
of a park roadway, or sidewalk or a rear boundary line when the boundary line
is not common to any public street, highway right-of-way, or M-P District
boundary; and as to maintain a minimum setback of 5 feet from any side boundary
line of a mobile home space.
      (7)   Each mobile home space shall have a surface containing pads,
runners or piers constructed of portland cement or asphaltic concrete upon
which the mobile home will be situated and each home shall be equipped with
skirts on all sides, the skirts to be of material harmonious to the mobile home
structure.
      (8)   All mobile homes shall be so located as to maintain a clearance of
not less than 20 feet from another mobile home and as to maintain a clearance
of not less than 12 feet between any mobile home and any appurtenance to a
mobile home. No mobile home shall be located closer than 25 feet from any
building within the park.
      (9)   At least 2 parking spaces for each mobile home shall be provided
within 60 feet of the mobile home. The parking space shall be off the public
street or private drive and each shall be not less than 9 feet by 20 feet in
size. Each parking space shall be surfaced with at least 6 inches of compact
stone base with 2 inches of hot mix bituminous concrete or 6 inches of portland
cement concrete.
      (10)   All mobile home space shall front upon a private roadway of not
less than 28 feet in width, including curbs on each side. If parallel parking
is permitted on both sides of the street, the width shall be increased to 36
feet. All roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
      (11)   Common walks shall be provided in locations where pedestrian
traffic is concentrated; for example, to the entrances of the office and other
important facilities. Common walks shall preferably be through interior areas
removed from the vicinity of streets.
      (12)   All roadways and sidewalks within the mobile home park shall
conform to specifications outlined in
Chapter 154 of this code.
      (13)   A community building may be provided which may include recreation
facilities, laundry facilities, storm shelter and other similar uses.
      (14)   Each mobile home park shall devote a minimum of 300 square feet
per mobile home space for recreational area, and required setbacks, roadway,
and off-street parking spaces shall not be considered as a recreation space. If
individual recreational areas are provided, they shall contain a minimum area
of 5,000 square feet and required setbacks, roadway and off-street parking
spaces shall not be considered as recreation space. A minimum of 50% of the
recreational facilities shall be constructed prior to the development of one-
half of the project, and all recreational facilities shall be constructed by
the time the project is 75% developed.
      (15)   (a)   A semi-solid fence or wall, minimum 6 feet, maximum 8 feet
high, shall be provided between the mobile home park district and any adjoining
property or property immediately across an alley which is zoned for purposes
other than for mobile homes. The fence shall be so located as to not be in
violation of the intersection clear sight distance as defined in
Chapter 154 of this code.
         (b)   In lieu of the fence or wall, a landscape buffer may be provided
not less than 25 feet in width and the landscape buffer shall be planted with
coniferous and deciduous plant material so as to provide proper screening for
the park. When the landscape buffer is used in lieu of the fence or wall, the
landscape buffer shall not be included as any part of the required rear yard
for a mobile home space. The fence, wall, or landscape buffer shall be properly
policed and maintained by the owner.
      (16)   Each mobile home space may be provided with a paved patio of not
less than 200 square feet. If accessory storage buildings are provided, they
shall be designed in a manner that will enhance and park and shall be
constructed of weather- resistant materials and set on a permanent foundation
or concrete slab and bolted down. If accessory storage or other buildings not
contained in the approved plan are erected, they shall be erected in compliance
with this subchapter and any applicable ordinances of the city and only after a
building permit has been issued by the Building Official.
      (17)   A mobile home park shall not be used for other than residential
purposes: mobile homes may be offered for sale in the mobile home park only by
resident owners.
      (18)   Any substantial deviation, as determined by the Building Official
from the approved plan, shall constitute a violation of the building or zoning
permit authorizing construction of the project. Changes in plans shall be
resubmitted for reconsideration and approval by the Plan Commission and City
Council prior to the issuance of a building or zoning permit.
   (C)   Home occupations.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses (if erected after park is built see
division (B)(16) herein).
(1992 Code, § 155.083) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.084 COMMUNITY BUILDINGS REGULATIONS.
   Community buildings, when provided, housing, recreation, sanitation or
laundry facilities, or any facilities, shall be permanent structures complying
with all applicable regulations, codes and statutes regulating buildings,
electric installations, plumbing and sanitation systems.
(1992 Code, § 155.083) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.085 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An accessible, safe and potable supply of water as approved by the
State Health Department shall be provided in each park or camp. If a public
water supply is reasonably available to the park, it shall be used.
   (B)   The size and location of water mains and fire hydrants shall be
designed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the agency from which the water supply is obtained.
   (C)   Individual water service connections shall be provided at each mobile
home space.
   (D)   When a private water supply is provided, it shall provide an adequate
water supply with minimum flow rates of 4 gallons per minute for each of the
first 5 mobile home spaces and an additional 2 gallons per minute for each
additional space for the next 10 spaces, and an additional 1½ gallons per
minute for each additional space for the next 25 spaces, and an additional 1
gallon per minute for each additional space thereafter. The system shall
provide a minimum of 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all connections
provided.
(1992 Code, § 155.085) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.086 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Individual sewer connections shall be provided for each mobile home
space and shall be in accordance with all codes and regulations regarding the
systems. If a public sewer system is reasonably available to the park, it shall
be used.
   (B)   All sewage systems shall be designed by a licensed professional
engineer and shall be submitted to the appropriate governing body for their
approval.
   (C)   When the sewer lines of the park are not connected to a public sewer,
a sewage treatment plant or sewage disposal system approved by the Health
Officer or the engineer having jurisdiction shall be provided.
(1992 Code, § 155.086) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.087 MOBILE HOMES; LOCATION WHERE PERMITTED; CONFORMANCE TO SURROUNDING
NEIGHBORHOOD; EXISTING MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   (1)   Within the city corporate limits, a single-wide mobile home, a
double-wide mobile home or modular mobile home may be permitted in an approved
mobile home park or in an R-1 or R-2 zoning district, provided, however, that
the single- wide mobile home, double-wide mobile home or modular mobile home
shall be located on a permanent slab or permanent piers with underpinning, or a
permanent foundation on a lot which complies with all the regulations of the
Zoning Code and
Chapter 154. The single-wide, double-wide or modular structures to be located
outside an approved park shall be first submitted to the Plan Commission for
review as to architectural conformity with the surrounding neighborhood based
on the following.
         (a)   The physical condition of the structure is sound, well
maintained and of neat appearance, including an exterior residential siding and
roof, and built to HUD 76 standards.
         (b)   The proposed site of the structure is not in a neighborhood
which contains homes of size and value sufficiently higher than will result
from the establishment of the single-wide, double-wide or modular structure
that the contrast in appearance will depress property value in the
neighborhood.
         (c)   The State of Illinois tie-down rules must be followed.
      (2)   A mobile home may also be permitted by the City Council for the
purposes of temporary relief from a local disaster, such as fire, wind, or
flood damage, provided the mobile home shall be removed from the premises
within 6 months of its original placement unless an extension of time is
granted. Extensions may be granted for periods not to exceed 6 months. The
number of extensions granted shall be determined by the Commission with the
approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Existing mobile homes.
      (1)   No section or provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to
prohibit the extension, alteration or repair of mobile homes on lots in R-
2 General Residence Districts that were permitted by the issuance of a special
use permit subsequent to the enactment of the Zoning Code.
      (2)   No section or provision of this subchapter shall be construed to
prohibit the continued use of mobile homes on lots in R-2 General Residence
Districts that were permitted by the issuance of a special use permit
subsequent to the enactment of the Zoning Code.
      (3)   No provision of this division (B), and no section or provision of
this subchapter shall be construed to permit the violation of §§
155.110 through
155.114.
(1992 Code, § 155.087) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978; Am. Ord. 101182D, passed
10-11-1982)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.088 TRAILERS; WHERE PERMITTED.
   (A)   Camping trailers.
      (1)   Camping trailers may be parked in a campground or trailer park,
provided the camp area is in conformance with the Zoning Code and any other
applicable ordinances of the city. No camping trailers shall be used for
permanent or semi-permanent residential purposes. Nothing in this subchapter
shall prohibit the use of tents, pick-up campers and other the equipment from
also utilizing an approved campground or camper park.
      (2)   Camping trailers may also be stored on the basis of 1 per family,
in private garages, or in the side or rear yards of private homes, business or
industrial area, provided no trailer shall be used for residential purposes.
   (B)   Advertising trailers. Advertising trailers may be permitted only on
property zoned B-1, B-2, A-1 and M-1, and trailers shall be off the public
street and conform to the setback height and area regulations for other signs.
   (C)   Hauling trailers. Hauling trailers, as defined herein, may be stored
or rented in property zoned B-1, A-1 and M-1. Hauling trailers, customarily
towed behind passenger cars and not exceeding 8 feet of box length may also be
kept or stored on the basis of 1 per family, in private garages or in the side
or rear yard of private homes.
(1992 Code, § 155.088) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.089 MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS AS NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   One or more mobile homes or trailers may be used as a temporary office or
other nonresidential structure on the site of a construction project, provided
the structure is removed upon completion of the project. Mobile structures may
be used, also, as temporary classroom facilities in connection with public
schools, or private schools with equivalent curriculum.
(1992 Code, § 155.089) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.090 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   The mobile home park shall be in compliance with this subchapter and all
other applicable regulations and the site shall be in conformance with
applicable regulations of the locality and state.
(1992 Code, § 155.090) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.091 PARKING; STORAGE OF MOBILE HOME.
   A mobile home may be parked in the mobile home park, providing that it shall
not be a nuisance and does not constitute a fire hazard, and further providing
the mobile home is not offered for sale by other than the resident owner.
(1992 Code, § 155.091) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.092 TIEDOWNS.
   The provisions of ILCS Chapter 210, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq. (Mobile Home
Tiedown Act) are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this code
as if set out in full herein.
(1992 Code, § 155.092)
§ 155.093 REZONING OF UNUSED MOBILE HOME PARK.
   Whenever property zoned as a Mobile Home Part District ceases to be occupied
for a period of 6 months, the Planning Commission may initiate action and hold
a public hearing to consider reclassification of the property and thereafter
recommend whatever action they deem necessary.
(1992 Code, § 155.093) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978; Am. Ord. 012698B, passed
1-26-1998)
§ 155.094 MOVING MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   No mobile home shall be permitted to be moved into the corporate area
of the city, except for the purposes of sale by a licensed dealer, until a
moving permit has been issued for its location in a specified mobile home park
or other approved locations, in compliance with this subchapter and any other
applicable ordinances of the city. In the event that all applicable regulations
and ordinances are complied with, the applicant shall be issued a moving permit
and the mobile home shall be established in accordance therewith within 6
months or the permit shall become invalid. A permit may be extended an
additional 3 months with the approval of the Plan Commission.
   (B)   The fee for a moving permit shall be $45 per mobile home.
(1992 Code, § 155.094) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978; Am. Ord. 01129B, passed
1-12-1998)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.095 MANAGEMENT; MAINTENANCE OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Each mobile home park shall be operated in a sanitary, orderly and efficient
manner and shall maintain a neat appearance at all times. No damaged or
deteriorated mobile home shall be permitted to remain and suitable and
effective rules for regulating the outside storage of equipment, the removal of
wheels and installation of skirtings, the collection of trash and garbage and
the attachment of appurtenances to the mobile homes shall be continually
enforced. A map shall be placed at the main entrance to the park, clearly
showing the location of each space. All drives, playground area and equipment,
lawn and trees, and any recreation or accessory buildings shall be adequately
maintained. All portions of the mobile home park buildings shall be adequately
maintained. All portions of the mobile home park shall be open and accessible
to fire, police and other emergency and protective vehicles and personnel,
including city, county and state inspectors.
(1992 Code, § 155.095) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.096 LICENSING OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   All mobile home parks shall be subject to an annual license which may be
issued by the City Council. Compliance with this subchapter and all other
applicable regulations and ordinances of the city shall be necessary prior to
the issuance or renewal of the license. A license fee of $20 shall be paid by
the owner of the mobile home park upon establishing the park, and the annual
renewal of the license shall be in the amount of $2 for each space occupied on
the date of expiration of the previous license.
(1992 Code, § 155.096) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.097 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   See §§
155.160 through
155.172 herein.
(1992 Code, § 155.097) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.098 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   See §
155.150 herein.
(1992 Code, § 155.098) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
§ 155.099 BUILDING OFFICIAL; RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Building Official is hereby designated with the primary responsibility
for the enforcement of this subchapter in compliance with
Chapter 10 and
Chapter 130 of this code.
(1992 Code, § 155.099) (Ord. 042478, passed 4-24-1978)
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 155.110 SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building or use of a building or land lawfully existing at the time of
the passage of the Zoning Code which does not conform to the regulations of the
Zoning Code shall be known as nonconforming and may remain and the use or
location thereof be continued, as hereinafter provided.
(1992 Code, § 155.110) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.111 ENLARGEMENTS, EXTENSIONS; ALTERATIONS.
   No existing building which does not conform to the use, area or density
regulations of the district in which the building is located shall be enlarged,
extended, or structurally altered, unless the use or location is changed to a
use or location permitted in the district in which the building or structure is
located. A nonconforming use occupying a part of a building shall not be
extended beyond that part of the building originally designed for the use, and
in no case shall any addition be made which will provide for the expansion of
the nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of land shall not be extended.
(1992 Code, § 155.111) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.112 ABANDONMENT OF USE.
   A nonconforming use which is discontinued or its normal operation stopped
for a period of 6 months shall not thereafter be re-established.
(1992 Code, § 155.112) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 011298C, passed 1-12-
1998)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.113 ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE PERMITTED.
   Only ordinary repairs and maintenance, including replacement of roof
covering, shall be permitted on any building devoted to a nonconforming use. In
no case shall the repairs include structural alterations.
(1992 Code, § 155.113) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.114 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The foregoing provisions shall apply to nonconforming uses in
districts hereafter changed.
   (B)   The provisions of §§
155.111 through
155.113 of this subchapter shall not apply to a single- family or two-family
dwelling that is a nonconforming use, provided, however:
      (1)   No nonconforming single-family or two-family dwelling shall be
changed into a use not permitted in the district in which the nonconforming
dwelling is located; and further, in the event 2 separate nonconforming single-
family dwelling units built prior to enactment of this chapter occupy a single
zoning lot, the same may be separated into 2 separate zoning lots, each lot
containing 1 dwelling unit, as long as the separation is done according to a
survey made by a licensed Illinois Professional Land Surveyor and after
separation each lot contains at least 6,000 square feet of lot area; the new to
the required public notice, in the City Building, at the separated lots shall
be exempt from complying with minimum side yard requirements of this chapter.
Also, each separate zoning lot shall be serviced by its own separate sewer and
water lines.
      (2)   Any extension, structural alteration, enlargement or relocation of
the single-family or two- family dwelling shall conform to the height, area and
density regulations required of the dwellings in the R-1 District. However,
yard area requirements may be varied by the Building Official to allow
alteration of or enlargement of the existing dwelling so long as the alteration
or enlargement follows the existing foundation lines of the dwelling.
      (3)   Any single-family or two-family dwelling which is not in a flood
plain area or district that is a nonconforming use which is damaged or
destroyed by a catastrophic event such as fire or windstorm may be repaired or
rebuilt.
(1992 Code, § 155.114) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 112772, passed 11-27-
1972; Am. Ord.07984, passed 7-9-1984; Am. Ord. 08286A, passed 7-28-1986; Am.
Ord. 121195C, passed 12-11-1995)
Penalty, see § 155.999
SPECIAL USES
§ 155.125 PURPOSE.
   The principal objective of these standards for land use control is to
provide for an orderly arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses and
for the proper location of all types of uses required for the social and
economic welfare of the city. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind
of use is classified as permitted in 1 or more of the various districts
established herein. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified
and permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses which it may
be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service
they provide the public. These special uses require particular consideration as
to their proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses
or to the planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the
location and operation of the “special uses” are established by the following
provisions of this section.
(1992 Code, § 155.125) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.126 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council shall have authority to permit by special ordinance the
following uses of land or structures, or both, subject to conditions, contained
herein if it finds that the proposed location and establishment of any use will
be desirable or necessary to the public convenience or welfare and will be
harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity of
the selected site or sites.
   (A)   Airport, landing field or landing strip, in any use district subject
to the Federal Aviation Agency certifying that a new or reoriented runway will
not interfere with the flight pattern of any established airport, landing field
or landing strip.
   (B)   Areas for the dumping or disposal of trash or garbage, in any use
district, provided the sanitary landfill method is used.
   (C)   Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium and other similar places
for public events, in any business or manufacturing district.
   (D)   Beauty parlors.
   (E)   Bus terminal, railroad passenger station, freight terminal, or any
other public transportation terminal facilities, in any use district.
   (F)   Clinic or medical center, in any use district other than a
manufacturing district.
   (G)   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums, in any use district.
   (H)   Daycare center, in any B-1, B-2 or Agricultural District.
   (I)   Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials, materials, in
agricultural or manufacturing districts.
   (J)   Golf courses, public or private, in any use district.
   (K)   Hospitals or sanitariums, public or private, in any use district other
than a manufacturing district.
   (L)   Institutions for the care of the insane or feeble-minded, public or
private, in any use district other than a manufacturing district.
   (M)   Mini warehouses for storage purposes only, in any B-1 District,
provided there is a need for such a facility and further provided that storage
of flammable, explosive, corrosive and toxic materials, mechanical work on or
spraying or painting of any property is prohibited.
   (N)   Motels.
   (O)   Municipal or privately-owned recreation building or community center,
in any use district.
   (P)   Nursery school or day nursery, in any residential or business
district.
   (Q)   Off-street parking areas and garages, in any residential district,
provided there is a need for this facility and that no appropriate site is
available in nearby business or manufacturing districts, and provided that an
adequate method of screening is provided.
   (R)   Penal or correctional institutions, in any use district.
   (S)   Police station or fire station, in any use district.
   (T)   Public buildings, including art gallery, post office, library, museum,
or similar structures, in any residential or business district.
   (U)   Public or private park or playground, in any use district.
   (V)   Public or privately owned and operated fair grounds, permanent
carnivals, “kiddie parks,” or other similar amusement centers, in any B-2 or
Manufacturing District.
   (W)   Public utility facilities, such as, filtration plant, water reservoir
or pumping stations heat or power plant, transformer station and other similar
facilities, in any use district other than the B-2 or Manufacturing Districts,
where the facilities are permitted uses.
   (X)   Radio and television transmitting or antenna towers (commercial) and
other electronic equipment requiring outdoor structures and including antenna
towers used for sending private messages, provided however that this division
shall not apply to cell phone towers which are specifically provided for in
division (X-1) of this section, nor to private receiving aerials or antennas.
   (X-1)   Cellular telephone or message towers. In any business or
manufacturing district, provided that the location of such tower is not located
within 2,500 feet of any property in the city zoned R-1 or R-2, and provided
that there are not adequate cell phone tower facilities otherwise available for
such purposes, and provided that such tower use includes adequate, acceptable
provisions for a "fall zone."
   (Y)   Railroad right-of-way, in any use district.
   (Z)   Rest homes and nursing homes, in any R-2 or Business District,
provided that when located in a business district, the uses shall be
established above the first floor when located in a building constructed for a
business use. A building originally constructed for residential use may be used
in whole or in part.
   (AA)   Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private, in any
residential district, but not including trade or commercial schools operated
for profit.
   (BB)   Telephone exchange, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment
essential to the operation of the exchange, in any R-2 District in addition to
the business or manufacturing districts where the facilities are permissive
uses.
   (CC)   Trailer and/or mobile homes, in any R-2 District.
   (DD)   Small engine repair shops.
   (EE)   Dwelling units, located on the ground floor.
   (FF)   Massage therapy businesses.
   (GG)   Wind energy conversion systems subject to compliance with
Chapter 157.
(1992 Code, § 155.126) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord., passed 6-24-1991; Am.
Ord. 112497B, passed 11-24-1997; Am. Ord. 010801A, passed 1-8-2001; Am. Ord.
2006-MC06, passed 8-14- 2006; Am. Ord. 2011-MC07, passed 8-8-2011; Am. Ord.
2021-MC02, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 155.127 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   The Plan Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose the
restrictions upon the height, bulk and area of lot coverage of any structure so
approved for special use as may be reasonable under the particular
circumstances, provided that the restrictions and stipulations shall not be
more restrictive than the requirements established for the district in which
the structure is proposed to be located, or as may be required in any other
municipal code. Off-street parking facilities as well as off-street loading and
unloading spaces may also be stipulated in the order permitting the special
use.
(1992 Code, § 155.127) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.128 PROCEDURE.
   The procedure to be followed in considering applications for special uses
shall be as follows.
   (A)   Application. An application verified by the owner or authorized agent
of the owner of the property involved shall be filled out and filed with the
City Clerk along with a fee of $100, for the attention of the Plan Commission,
upon a form prescribed therefor, which shall contain or be accompanied by all
required information for special use.
   (B)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of the verified application, the City
Clerk shall notify the Chairperson of the Commission, or in his or her absence,
the Vice-Chairperson, who shall give notice of a public hearing in the same
manner as provided for hearings on the reclassification of property, as
contained in §§
155.185 through
155.188. A record of pertinent information presented at the public hearing
shall be made and maintained by the Commission as part of the permanent record
relative to the application.
   (C)   Determination. The Commission shall then make its findings and
recommendations to the City Council within 30 days following the date of public
hearing on each application. The City Council may then authorize a special use
as defined herein, provided the evidence that is presented is such as to
establish beyond a reasonable doubt.
      (1)   That the proposed use at the particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the
interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of
the neighborhood or community;
      (2)   That the use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of
persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property values or
improvements in the vicinity; and
      (3)   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in these standards for the use and with the stipulations
and conditions made a part of the authorization granted by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 155.128) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 051401H, passed 5-14-
2001; Am. Ord. 2007-MC02, passed 1-22-2007)
ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS
§ 155.140 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The uses permitted in the various zoning districts are principal uses, and a
building or use that is accessory to a permitted use is allowable in connection
with such a use, provided:
   (A)   It is located on the same lot designed for the principal use or
building being established or existing;
   (B)   It is compatible in character and extent with the principal use and
district where located;
   (C)   It conforms with the other regulations as apply;
   (D)   It is not prohibited; and
   (E)   It shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of
the principal use or building.
(1992 Code, § 155.140) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.141 LOCATION.
   (A)   An accessory building may not be located nearer to any interior lot
line than that permitted for the principal building, when any part of the
accessory building is on line with the principal building, if extended.
However, when an accessory building is located in the rear yard, it may then be
located within 2 feet of the interior lot lines but not nearer than 3 feet of
the rear lot line.
   (B)   No accessory building shall be located on a reversed corner lot beyond
the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer
than 5 feet to the side lot line of the adjacent lot.
(1992 Code, § 155.141) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.142 ERECTION PRIOR TO ESTABLISH- MENT OF MAIN BUILDING PROHIBITED.
   An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment or
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, or to which it
is intended to be accessory.
(1992 Code, § 155.142) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
SIGNS
§ 155.150 SIGNS PERMITTED IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS.
   Any publicly displayed sign, symbol or notice on a premises to advertise the
business there transacted, or name of person or firm conducting the business on
premises or directing to some other locale, shall be regulated as follows.
   (A)   Permitted signs in Agricultural District.
      (1)   Highway directional signs and markers.
      (2)   Traffic or directional signs.
      (3)   Billboards or other similar forms of advertising signs.
   (B)   Permitted signs in Residential Districts.
      (1)   For a structure other than a dwelling unit, 1 identification sign
not exceeding 10 square feet, except a church bulletin board which shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
      (2)   For purpose of orientation, directional signs when established by
the city.
   (C)   Permitted signs in Business Districts.
      (1)   Signs relating only to the name and use of buildings or premises
upon which they are placed. Outdoor billboards or signs advertising products or
matters not related to the occupancy of the premises shall not be permitted.
      (2)   Signs attached to or hung from a marquee or canopy shall be
completely within the borderline of the outer edge of the marquee or canopy and
shall in no instance be lower than 8 feet above the ground or surface over
which the marquee or canopy is constructed.
      (3)   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices erected upon standards
or separate supports shall be placed so as to be entirely within the property
lines of the premises upon which they are located, and no part of the sign or
standard shall have a total height greater than 20 feet above the level of the
street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level if the
ground level is above the street level, nor shall the surface or any face of
any sign exceed an area of 50 square feet.
      (4)   No sign shall be permitted which is in conflict with traffic
signals, controls or directional signs.
      (5)   Traffic or directional signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use of parking facilities, accessory to the main use of the
premises, may be maintained provided they are located within the property lines
of the subject lot.
   (D)   Permitted signs in Manufacturing Districts.
      (1)   Signs identifying the occupant of a building or buildings.
      (2)   Billboards when located not less than 100 feet from any adjoining
lot in a residential district.
      (3)   Directional signs permitted in residential districts.
      (4)   Signs permitted in business districts.
(1992 Code, § 155.150) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 112778, passed 11-27-
1978; Am. Ord. 072897C, passed 7-28-1997)
§ 155.151 FEES TO BE PAID BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   For a permit for the placement of a sign, the fee shall be $50.
(Am. Ord. 051401F, passed 5-14-2001)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
§ 155.160 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public streets and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and
unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is
put.
(1992 Code, § 155.160) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.161 PARKING AND LOADING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Procedure. An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged
building, structure or use shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided
in compliance with the requirements of these standards.
   (B)   Extent of control. The off-street parking and loading requirements of
these standards shall apply as follows.
      (1)   All buildings and structures erected or enlarged and land uses
initiated after the effective date of these standards shall provide accessory
off-street parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use
thereof, except that a building or structure for which a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of these standards shall not be
required to furnish parking or loading facilities if construction is begun
thereon within 6 months of the effective date of the building permit and
diligently prosecuted to completion.
      (2)   When a building or structure erected or enlarged prior to or after
the effective date of these standards shall undergo a decrease in number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or
other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading
facilities, and further, when the decrease would result in a requirement for
fewer total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions
herein, parking and loading facilities may be reduced accordingly provided that
existing parking or loading facilities shall be so decreased only when the
facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of these standards to
the entire building or structure as modified.
      (3)   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in number
of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement specified herein after for required parking or loading facilities,
and further, when the increase would result in a requirement for additional
total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of these
standards, parking and loading facilities may be increased accordingly,
provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so increased that
the facilities would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of these provisions to the entire
building or structure as modified.
   (C)   Existing parking and loading spaces. Accessory off-street parking and
loading spaces in existence on the effective date of these standards may not be
reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this section for
equivalent new construction; in which event, the spaces shall not be reduced
below the number required herein for the equivalent new construction.
   (D)   Permissive parking and loading spaces. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the establishment of off-street automobile parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full
compliance with the provisions of this section, except that off-street parking
areas accessory to existing multiple-family structures cannot be located off
the premises containing the principal use, unless on a lot adjacent thereto,
without special authorization by the City Council.
   (E)   Damage or destruction. Any building, structure or use which is in
existence and in a conforming use on the effective date of these standards and
which subsequently shall be damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion
or other cause may be reconstructed, re-established or repaired with or without
off-street parking or loading facilities, except that parking or loading
facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of the damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, it shall not
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of
those required herein for equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Schedule of requirements.
      (1)   Tables for required parking and loading. Requirements governing the
number and location of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities in
relation to the use of property are established hereinafter in this section.
The parking and loading requirements for any use not specified herein shall be
the same as for a similar specified use, as determined by §
155.171.
      (2)   Floor area. The term FLOOR AREA as employed in this parking and
loading section in the case of office, merchandising or service types of use
shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure used or intended to
be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or
tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or
sale of merchandise. FLOOR AREA for the purposes of this section, shall not
include any area used for:
         (a)   Storage accessory to the principal use of a building;
         (b)   Incidental repairs;
         (c)   Processing or packaging of merchandise;
         (d)   Show windows, or offices incidental to the management or
maintenance of a store or building;
         (e)   Rest rooms;
         (f)   Utilities; or
         (g)   Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
(1992 Code, § 155.161) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.162 USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.
   Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in
any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this section
shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by
occupants of the dwelling structures to which the facilities are accessory or
by guests of the occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking
facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the storage of
commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the
employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or customers of business or manufacturing
establishments, except as permitted in §
155.166.
(1992 Code, § 155.162) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.163 JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.
   Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses or
for mixed uses may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which
separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted,
provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less
than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
(1992 Code, § 155.163) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.164 CONTROL OF OFF-STREET FACILITIES.
   When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere
than on the same lot on which the principal use served is located, they shall
be in the same possession, either by deed or long-term lease, as the property
occupied by the principal use, and the owner shall be bound by covenants filed
of record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, requiring the owner and his
or her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces
during the existence of the principal use.
(1992 Code, § 155.164) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.165 PERMITTED DISTRICTS FOR ACCESSORY PARKING.
   Accessory parking facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning lot
with the principal use served in accordance with subsection 7-6.4 may be
located in any zoning district except as follows:
   (A)   No parking facilities accessory to a multiple- family use shall be
located in an R-1 District;
   (B)   No parking facilities accessory to a business or manufacturing use
shall be located in a residential district, except when authorized by the City
Council as prescribed hereinafter;
   (C)   No parking facilities accessory to a manufacturing use shall be
permitted in a B-1 District.
(1992 Code, § 155.165) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.166 NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Accessory off-street parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of
property may be permitted in an R-2 District when authorized by the City
Council, subject to the following requirements, in addition to all other
relevant requirements of this section.
   (A)   The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with,
1 or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining districts, or in
connection with 1 or more existing professional or institutional office
buildings or institutions.
   (B)   The parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
   (C)   No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted on
the parking lot.
   (D)   No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use shall be maintained on the parking lot.
   (E)   Each entrance to and exit from the parking lot shall be at least 20
feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential district,
except where ingress and egress to the parking lot are provided from a public
alley or public way separating the residential areas from the proposed parking
lot.
   (F)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, the parking lots shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed by the
City Council for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the vicinity
of the proposed parking lot. These may include the provision of screen
plantings.
(1992 Code, § 155.166) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.167 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Parking space. A required off-street parking space shall be an area of
not less than 162 square feet nor less than 8½ feet wide by 19 feet long,
exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas,
accessible from streets or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets
or alleys and to be used for the storage or parking of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles under 1½ tons capacity where permitted in these
standards. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall not be less than 12
feet in width when serving automobiles parked at a 45° angle in 1 direction,
nor less than 20 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicular to
the aisles and accommodating two-way traffic.
   (B)   Measurement of space. When determination of the number of required
off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions over
one-half shall be interpreted as 1 parking space.
   (C)   Open and enclosed spaces. Parking areas may be open or enclosed except
that when parking facilities accessory to a multiple dwelling are located in a
residential or business district elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the
principal use served, the parking facilities shall be open to the sky.
   (D)   Access. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least interfere
with the movement of traffic.
   (E)   Signs. No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any
residential district, except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of
the parking facilities.
   (F)   Required setbacks. No parking space nor portion thereof established on
the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a required front
yard. No parking spaces nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot without
a building shall be located closer to any street line than the established
building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard setback
required for the district in which the parking lot is located. Further, any
wall, fence, or hedge developed around any parking area shall be subject to the
front yard setback requirements established in these standards in the same
manner as a building or structure.
   (G)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be hard surfaced or
shall be surfaced with a dustless material.
   (H)   Screening and landscaping. All open off- street parking areas for 6 or
more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence or a densely
planted compact hedge along any side which adjoins or is directly across a
street or alley from a property in a residential district or an institutional
property. The wall, fence, or hedge, shall be at least 4 feet, but not more
than 7 feet, in height, and shall be maintained in good condition.
   (I)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties.
(1992 Code, § 155.167) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.168 SPECIAL USE PUBLIC PARKING AREAS.
   Any automobile parking area developed for transient trade, and not accessory
to specific principal uses or groups of uses for which parking is required by
these standards, shall be treated as a “special use” as defined in §§
155.125 through
155.128, and as allowed in accordance with the provisions of §§
155.125 through
155.128 by the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 155.168) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.169 LOADING; DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Loading berth. An off-street loading berth shall be a hard-surfaced
area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or a public way, used
principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors
and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets
and alleys. A required loading space shall not be less than 10 feet in width,
45 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and
maneuvering space, except as otherwise specifically dimensioned hereafter.
   (B)   Location. No permitted or required loading berth shall be closer than
50 feet to any property in a residential district unless completely enclosed by
building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination
thereof not less than 6 feet in height. No permitted or required loading berth
shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any 2
streets. Loading berths open to the sky may be located in any required yards.
   (C)   Measurement of berth. When determination of the number of required
off-street loading berths results in a requirement of a fractional berth, any
fraction up to and including ½ shall be disregarded, and fractions over ½ shall
be interpreted as 1 loading berth.
   (D)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
hard surface or shall be surfaced with a dustless material.
(1992 Code, § 155.169) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.170 LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS; EXTENT OF CONTROL.
   Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter
specified; where a distance is specified, the distance shall be walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest
entrance of the building that the parking area is required to serve:
   (A)   For one- and two-family dwellings, on the same lot with the building
they are required to serve;
   (B)   For three- and four-family dwellings not over 2 stories in height, on
the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve. For
the purpose of these standards, a group of the uses constructed and maintained
under single ownership or management shall be assumed to be on a single lot or
parcel of land;
   (C)   For apartment houses containing 4 or more dwelling units, on the same
lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, or on a
separate motor parcel of land not more than 300 feet from the nearest entrance
to the principal building being served provided the lot or parcel of land
selected for the parking facilities is located in an apartment district or a
less restricted district;
   (D)   For rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, hospitals, sanitariums,
orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, dormitories, sorority and
fraternity houses, and for the other similar uses, the off-street parking
facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal
building or buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the zoning
lot upon which is located the building or buildings they are intended to serve;
   (E)   For uses other than those specified above, off-street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over 1,000
feet from the entrance of the principal building, measured from the nearest
point of the parking area, provided the separate lot or parcel of land intended
for the parking facilities is located in the same district as the principal
permitted use or in a less restricted district.
(1992 Code, § 155.170) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.171 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Parking requirements shall be as follows:
   (A)   For one- and two-family dwellings, 1 parking space for each family
dwelling unit.
   (B)   For 3 or more family dwellings, 1 parking space for each family
dwelling unit.
   (C)   For hotels and clubs, 1 parking space for each 6 guests or sleeping
rooms and suites, plus 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area
devoted to supplementary parking generative activities such as bars, ballrooms,
dining rooms, night club facilities and the like.
   (D)   For motels, parking space for each guest or sleeping room or suite,
plus 1 additional space for the owner, manager and employees on the premises.
   (E)   For lodging, rooming and boarding houses, 1 parking space for each 4
guests, plus 1 additional space for the owner or manager if resident on the
premises.
   (F)   For private clubs or lodges (without sleeping rooms), parking spaces
equal in number to 25% of the total membership.
   (G)   For hospitals, 1 parking space for each 3 hospital beds, plus 1
parking space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area in residents’
quarters, plus 1 additional space for each staff or visiting doctor.
   (H)   For sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes or homes for the
aged, 1 space for each 4 patient beds, plus 1 additional space for each staff
or visiting doctor.
   (I)   For medical or dental clinics, 3 parking spaces per doctor engaged at
clinic.
   (J)   For mortuaries or funeral parlors, 5 parking spaces for each room used
as a chapel or parlor, plus 1 space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the
premises, plus 1 space for each family residing on the premises.
   (K)   For bowling alleys, 2 parking spaces for each alley plus the
additional spaces as may be determined by the Building Official for affiliated
uses such as bars, restaurants and the like.
   (L)   For convention halls, dance halls, skating rinks, assembly halls,
exhibition halls or other places of assembly, 1 parking space for each 100
square feet of floor area used for assembly.
   (M)   Stadium, sports arena, auditorium and gymnasium (other than incidental
to a school), 1 parking space for each 8 seats.
   (N)   For theaters:
      (1)   Indoor - 1 parking space for each 10 seats up to 500, plus 1
parking space for each 5 seats above 500.
      (2)   Outdoor - reservoir space equal to 10% of the capacity.
   (O)   For church, Sunday school, high school, college and university
auditoriums, 1 parking space for each 12 seats provided in the buildings or
structures.
   (P)   For airports, railroad passenger stations, bus depots, or other
passenger terminal facilities (special uses), the parking space as the City
Council, subject to the recommendation of the Plan Commission, shall deem to be
adequate for employees, passengers, spectators, visitors and others.
   (Q)   For banks, business or professional offices, or public administration
buildings, 1 parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
   (R)   For mixed uses - the parking facilities required shall be the sum of
the requirements for the various individual uses, computed separately in
accordance with this section; parking facilities for 1 use shall not be
considered as providing the required parking facilities for any other use in
the same building or on the same lot.
   (S)   For retail stores and service shops, 1 parking space for each 300
square feet of retail floor area.
   (T)   For establishments handling the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, food or refreshments on the premises, 1 parking space for each 300
square feet of floor area.
   (U)   For furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale
stores, household equipment or furniture repair shops or machinery sales, 1
parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
   (V)   For manufacturing and industrial uses, research and testing
laboratories, laundry and dry- cleaning plants, printing, binding, publishing
and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books and other reading matter,
telephone exchanges, warehouses, storage buildings, engraving shops, assembly
of materials and products, and other similar uses, 1 parking space for each 4
employees, based upon the maximum number of persons to be employed at any 1
work period during the day or night, plus the additional parking facilities as
shall be required for all vehicles used in the conduct of the enterprise.
(1992 Code, § 155.171) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.172 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES.
   In all districts where property uses include the loading and unloading of
materials or merchandise from vehicles, off-street loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   For hospitals or sanitariums containing forty thousand to 100,000
square feet of gross floor area, 1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus
1 additional space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area
or fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (B)   For buildings containing bowling alleys, taverns, restaurants, or any
retail shops and having 10,000 or more square feet of gross floor area, 1 off-
street loading and unloading space.
   (C)   For banks, business or professional offices or public administration
buildings containing 20,000 square feet or more of gross floor space, 1 off-
street loading and unloading space.
   (D)   For buildings containing furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle
sales, wholesale stores, household equipment or machinery sales and having
8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, 1 off-street loading and
unloading space.
   (E)   For buildings containing manufacturing uses, research and testing
laboratories, laundry and dry- cleaning establishments, printing, binding,
publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books and other reading
matter, warehouse and storage facilities, engraving shops, assembly of
materials and products, processing and distribution of materials and products,
and other similar uses, having more than 8,000 square feet of gross floor area,
exclusive of basement area, and less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area, 1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus 1 additional space for
each additional 60,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 40,000
square feet.
(1992 Code, § 155.172) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 155.185 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   A Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The word “Board”
when used in this subchapter shall be construed to mean the Board of Appeals.
The Board shall consist of 5 members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council. The members of the Board shall serve for a term of 5 years.
One of the members of the Board shall be designated as Chairperson of the Board
by the Mayor, with the consent of City Council and shall hold his or her office
as Chairperson until his or her successor is appointed. The Chairperson, or, in
his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. The Mayor shall have the power to remove any member of
the Board for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon the Board shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant,
in the manner herein provided for the appointment of the member.
(1992 Code, § 155.185) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.186 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at the other times as the Board may determine. There shall be
at least 7 days but not more than 30 days notice of the time and place of the
meeting published in a paper of general circulation in the city, the notice to
contain a statement of the particular purpose of the meeting and a brief
description of the location of the property under consideration at the meeting.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (B)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
the fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a
requested variation, and the reasons for granting or denying the variation
shall be specified. Every rule, regulations, every amendment or repeal thereof,
and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
   (C)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with
the statute in the case made and provided and may select or appoint the
officers as it deems necessary.
(1992 Code, § 155.186) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.187 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of the Zoning Code. The Board may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that
the Board may decide to be fitting and proper in the premises. The applicant
for such an appeal or an applicant for variance to the zoning ordinance shall
submit, with his or her application, the fee of $100.
   (B)   The Board shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or
upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Code.
   (C)   Where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the Zoning Code, the Board may
authorize a variation in the application of the regulations of the Zoning Code
in harmony with their general purpose and intent, in the following instances:
      (1)   To permit a front yard, a side yard, and/or a rear yard less than
that required by the Zoning Code, but the variation shall not exceed 25% of the
depth of the front yard, or the width of a side yard, as required by the Zoning
Code;
      (2)   The Board is hereby authorized to vary the rear lot requirements to
reduce rear lot measurements to as low as 10 feet; except on corner lots where
buildings are erected to front on the long dimension of a lot, and except on
triangular, irregular and odd shaped lots, the Board is hereby authorized to
vary the rear lot measurements to as low as 5 feet;
      (3)   To permit a building or structure to exceed the height limit by a
reasonable amount beyond the limits established by the Zoning Code;
      (4)   To permit the use of a lot less in area by not more than 10% of the
lot width as required by the Zoning Code;
      (5)   To permit the use of a lot less in width by not more than 15% of
the lot width as required by the Zoning Code;
      (6)   To permit the use of a lot adjacent to a commercial or multiple
dwelling use as parking space for the use, provided that the lot shall have the
area required by the Zoning Code for parking space for the use.
   (D)   In considering all proposed variations to the Zoning Code, the Board
shall, before making any variation from the regulation in a specific case,
first determine and make a finding of fact that the proposed variation will not
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, increase the
congestion in public streets, increase the danger of fire or endanger the
public safety, and unreasonably diminish or impair established property values
within the surrounding area.
   (E)   The concurring vote of 3 members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of the Zoning Code or to decide in favor
of the applicant any matter upon which the Board is authorized by the Zoning
Code to render a decision.
(1992 Code, § 155.187) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 042682, passed 4-26-
1982; Am. Ord. 051401G, passed 5-14-2001; Am. Ord. 2007-MC01, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 155.188 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken from the officer charged with the enforcement
of the Zoning Code by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, or
bureau of the city. The appeal shall be taken within the time as shall be
prescribed by the Board by general rule, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the Board, a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal
is taken and on due cause shown.
   (C)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal
and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent,
or by attorney.
   (D)   All final administrative decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the “Administrative
Review Act,” approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications
thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
(1992 Code, § 155.188) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.200 COMMISSION OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ENFORCE ZONING CODE.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce the Zoning Code.
(1992 Code, § 155.200) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.201 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   Subsequent to the effective date of the Zoning Code, no change in the
use of land, nor any change of use in an existing building shall be made, nor
shall any new building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of the Zoning Code, stating that the building and use comply with
the provisions of the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the
application for a building permit, and shall be issued after all 5 sections of
the record of inspection have been successfully met. No permit for excavation
for or the erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. No building or
premises shall be occupied until a certificate has been issued.
   (C)   A record of a certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of the
Zoning Code, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building affected by the
certificate of occupancy.
(1992 Code, § 155.201) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 051401E, passed 5-14-
2001)
Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.202 PLATS.
   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the size and location of the building or buildings to be erected or
altered and the other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of the Zoning Code. A careful record of the applications and plats
shall be kept in the Office of the Commissioner of Public Works.
(1992 Code, § 155.202) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.203 PRESENTATION TO CITY COUNCIL OF RECOMMENDATIONS OR NO RECOM-
MENDATIONS OF PLAN COMMISSION TO CITY COUNCIL.
   In the event the Plan Commission fails or refuses to recommend, or
recommends against the reclassification of any tract of real estate in the
city, the recommendation or lack of recommendation shall be reported to the
City Council, and unless the petitioner or proponents of the zoning
reclassification obtain an adopted ordinance for the rezoning classification by
the first or second City Council meeting subsequent to the Plan Commission
meeting at which the recommendation or non-recommendation occurred, the City
Council cannot thereafter adopt an ordinance for the zoning reclassification in
reference to the tract of real estate in the city, unless and until the
proposal is subsequently again first presented to the Plan Commission at a
future meeting of the Commission, pursuant to a future notice by publication,
prior to Commission hearing and to consider any proposal for reclassification
of zoning.
(1992 Code, § 155.203) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
§ 155.204 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The regulations imposed and the districts created under the Zoning
Code may be amended by ordinance, but no amendments shall be made without a
hearing before the Plan Commission created pursuant to ordinance.
   (B)   At least 15 days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation in the city, the notice to contain
the particular location for which the amendment is requested as well as a brief
statement describing the proposed amendment. In case of written protest against
the proposed amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the
frontage proposed to be altered or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to the regulations or
district, filed with the City Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except
by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all of the members of the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council shall, at its discretion and direction, require that
any Zoning Code amendment, approved after hearing before the Plan Commission
which impacts adjoining property owners, either at the current time or at any
foreseeable time in the future, shall be filed with the Douglas County Recorder
of Deeds' office upon a form prescribed therefor which shall contain or be
accompanied by all required information for said change or amendment. Any fee
incurred in association with such filing shall be the responsibility of
applicant(s) of said variance.
(1992 Code, § 155.204) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord.
2007-MC03, passed 1-22-2007)
§ 155.205 FEES.
   Fees for certificates of occupancy, appeals to the Board of Appeals and
petitions for amendments shall be as established by action of the City Council
from time to time. The fees shall be paid to the Commissioner of Public Works
who shall give a receipt therefor and account for same at regular intervals to
the City Council.
(1992 Code, § 155.205) (Ord. passed 5- -1969)
STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 155.215 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system whose primary purpose is
to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or
transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS. An active solar energy system that
is an, integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building. Building-integrated system include but
not limited to photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings.
   GRID-INTERTIE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar energy system that
is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility company.
   GROUND-MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on a rack or pole that rests on
or is attached to the ground.
   OFF-GRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar energy system in which
the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically
connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric
utility company.
   PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that captures solar light
or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. An active solar energy system that converts solar
energy directly into electricity.
   POLLINATOR PLANTS. Pollinator plants shall be those plants designated on the
United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service
pollinator plane list.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY EASEMENT, SOLAR ENERGY EASEMENT. An easement that limits
the height or location, or both, of permissible development on the burdened
land of a structure or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access
for the benefitted land to wind or sunlight passing over the burdened land.
   ROOF MOUNT. A solar energy system that is mounted on a rack that is fastened
onto a building roof.
   SOLAR ACCESS. Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR. An assembly, structure, and the associated equipment and
housing, designed for gathering, concentrating, or absorbing direct and
indirect solar energy for which the primary purpose is to convert or transform
solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES). All components required to become a complete
assembly for structure that will convert solar energy into electricity for use.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM ADDITION. A private solar energy system which is
structurally attached to a building or structure on a zoning lot on which said
system is located. Said system shall be considered part of the building and
shall comply with all provisions of this ordinance pertaining thereto.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PRIVATE. A collection of one or more solar collectors
designed for use by the occupant(s) of the zoning lot on which said system is
located; excess power generation is limited to net metering or similar
technology with regulations set by the local power utility, community, county,
and state. Private solar energy system equipment shall conform to applicable
industry standards, and applicants for building permits for private solar
energy systems shall submit certificates from equipment manufactures that the
equipment is manufactured in compliance with industry standards.
   SOLAR FARM. A commercial facility either more than 20 acres in size or more
than two megawatts a/c in capacity that converts sunlight into electricity,
whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or
other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of
generated electricity. A solar farm is the principal land use for the parcel on
which it is located.
   SOLAR GARDEN. A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array, of no more
than 20 acres in size and two megawatts or less a/c in capacity, that provides
retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple
households or businesses residing in or located off-site from the location of
the solar energy system. A county solar garden may be either an accessory use,
when a part of existing or a proposed subdivision or a special use if it is a
stand-alone garden.
   SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER. A component of a solar energy device that is used to
transfer heat from one substance to another.
   SOLAR HOT AIR SYSTEM. An active solar energy system (also referred to as
solar air heat or solar furnace) that includes a solar collector to provide
direct supplemental space heating by heating and re-circulating conditioned
building air.
   SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM. A system (also referred to as solar thermal) that
includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water
for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential
domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes.
   SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES. Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the
mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or the ground.
   SOLAR STORAGE UNIT. A component of a solar energy device that is used to
store solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.216 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
   (A)   All solar energy systems (SES) will be required to have a City of
Villa Grove Building Permit before any work can be started. A written plan and
a plat/drawing for the proposed solar energy system shall be provided with the
building permit application. The plat/drawing must show the location of the
system on the building or on the property, (for a ground-mount system show
arrangement of panels), with all property lines and setback footages indicated.
Fees for processing the applications for building permits shall be submitted to
and collected by the City of Villa Grove as follows:
      (1)   Zero - 10 kilowatts (kW): $150.
      (2)   Eleven - 50 kilowatts (kW): $300.
      (3)   Fifty-one - 100 kilowatts (kW): $600.
      (4)   One hundred one - 500 kilowatts (kW): $1,200.
      (5)   Five hundred one - 1000 kilowatts (kW): $2,750.
      (6)   One thousand one - 2000 kilowatts (kW): $6,000.
      (7)   Over 2,001 kilowatts (kW): $6,000 + $200 for each additional 0-100
kilowatts.
   (B)   Any SES that construction has started before a building permit has
been applied and paid for will be charged double the permit fee.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.217 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Setback requirements for all solar energy systems (SES) shall meet the
structure minimum set back requirements when the SES is oriented at any and all
positions.
   (B)   No solar energy system shall be allowed to be placed in the front yard
of any residentially used or zoned property and such systems shall be subject
to a five foot rear yard setback and a five foot side yard setback. Such ground
mounted systems shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
   (C)   Roof mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior
perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.218 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Building or roof mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height in any zoning district, of the City of Villa Grove
Zoning Ordinance, except that roof mounted solar energy systems installed in
residentially zones and business district zones shall not exceed four feet
above a flat roof and shall not exceed two feet above a sloped roof. For the
purposes of this section a flat roof shall be one that is sloped five degrees
or less and a sloped roof shall be one that is sloped more than five degrees.
   (B)   In Business, Agricultural and Manufacturing Districts roof mounted SES
may not exceed six feet above the peak or highest point of the roof.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.219 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Upon request from the City of Villa Grove Building Inspector, an owner
of a commercial solar energy system must provide documentation, within 30 days,
that the solar energy system is still in use. If it is not, the owner of the
system will have 180 days, after notification from the Zoning Department, to
remove.
   (B)   Upon request from the City of Villa Grove Building Inspector, the
owner or operator of a solar farm or a solar garden must submit, within 14
days, a current operation and maintenance report to the Department.
   (C)   For any ground-mounted solar system in excess of ten kilowatt, a six-
foot security fence with lockable gate(s) shall be installed around the entire
perimeter, otherwise, no fencing is required. Any fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that is clearly visible on the
site.
   (D)   Any lighting for solar farms/gardens shall be installed for security
and safety purposes only. Except for lightening that is required by the FCC or
FAA, all lighting shall be shielded so that no glare extends substantially
beyond the boundaries of the facility.
   (E)   Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be oriented such that
they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
   (F)   Electric solar energy system components must have a UL listing and
must be designed with anti-reflective coating(s).
   (G)   Solar energy systems must be in compliance with ALL State of Illinois
Building, Electric, Plumbing and Energy Codes.
   (H)   Pollinator plants customarily utilized in the region shall be planted
and properly maintained in all areas where practicable.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.220 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Active solar energy systems shall be designed to conform to the county
comprehensive plan and to blend into the architecture of the building or may be
require to be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way other than
alleys. Screening may be required to the extent it does not affect the
operation of the system. The color of the solar collector is not required to be
consistent with other roofing materials.
   (A)   Building integrated photovoltaic systems. Building integrated
photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of whether the
system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided the building component
in which the system is integrated meets all required setback, land use or
performance standards for the district in which the building is located.
   (B)   Solar energy systems with mounting devices. Solar energy systems using
roof mounting devices or ground-mount solar energy systems shall not be
restricted if the system is not visible from the closest edge of any public
right-of-way or immediately adjacent to a residential structure.
   (C)   Reflectors. All solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance
solar production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting adjacent or
nearby properties. Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of
the system, screening on the north side of the solar array, modifying the
orientation of the system, reducing use of the reflector system, or other
remedies that limit glare.
   (D)   Aviation protection. For solar units located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the solar glare hazard analysis tool (SGHAT) for the
Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federally.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.221 OBLIGATED AIRPORTS, OR MOST RECENT VERSION ADOPTED BY THE FAA.
   (A)   Coverage. Roof or building mounted solar energy systems, excluding
building integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-
fighting purposes to the south-facing or flat roof upon which the panels are
mounted. Ground-mount private solar energy systems shall be exempt from
impervious surface calculations if the soil under the collector is not
compacted and maintained in vegetation. Foundations, gravel, or compacted soils
are considered impervious.
   (B)   Plan approval required. All solar energy systems shall require
administrative plan approval by the City of Villa Grove Building Inspector via
the review of the application for a building permit.
      (1)   Plan applications. Plan applications for solar energy systems shall
be accompanied by horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The drawings
must show the location of the system on the building or on the property for a
ground-mount system, including the property lines.
         (a)   Pitched roof-mounted solar energy systems. For all roof-mounted
systems other than a flat roof the elevation must show the highest finished
slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof surface on
which it is mounted.
         (b)   Flat roof mounted solar energy systems. For flat roof
applications a drawing shall be submitted showing the distance to the roof edge
and any parapets on the building and shall identify the height of the building
on the street frontage side, the shortest distance of the system from the
street frontage edge of the building, and the highest finished height of the
solar collector above the finished surface of the roof.
      (2)   Plan approvals. Applications that meet the design requirements of
this subchapter, and do not require an administrative variance, shall be
granted administrative approval by agreement of the City Administrator and the
Building Inspector and shall not require Planning and Zoning Committee review.
Plan approval does not indicate compliance with Building Code or Electric Code.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.222 APPROVED SOLAR COMPONENTS.
   Electric solar energy system components must have a UL listing or approved
equivalent and solar hot water systems must have an SRCC rating.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.223 COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE.
   All active solar energy systems shall meet approval of county building code
officials, consistent with the State of Illinois Building Code and solar
thermal system shall comply with HVAC-related requirements of the Energy Code.
Any county adopted building codes will apply and take precedence where
applicable.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.224 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE ELECTRIC CODE.
   All photovoltaic systems shall comply with the Illinois State Electric Code.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.225 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   Solar thermal systems shall comply with applicable Illinois State Plumbing
Code requirements.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.226 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE ENERGY CODE.
   All photovoltaic systems and solar thermal systems shall comply with the
Illinois State Energy Code.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.227 UTILITY NOTIFICATION.
   All grid-intertie solar energy systems shall comply with the interconnection
requirements of the electric utility. Off-grid systems are exempt from this
requirement.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.228 PRINCIPAL USES.
   Douglas County encourages the development of commercial or utility scale
solar energy systems where such systems present few land use conflicts with
current and future development patterns. Ground-mounted solar energy systems
that are the principal use on the zoning lot or lots are special uses in
selected districts.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.229 ROOFTOP GARDENS PERMITTED.
   Rooftop community systems are permitted in all zoning districts where
buildings are permitted.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.230 GROUND-MOUNT GARDENS.
   Ground-mount community solar energy gardens must be less than 20 acres in
total size. Ground-mount solar developments covering more than 20 acres shall
be considered solar farms.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.231 STORMWATER.
   Solar gardens are subject to the City of Villa Grove's Stormwater Management
regulations, erosion and sediment control provisions.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.232 INTERCONNECTION.
   An interconnection agreement must be completed with the electric utility in
whose service territory the system is located prior to construction.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.233 OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Private SES and solar gardens. Ground-mount systems must comply with
all required standards for structures in the district in which the system is
located. All solar gardens shall also be in compliance with all applicable
local, state and federal regulatory codes, including the State of Illinois
Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the National Electric Code, as amended.
Also, Health Department requirements for wells and septic systems must be met.
   (B)   Solar farms. Ground-mount solar energy systems that are the primary
use on the lot, designed for providing energy to off-site uses or export to the
wholesale market, are permitted under the following standards:
      (1)   Special use permit. Solar farms are special uses in agricultural
district.
      (2)   Stormwater. Solar farms are subject to the City of Villa Grove's
Stormwater Management regulations, erosion and sediment control provisions.
      (3)   Ground cover and buffer areas. Top soils shall not be removed
during development, unless part of a remediation effort. Soils shall be planted
to and maintained in perennial vegetation to prevent erosion, manage run off
and build soil. The City of Villa Grove has a Noxious Weed Ordinance which is
to be followed subject to the allowance of the planting of Pollinator plants as
otherwise provided under this subchapter. Due to potential liability under the
Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 520, Act 10, § 11(b) it is
required that any crops planted be in compliance with all federal and state
laws protecting endangered species. This will also include pollinators such as
bees.
      (4)   Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar panels racking and support is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      (5)   Other standards and codes. All solar farms shall be in compliance
with all applicable local, state and federal regulatory codes, including the
State of Illinois Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the National Electric
Code, as amended.
      (6)   Power and communication lines. Power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the City of Villa Grove in instances where shallow bedrock, water
courses, or other elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability
to bury lines, or distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion
of the City Superintendent in consultation with the Mayor. In addition, the
Illinois Department of Agriculture (IDOA) has established standards and
policies in the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreements (AIMA) regarding the
construction or burial of electric transmission lines which should be agreed to
and adhered to between the landowner and the developer.
      (7)   Site plan required. A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, rights-of-way, service roads, floodplains,
wetlands and other protected natural resources, topography, farm tile, electric
equipment, fencing, and screening materials and all other characteristics
requested by the City of Villa Grove. The site plan should also show all zoning
districts, and overlay districts. The city will retain the authority to suspend
any requirement for any studies or plans for purposes of permit approval so
long as such studies and/or plans are completed and approved by time of
construction.
      (8)   Aviation protection. For approach zones of an airport, the
applicant must complete and provide the results of the solar glare hazard
analysis tool (SGHAT) for the Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final
approach paths, consistent with the Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy
Projects on Federally Obligated Airports, or most recent version adopted by the
FAA.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 155.234 LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   For private/individual SES(s), commencing with the issuance of
building permits, the applicant or owner shall maintain a current liability
policy of at least $1,000,000 covering bodily injuries and any damage that may
occur, on their home owner's policy or other applicable policy as approved by
the Director of Community Development. A copy of said liability policy shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector on an annual basis.
   (B)   Any SES(s), applicant, owner, or operator, whether individual or
commercial, shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the county and its
officials, employees, and agents (collectively and individually, the
"indemnified parties") from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
suits, causes of actions, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney's fees, except to the extent arising
in whole or part out of negligence or intentional acts of such indemnified
parties (such liabilities together known as "liability") arising out of
applicant, owner, or operators selection, construction, operation, and removal
of the SES(S) and affiliated equipment including, without limitation, liability
for property damage or personal injury (including death), whether said
liability is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation
strict liability or negligence). This general indemnification shall not be
construed as limited or qualifying the county's other indemnification rights
available under the law.
(Ord. 2021-MC12, passed 12-13-2021)
LARGE/COMMERCIAL STORAGE CONTAINERS
§ 155.250 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR SHIPPING CONTAINER STORAGE UNITS.
   (A)   Shipping containers may be used for permanent or temporary storage
purposes only, however special use permit (permanent) or temporary use permit
(temporary) must be requested by owner and first granted by the city.
   (B)   Accessory buildings may not be used as dwelling units or for sleeping
purposes.
   (C)   As indicated in § 10-10-1 of this ordinance, a zoning permit is
required for the installation of a shipping container.
   (D)   Shipping containers shall be single unit height with no stacking
allowed.
   (E)   Shipping containers shall not store materials that could be injurious
or harmful to people, property or the city.
   (F)   Insurance for shipping container storage units shall be obtained by
property owner.
(Ord. 2024-MC17, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 155.251 PERMANENT USE.
   (A)   Shipping containers may be used for permanent use, only within general
commercial, manufacturing or industrial districts.
   (B)   Special use permit shall be requested for by owner and approved by
city for permanent uses.
   (C)   Limit of 2 storage units per lot.
   (D)   Must be located on paved or aggregate surface location. Not intended
for yard or non- accessible locations.
(Ord. 2024-MC17, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 155.252 TEMPORARY USE.
   (A)   Shipping containers may be used for temporary use, on any of the
commercial, residential, or industrial districts.
   (B)   Temporary use permit shall be requested for by owner and approved by
Zoning Administrator for temporary uses.
   (C)   Limit of 1 temporary storage unit per lot.
   (D)   Must be located on paved or aggregate surface location. Not intended
for yard or non- accessible locations. Can only be placed on city right-of-way,
streets or parking spots with prior approval from Zoning Administrator.
Temporary shipping container location must not interfere with traffic, parking,
pedestrian or ADA access.
   (E)   Permit applicant must specify use of temporary storage unit in
request.
   (F)   Temporary use shall be limited to and permitted for up to 30 days.
   (G)   Temporary use permit must be displayed on a visible side of the
shipping container, through the duration of the temporary use.
(Ord. 2024-MC17, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of the Zoning Code shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense. Each day that a violation shall
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of the Zoning Code, the Building
Inspector, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or
proceedings in the name of the city to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of
the building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises.
(1992 Code, § 155.999) (Ord. passed 5- -1969; Am. Ord. 081202A, passed 8-12-
2002)
CHAPTER 156: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
Section
   
156.01   Applicability
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Petitions
   
156.04   Payment and administration of costs
   
156.05   Participants
   
156.06   Public hearing
   
156.07   Public comment; written and oral
   
156.08   The public record
   
156.09   Decision by the City Council
§ 156.01 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter is applicable to a request for site location approval of a new
pollution control facility that does not handle hazardous waste as defined by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. To the extent a facility,
described in a petition, proposes to handle or manage material that is not a
waste, or proposes to conduct an activity which is excluded from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act’s definition of a pollution, control facility, or
proposes to conduct an activity which does not require a permit from the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, this chapter does not govern the
petition, and authorization to locate such a facility shall be determined by
other provisions in the city’s code, including but not limited to those related
to zoning, special use, building or environmental requirements, as applicable.
The terms of this chapter do not constitute or imply a policy decision by the
city concerning siting pollution control facilities of any kind within the
city, but exist to guide the city in the fulfillment of its statutory duties
with respect to requests for site location approval.
(Ord. 042404D, passed 4-26-2004)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   All words used in this chapter shall have the same meaning and definition as
set forth in the Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act. 5, § 1 et
seq. (hereinafter the “Act”) unless otherwise set forth herein below. Defined
terms in this chapter need not be capitalized to have the meaning proscribed to
them in this section or the Act.
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act. 5, § 1 et seq.
   APPLICANT.  Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an application for
site approval pursuant to this chapter.
   CITY.  The City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Villa Grove.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk for the City of Villa Grove, Illinois, or the
Clerk’s designee. Most references to the City Clerk refer to the administrative
office of the City Clerk.
   FACILITY. A new pollution control facility as defined in the Act.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The City of Villa Grove Comptroller and/or City Treasurer.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE.  A site where hazardous waste is received, stored,
treated, dumped or disposed. HAZARDOUS WASTE is defined by the Act.
   HEARING OFFICER. An attorney, licensed to practice in the State of Illinois,
appointed by the Mayor to conduct the public hearing(s) associated with a
siting petition.
   IEPA.  The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the City of Villa Grove, Illinois.
   PETITION. The application filed by the applicant requesting site approval
for a facility.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-04)
§ 156.03 PETITIONS.
   (A)   Filing.  The applicant shall file 1 original and 20 copies of the
petition with the City Clerk, in the form described in divisions (C) and (D) of
this section. The applicant shall include, with the filing of the petition, the
application fee, as described in §
156.04.
   (B)   The City Clerk, upon receiving said petition, shall do the following:
      (1)   Accept for filing and date stamp as filed any petition that is
filed with the correct number of copies as required by division (A), above, in
the form as required by division (C), below; and with the application deposit
as provided in §
156.04. The date on the stamp of the City Clerk shall be considered the
official filing date for all purposes relating to the time of filing. Receipt
and acceptance of a petition by the City Clerk is pro forma, and does not
constitute an acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the Act or
this chapter. Should the petition be presented to the City Clerk without the
correct number of copies, in the incorrect form, or without the sections and
fee described in this subsection, the petition shall be rejected by the City
Clerk.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a petition, the City Clerk shall promptly
distribute the copies of the petition to the following parties in the following
numbers: 1 copy to the Mayor; 1 copy to each Alderman; 2 copies to the City
Attorney; 1 copy to the Fire Protection District. The original petition and 2
copies shall be maintained by the City Clerk and the City Clerk has the option
of sending 1 of the copies to a copy service within the city.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall make available a copy of the petition and
public record concerning the petition for public inspection during normal
business hours of the City Clerk’s Office. Additionally, the City Clerk shall
provide to any person so requesting, copies of the petition or the public
record, upon such person’s payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Form of petitions.
      (1)   All petitions shall be in writing on 8 1/2 inch by 11 inch, 8 1/
2 inch by 14 inch, or 11 inch by 17 inch paper.
      (2)   The pages of the petition and all exhibits, including pages
intentionally left blank, shall be consecutively numbered.
   (D)   Content of petitions.  The determination of the quality and quantity
of information to be included in a petition is, ultimately, the applicant’s to
make, as it is the applicant’s burden to demonstrate that the siting criteria
set forth in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2 are met. However, for purposes of this
chapter, a petition shall contain, at a minimum, the following documents and
information, in addition to what the applicant submits in support of the ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2 criteria, together with–to the extent that such
documents and information are based on other information or data–citations to
the primary sources of data:
      (1)   The identification as well as current address of the applicant, all
landowners and the operator for the proposed facility. If the proposed site is
owned by a land trust, each beneficiary of the land trust must be identified
and their name and address listed, and the extent of their interest must be
defined. Indicate whether or not the applicant, if not the property owner, is
to purchase or lease the site. Also indicate whether the applicant, the
landowner and the operator is a corporation, partnership, individual or unit of
government. In the case of a partnership, submit the names of all partners. In
the case of a corporation, submit the names and addresses of all officers and
directors, and the names and addresses of all shareholders owning 5% or more of
the capital stock of the corporation. In the case of a corporation, attach
articles of incorporation and a certified copy from the secretary of state, of
the entity’s incorporation in the State of Illinois or, if not incorporated in
the State of Illinois, its license to do business in the State of Illinois as
exhibits.
      (2)   The proposed operator of the proposed facility shall submit audited
financial statements for the preceding 3 years or the total number of years the
entity has been in existence, whichever is less. If an entity has no audited
financial statements, then it shall include pro forma statements for the same
time period as required for audited statements.
      (3)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street address as
well as other reasonable description of where the proposed site is located. A
plat of survey of the proposed facility boundary must be attached to the
petition.
      (4)   A brief description of the proposed facility, its operation, the
expected longevity thereof and copies of any proposed or actual agreements for
host fees or incentives offered or agreed to by the applicant with the city.
      (5)   Identification of the area to be served by the proposed facility, a
map showing the extent of the service area the facility is intended to serve,
and a statement of the need for the identified area for such a facility.
      (6)   The expected types; amounts and methods of treatment, disposal,
consolidation, transfer or storage of all wastes proposed for the site.
      (7)   Reasons supporting approval of the application.
      (8)   A request for site approval.
      (9)   Proof of notice, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2(b).
      (10)   A site plan showing details of the proposed facility, including:
         (a)   Engineering cross sections;
         (b)   All known and proposed wells (identified as such), whether
potable, monitoring, or other, within the proposed site and within 1,500 feet
of the property line of the proposed site;
         (c)   Fences, buildings, other structures and berms and landscaping;
         (d)   Roads, entrances and driveways;
         (e)   Existing and proposed underground or aboveground storage tanks
(identified as such), identifying, if applicable, which are known to be out of
operation or abandoned;
         (f)   Location of property lines of neighboring properties, and
properties whose owners were provided notice pursuant to ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §
39.2(b) of the fact;
         (g)   Existing and proposed utility lines (identified as such and
identified as to type of utility), indicating which are above and which are
below the ground;
         (h)   Surface water drainage systems and ways shown on city public
records within 1,500 feet of the property line of the proposed site, including,
but not limited to, drain tiles, creeks, etc.;
         (i)   Any information to demonstrate that the proposed facility is so
designed, located and proposed to be operated in such a manner that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected, in addition to that which has
been provided already pursuant to this chapter;
         (j)   Whether any existing uses will be continued.
      (11)   A description of the general characteristics of the site
(industrial park, open field, gravel pit, quarry, strip mine, swamp, flood
plain, etc.).
      (12)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed facility,
including, but not limited to, the following (where applicable):
         (a)   Type of facility including method of transfer or, if applicable,
landfilling, incineration, resource recovery or other proposed storage,
process, treatment or management, and the proposed layout of the site,
including identification of the location of proposed buildings or other above
or below ground structures, and identification of the location of any proposed
process flows, storage, treatment, disposal, consolidation, or other waste
management activity;
         (b)   Description of the design criteria and design features of the
facility, where applicable, including:
            1.   Leachate collection system.
               a.   Type, location and construction of the subsurface
collection system;
               b.   Written narrative describing methods and processes of the
collection, management and treatment of the leachate;
               c.   Program for monitoring effectiveness of the collection,
management and treatment of the leachate; and
               d.   Discharge points of effluent.
            2.   Drainage and erosion control including a description of the
type, location and design of drainage and erosion control devices.
            3.   All monitoring systems, including, but not limited to, ground
water, surface water, and air.
               a.   Techniques, location and construction;
               b.   Frequency of sampling and analysis;
               c.   Future corrective action program.
            4.   Surface water control.
            5.   Air emissions control.
            6.   Final cover system, including proposed soil and/or geomembrane
specifications if applicable.
            7.   Facility construction quality assurance and quality control
program.
            8.   Hours of operation.
            9.   Personnel.
            10.   Both on-site and off-site litter, vector, dust, odor and
noise control.
            11.   Fire control.
            12.   Corrective actions for spills and other operational
accidents.
            13.   If applicable, the stages of development or use.
            14.   If applicable, an end use plan.
            15.   Operating procedures including:
               a.   Personnel requirements including number of full- and part-
time employees, which personnel positions and in what numbers are considered
minimally necessary for facility operation, and the training and supervision of
employees. In addition, identify whether the proposed facility intends on
utilizing any contract or temporary employees and, if so, the positions those
employees would fill, the training requirements and supervision of such
employees, and whether such employees would be considered minimally necessary
for the facility operation.
               b.   Plans for chemical analysis of waste.
               c.   Plans for identification and verification of waste.
               d.   Plans for identification of unacceptable waste, soils or
other material and removal of same.
               e.   Leachate collection, management and treatment system or
plan.
               f.   Noise control.
               g.   Operation of air emission monitoring system.
               h.   Facility cleaning and maintenance, including, but not
limited to the interior floor.
               i.   For each type of waste proposed to be received for storage,
treatment, management, consolidation or disposal, provide the maximum daily and
annual receipt and throughput, and the expected types of sources for such waste
within the proposed area to be served.
      (13)   A map showing on-site roadways, vehicle and direction flow signage
and road markings, vehicle staging and parking areas and a description of the
plan of operation with respect to moving vehicular traffic on-site, including,
but not limited to, on-site traffic flow direction and control.
      (14)   A closure plan, including satisfactory proof of financial
responsibility therefor.
      (15)   Provide a traffic study in accordance with guidelines recommended
by the institute of transportation engineers regarding the proposed site
including the anticipated number of vehicles, their size, weight and direction
of movement, and a copy of any driveway permit. Included in this study, state
the number of each type of vehicle expected or intended to enter or exit the
facility, broken down by each hour of the day. If the number of vehicles is
expected or intended to be greater or less on particular days of the week,
identify those days, the numbers of vehicles, and where it includes vehicles
other than passenger automobiles, include the hourly analysis for each day of
the week.
      (16)   Provide all physical evidence, including, but not limited to,
studies; maps, reports; permits or exhibits, which the applicant desires the
city to consider at the public hearing. It is intended that the applicant
provide a full and complete disclosure of his case to facilitate early review
and analysis by all participants.
      (17)   Supply certificates of insurance verifying the insurance policies
carried by the applicant to cover single accidents, such as fires, explosions,
non-sudden accidental occurrences, whether such accidents occur at the proposed
site or while waste is being transported to or from the proposed site.
      (18)   Include a statement describing the past operating experience of
the applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the
parent corporation), in the field of solid waste management and identify all
experience in the State of Illinois.
      (19)   Furnish a statement identifying the past record of convictions of
the applicant, including but not limited to any individual conviction of its
current officers and directors, concerning a violation of the Act or any
federal environmental law, a description of enforcement actions or lawsuits
brought, if any, by government entity or any person, and remedial action taken,
if any, as a result of, in conjunction with, or as part of a settlement of any
conviction or admission of violation.
      (20)   Furnish a statement regarding adjacent and nearby land uses,
including, but not limited to: As to whether the facility is located so as to
minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to
minimize the effect on the value of the surrounding property, provide
documentation detailing:
         (a)   Property values of surrounding property, and a property value
impact analysis conducted by a certified real estate appraiser.
         (b)   Topographic survey of existing site.
         (c)   Final design grades.
         (d)   Surrounding zoning and land uses within 1 mile of the property
line of the site, including identification of any surface or subsurface mining
activities in the area, residential (single-family or multiple-family) housing
areas, schools, hospitals, nursing or extended care facilities, daycare or
other childcare facilities, historic or architectural or archaeological
resources.
         (e)   Proposed use after operation (i.e., end-use) including changes
in topography and all new surface features.
         (f)   A description of how the applicant will minimize the effect of
traffic flow to and from the proposed facility on the character of the area
through which the traffic is proposed to pass and property values.
         (g)   A description of the external materials to be used in
construction of the proposed facility.
         (h)   A description of any proposed landscaping or facility screening.
      (21)   A statement as to whether the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year flood plain or the site is flood-proofed, and
documentation supporting such statement.
      (22)   Documentation detailing compliance of the proposed facility with
all applicable storm water ordinances.
      (23)   As to whether the plan of operation for the facility is so
designed to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or
other operational accidents provide documentation detailing, at a minimum,
provide the following information or documentation:
         (a)   Accident prevention plan, including plans for spill control and
containment;
         (b)   Fire prevention plan;
         (c)   Proposed responses to spills and other operational accidents.
      (24)   An emergency response plan for the proposed site, including, but
not limited to, documentation detailing procedures to be used in case of a
release or spill, as to:
         (a)   Notification of appropriate agencies and personnel;
         (b)   Containment procedures;
         (c)   Evacuation procedures for the facility and the surrounding area.
      (25)   The petition shall be signed by the applicant, landowner(s),
operator, engineer registered in the State of Illinois under the Illinois
Professional Engineering Practice Act, land surveyor and any other technical
consultant responsible for drafting all or portions of the petition. The
application shall state a contact address and phone number and e-mail address
for all persons named.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-2004)
§ 156.04 PAYMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS.
   (A)   Costs and fees deposit. At the time of filing a petition, the
applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a costs deposit in the form of a
certified or cashier’s check made payable to “City of Villa Grove,” to pay the
reasonable and necessary fees and costs of the city in processing and
responding to the petition, including but not limited to the fees and cost of:
city employee or staff review time, legal fees, expert witnesses, scientific
testing, records or other investigations, data searches, notices, court
reporters, transcription costs, consultants, the hearing officer, other
expenses incurred by the city in conducting the review of the petition, the
public hearing, and the city’s site location decision. The amount of the costs
and fees deposited shall be determined by the City Council on a case-by-case
basis.
   (B)   In the event the applicant files an amendment in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2(e), an additional initial costs and fees deposit shall
be delivered to the City Clerk at the same time as the filing of the amendment,
and such deposit shall be in the same form as described in division (A), above.
The amount of the additional initial costs and fees deposited, shall be
determined by the City Council on a case-by-case basis.
   (C)   All fees and expenses incurred by the city as described in division
(A) above, shall be paid from the fees and costs deposits as provided herein:
      (1)   Records of city-incurred fees and costs, including but not limited
to relevant time records of city employees and staff and city consultants, to
the extent the city is needing reimbursement of their time, are to be submitted
by the persons creating such records to the Finance Director on a monthly
basis.
      (2)   The Finance Director or his/her designee, shall organize the
records and prepare and submit periodic reports to the City Board, City Clerk
and the applicant, of invoices to or expenditures by the city. The actual
invoices and bills submitted to the Finance Director and included in the report
submitted to the City Board, City Clerk and applicant with all privileged and
confidential information, if any, redacted. Inadvertent disclosure of
confidential or privileged information by the city is not a waiver of
confidentiality or privilege.
      (3)   Upon approval of each report, described in division (C)(2), above,
by the City Council, the Finance Director may draw upon the applicant’s cost
and fees deposits in the amount of the reported incurred costs and fees, or as
otherwise provided by the City Council.
      (4)   In determining the fees to be paid to the city to reimburse the
city for its employees or staff’s time involved in matters concerning the
petition, the Finance Director shall determine a rate for each employee who
submits a record of his/her time to the Finance Director, including in such
rate, all costs of the city in compensating such employee or staff member, such
as salary or wage, or benefits. The Finance Director shall include the rate it
calculates per employee in the report described in division (C)(2), above.
      (5)   At any time the amount on deposit with the city falls below 10%,
then, upon written demand from the Director of Finance, the applicant shall
deposit, within 5 business days of receipt of the demand, an additional sum
determined by the City Council, on a case-by-case basis, or the amount
reasonably estimated to finish the process, whichever is greater. Any unpaid
amount shall constitute a debt and the city shall recover its costs and
attorneys’ fees if it is required to make a claim or commence a suit against
the applicant and to recover the unpaid fees.
      (6)   Any portion of the fees and costs deposits that remains unexpended
at the conclusion of the local site location review process (including all
appeals and resolution of any applicant challenge to fees or costs), shall be
returned to the applicant.
      (7)   Nothing herein limits an applicant’s ability to contest or object
to the reasonableness of costs and expenses described herein.
   (D)   This section shall not be applicable where costs and fees, deposits,
and/or payments have been established pursuant to a host agreement.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-04)
§ 156.05 PARTICIPANTS.
   (A)   The applicant is a participant.
   (B)   The city, its employees and staff, and any experts, consultants,
investigators or attorneys hired by the city to review, investigate, present at
hearing, or otherwise work for the city concerning the petition, are
participants. To the extent the city employees and staff wish to participate in
the public hearings outside their roles or employment with the city, they must
submit a notice of participation, as do other members of the public.
   (C)   Any person other than described in divisions (A) and (B), above, must
file a written notification of intent to participate (notice of participation),
with the City Clerk before the start of the first day of public hearing or,
after the start and before the adjournment of the first day of public hearing,
with the hearing officer. Such notification shall state, at a minimum, the
name, address daytime phone number and, if available, facsimile number of the
person filing the notice of participation, whether the person will be
participating on his/her own behalf or as a representative/spokesperson of
another person or entity (and if on behalf of another person or entity,
identify the name of that person or entity), whether the person (or the entity
or association he/she represents) will be represented by an attorney during the
public hearings, and whether the person intends on providing oral testimony or
comment during the public hearing. A person may not become a participant after
the first day of the hearing except for good cause shown. The city shall
liberally interpret this limitation if the additional participation shall not
delay the process or unfairly prejudice a prior participant. No late
participant shall be entitled to cross-examine a witness who has previously
testified.
   (D)   Participant rights. Participants have the right to present sworn
testimony and witnesses; provide un-sworn, oral comment during the public
hearing (subject to the hearing officer’s judgment and consistent with
fundamental fairness), to cross-examine or question witnesses who provide sworn
testimony or, alternatively, submit to the hearing officer written questions to
be asked of the witnesses by the hearing officer and at the hearing officer’s
discretion as to whether and how such questions are to be posed.
   (E)   Any attorneys representing a participant must be licensed and in good
standing to practice law in the State of Illinois, or if licensed and in good
standing to practice law in another state which is part of the United States,
shall be allowed to serve as an attorney for a participant upon motion made to
and granted by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-2004)
§ 156.06 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   No sooner than 90 days but no longer than 120 days from the date the
petition was filed with the City Clerk, a public hearing shall be held by the
City Board. Any 2 members of the City Board shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of holding such a public hearing. They will participate in the
proceedings.
   (B)   The Mayor, within 50 days of the filing date of the petition, shall
determine the date, time and location upon which such public hearing shall be
held, but in any event the initial public hearing must be scheduled no sooner
than 90 days but no later than 120 days from the date the petition was filed
with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Upon such determination of the hearing date, time and location, as
described in division (B), above, the Mayor or, if she/he designates, the
hearing officer shall notify the City Clerk of the date upon which such hearing
shall be held and shall request the City Clerk to cause notice of such hearing
to be made as follows. Upon receipt of such request, the City Clerk, and at the
City Clerk’s discretion with the help of the attorney representing the city
(its staff and employees), shall cause the publication of notice pursuant to
the following requirements:
      (1)   By publication of 2 legal notices in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the city. One such notice shall be published no later
than 60 days from the date the petition was filed and one such notice shall be
published no later than 75 days from the date the petition was filed.
      (2)   Such notices shall consist of the following information, which,
except for (h) through (k), below, must be disclosed by the applicant in the
petition:
         (a)   The name and address of the person, partnership or corporation
requesting site location approval;
         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the site, and in case
ownership is in a land trust, the names of the beneficiaries of said trust;
         (c)   The legal description of the site;
         (d)   The street address of the property, and if there is no street
address applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership or occupancy or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
         (e)   The nature and size of the proposed facility;
         (f)   The nature of the activity proposed;
         (g)   The probable life of the proposed activity and facility;
         (h)   The time and date of the public hearing(s);
         (i)   The location(s) of the public hearing(s);
         (j)   A statement that all copies of evidence other than testimony to
be submitted at the public hearing(s) must be filed with the City Clerk at
least 7 days before the date of the first public hearing; and
         (k)   A statement that any person wanting to present sworn testimony
or cross-examine witnesses must sign up as a participant with the City Clerk no
later than the first day of the public hearing, or sign up with the hearing
officer no later than the adjournment of the first day of the public hearing.
      (3)   A copy of the notice shall also be sent, no later than 55 days
after the date the petition was filed, by certified mail return receipt
requested to the following. This notice, pursuant to ILCS, Ch. 415, Act 5, §
39.2(d), must be delivered to the following persons/entities no later than 14
days prior to the first day of public hearing. If a return receipt is not
received by the City Clerk confirming delivery of the notice on the following
persons/entities, by the 65th day following the filing of the petition, the
City Clerk shall arrange for personal service on the following persons/
entities.
         (a)   All members of the General Assembly from the district in which
the proposed facility is located;
         (b)   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
         (c)   The governing authority of every municipality whose corporate
limits are within 1 mile of the boundary of the proposed facility;
         (d)   The county board of the county where the proposed site is to be
located.
      (4)   Additional notice of the public hearing may, at the discretion of
the Mayor, be given, by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation published as a display ad at least once during the week preceding
the public hearing. Such notice shall consist of all items described in
divisions (C)(2)(a) through (k) above, except for division (C)(2)(c).
   (D)   Prior to the date of the first public hearing, the Mayor shall appoint
the hearing officer for the public hearing on the petition. The hearing officer
shall preside over the public hearing and shall make any decisions concerning
the admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted
subject to this section and the law concerning such applications. Accordingly,
all decisions and rulings shall be in accordance with the concept of
fundamental fairness (unless a different standard is adopted as a matter of
Illinois law). The hearing officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious testimony. Rulings of the hearing officer may be promptly
appealed to those City Council members then present. A simple majority of those
trustees present shall be sufficient to overrule the decision of the hearing
officer. All testimony and all public meetings concerning the petition shall be
in the presence of a certified court reporter who shall report all proceedings
regarding consideration of the petition. The hearing officer shall have the
following powers or duties:
      (1)   Administer oaths and affirmations;
      (2)   Conduct a public meeting, prior to the start of the public
hearings; to explain the public hearing procedure and site location review
process. If the hearing officer decides to hold such a meeting, it shall be
held no sooner than the 90th day from the date the petition was filed, and
notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation 1 week prior to the
meeting (or alternatively, as part of the first published notice of the
hearing) and such notice shall expressly state that it is an informational
meeting concerning the procedure to be used at the public hearing and the site
location review process, and that it is not a public hearing at which evidence
will be taken for purposes of making determination in accordance with the Act;
      (3)   Arrange for the presence of a certified court reporter to attend
and transcribe the conduct of all public hearings for the public record;
      (4)   Regulate the course of the hearing, including, but not limited to,
controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this chapter;
      (5)   Require a witness or person presenting un-sworn public comment to
state his/her position either for, against, or undecided with respect to the
proposed facility;
      (6)   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify;
      (7)   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of public hearing
consistent with the Act and this chapter, including but not limited to the
reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, un-sworn oral comment, direct and
cross-examination of any witnesses, and the limitation of repetitive or
cumulative testimony and questioning;
      (8)   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions, with the
understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental fairness,
but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois Supreme Court, Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure, or any local rules of evidence governing a civil
judicial trial in the State of Illinois, County of Douglas;
      (9)   Allow the introduction of late-filed evidence, be it written or
testimonial, on behalf of any participant, provided good cause is shown for the
late-filing, the evidence is offered in and is relevant to the rebuttal portion
of the participant’s case, and evidence was filed, with the City Clerk at least
1 day before the public hearing at which it is offered, and fundamental
fairness to all parties will be preserved;
      (10)   The hearing officer shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in
Illinois. The hearing officer shall confer with the City Council concerning the
petition, between the time of the filing of the petition and the City Council’s
decision on the petition. Given the hearing officer’s role of communicating
with the City Council, the hearing officer may not confer with the participants
(members of the public, applicant and city included) concerning the petition,
unless such conference takes place during the public hearing, is through
correspondence which is filed with the City Clerk (and, thus, available for
everyone to view), or concerns location, time or other similar scheduling
aspects of the public meeting or public hearing, or the, notices for same. The
only additional exception from this restriction is that the hearing officer may
confer with the City Clerk about the upkeep or status of the public record,
make a request to review or copy the public record, or confer with the City
Clerk regarding the scheduling or location of the public meeting or hearing, or
arrangements for the notices of the pubic meeting and hearing;
      (11)   The Mayor may remove and/or replace the hearing officer at will.
Should the hearing officer be removed and not replaced, the Mayor or his/her
appointed trustee shall conduct the remainder of the hearing proceedings;
      (12)   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after consideration of
all timely-filed written comments, the hearing officer shall submit draft
written findings (of law or fact) to the City Council and file a copy of such
findings with the City Clerk;
      (13)   The hearing officer does not have the right or the power to vote,
as a City Council member votes, on the petition.
   (E)   All reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence or copies thereof,
other than testimony, which any participant desires to submit for the record at
the public hearing must be filed in quantity provided for in §
156.03 with the City Clerk at least 7 calendar days before the p hearing and
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. In
the event that the seventh day prior to the date set for public hearing falls
on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the next working day shall be considered the
day that reports, studies and exhibits must be filed.
   (F)   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
      (1)   Call to order with determination of a quorum;
      (2)   Introduction of the City Council members who are present;
      (3)   Introduction of the hearing officer;
      (4)   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the petition;
      (5)   Recognition of fees, notices, and date of filing of the petition;
      (6)   Recognition of the city staff and attorney present;
      (7)   Recognition of all other participants who have filed the notice of
participation, pursuant to §
156.05;
      (8)   Recognition of all reports, exhibits, maps or documents of record
as filed pursuant to division (E), above.
      (9)   Applicant, the city and participants may then make an opening
statement.
      (10)   The City Council shall then hear testimony from the applicant and/
or any witnesses the applicant may wish to call. Upon the close of the
applicant’s testimony, participants, other than the applicant or the city, may
present sworn testimony, including any witnesses and evidence they wish to
present.
      (11)   After the close of the applicant’s and participants’ cases, the
city may present any witnesses and evidence it wishes to present.
      (12)   Rebuttal testimony and evidence will be allowed at the discretion
of the hearing officer; but if it is allowed, it will be presented in the same
order as described in division (F)(9), above.
      (13)   Following rebuttal testimony, if any, any participant who wishes
to present unsworn oral comment may then present such comment to the City
Council.
      (14)   Closing statements, if any, by participants, including the
applicant and city, who presented evidence or testimony at or questioned
witnesses during the public hearing.
      (15)   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject to
limitations as imposed by the hearing officer.
      (16)   Hearing closed.
   (G)   All witnesses who testify under oath, shall be subject to reasonable
questioning as follows: direct, cross-examination, redirect, re-cross, etc.
   (H)   At any time during the public hearings, any City Council member, the
hearing officer may question participants or cross-examine witnesses.
   (I)   Should any issues, facts, data or other evidence arise during the
course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably foreseeable
by a party from the petition as filed with the City Clerk, such situation may
constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for a period not to
exceed 5 working days. Any decision in this regard shall be made by the hearing
officer.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-2004)
§ 156.07 PUBLIC COMMENT; WRITTEN AND ORAL.
   (A)   Any person has the right to file written comment concerning the
appropriateness of the proposed facility, or its compliance with the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2 of the Act, with the City Clerk, at
any time after the filing of a petition and within the time limitation provided
in division (D), below.
   (B)   The City Clerk, on behalf of the City Council, shall receive written
comment from any person concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site.
Upon receipt of any such written comment the City Clerk shall date stamp same
and shall file written comment and the postmarked envelope in which comment is
received.
   (C)   Copies of such written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the offices of the City Clerk, and members of the public shall be
allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment of actual cost of
reproduction.
   (D)   Any written comment received by the City Clerk or postmarked not later
than 30 days after the date of the last public hearing shall be made part of
the record at the public hearing as hereinafter described and the City Council
shall consider any such timely written comments in making its final
determination concerning said petition. In the event that the 30th day falls on
a Sunday or a federal holiday, the next day on which mail is delivered shall be
considered the 30th day for purposes of this section.
   (E)   Any person has the right to provide oral, un-sworn comment during the
course of the public hearing, upon reasonable notice to the hearing officer
that the person desires to provide such comment. This type of comment, since it
is not provided under oath, is not subject to cross-examination.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-04)
§ 156.08 THE PUBLIC RECORD.
   (A)   The City Clerk or his/her designee, shall prepare and maintain the
public record concerning the petition, such record shall include the following
documents:
      (1)   The original petition and any amendments filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   All written comments filed with the City Clerk within the time
frame specified by §
156.06.
      (3)   Notices of participation filed with the City Clerk, pursuant §
156.05.
      (4)   All exhibits entered into evidence at the time of the public
hearings.
      (5)   All transcripts of testimony during the public hearing.
      (6)   Any motions filed during the course of the public hearing.
      (7)   Any evidence filed pursuant to §
156.06.
      (8)   Copies of all published or displayed notices, and certified or
personally served notices of the public hearings that were prepared by the City
Clerk or prepared by others and filed with the City Clerk.
      (9)   All reports submitted to the City Clerk pursuant to §
156.06 redacted as necessary to prevent disclosure of confidential or
privileged information.
      (10)   All transcripts, when available, of meetings, other than the
public hearings held pursuant to this chapter, at which a City Board Member was
in attendance. Although City Council Members are not encouraged to attend
meetings at which the member knows the petition may be discussed, due to the
member’s continuing, regular legislative duties during the course of the City
Council’s consideration of a petition, attendance at such meetings is sometimes
unavoidable (e.g. attendance at a municipality’s council meeting, attendance at
a local chamber of commerce meeting). As such, the member is required to obtain
and file a transcript of any meeting, where such meeting has been transcribed
or recorded, or otherwise disclose such meeting in the public records (such as
disclosing it on the record during the transcribed public hearings or during
the written comment period provided for in this chapter). The transcript shall
not, however, be utilized by the city in reaching its decision.
      (11)   The hearing officer’s written findings to the City Council.
      (12)   The resolution containing the final decision of the City Council
on the petition.
      (13)   A log which the City Clerk shall require each person seeking to
view, copy or file documents with or in the-public record, shall sign, stating
the date the request to view, copy, file or other was made, the nature of the
request (i.e., view, copy, file or other, and identifying the "other"), and the
requesting person’s name and address.
   (B)   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall, during the regular business
hours of the City Clerk’s Office, make the public record available to any
person requesting to review it.
   (C)   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall, during the regular business
hours of the City Clerk’s Office, accept requests from persons for copies of
the public record, in whole or in part, and arrange for copying so requested
upon the requesting person’s payment of the actual cost of copying. The City
Clerk shall respond to copying requests within a reasonable time.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the
public record.
   (E)   Although late filed public comments are not part of the public record
pursuant to this chapter, they shall be retained by the City Clerk with any
evidence of date of filing, such as the City Clerk’s date stamp copy of the
written comment or the postmark, if the written comment was mailed.
   (F)   The City Clerk or his/her designee shall make and deliver a copy of
all transcripts to the Mayor and each trustee for their review.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-04)
§ 156.09 DECISION BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   On or before the 180th day following the date the petition was filed,
or on or before the 270th day following the date the petition was filed if the
applicant filed an amendment to the petition in compliance with the timing
requirements of the Act, the City Council shall, by written resolution, upon
the vote of a majority of its members, decide whether to:
      (1)   Grant the petition, without any conditions;
      (2)   Grant the petition, but with conditions on such approval, provided
such conditions are reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2 and are not inconsistent with the regulations
promulgated by the Illinois Pollution Control Board; or
      (3)   Deny the petition.
   (B)   The City Council shall state in its decision its findings as to
whether the applicant has established, and whether the public record supports
the establishment of each of the following criteria:
      (1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area it is intended to serve;
      (2)   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      (3)   The facility is located so as to minimize the incompatibility with
the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value
of the surrounding property;
      (4)   For a transfer facility or facility other than a sanitary landfill
or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100
year flood plain or the site is flood-proofed; and for a facility that is a
sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year floodplain, or if the facility is a facility described
in subsection (b)(3) of §
22.19a of the Act, the site is flood-proofed;
      (5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
      (6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      (7)   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release;
      (8)   The consistency of the facility with the County’s Solid Waste
Management Plan, including any updates of that Plan;
      (9)   If the facility is located in a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control Board for
such areas have been met.
   (C)   The City Council shall consider as evidence the previous operating
experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the
applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation) in the field of solid waste management when considering the second
and fifth criterion of the Act, and divisions (B)(2) and (B)(5), above.
   (D)   In making its decision, the City Council shall consider the public
record of the hearing proceedings. The City Council shall give greater
evidentiary weight to sworn testimony and evidence presented during the public
hearings than to un-sworn oral or written comment.
   (E)   No determination by the City Council of a petition may be
reconsidered, except to the extent it is reversed and remanded on appeal and
the City Council is directed by the Illinois Pollution Control Board or
Illinois Appellate Court to conduct all or part of the review process again.
   (F)   Any City Council member may be excused from participation in the
hearing and decision upon demonstration of any disqualifying direct and
personal interest in the property or the affairs of the applicant or any
objector to the proceedings. Additionally, any City Council member may abstain
from voting on the decision, except to the extent there are insufficient number
of Council Members to pass a resolution consistent with subsection (A)(1),
above.
(Ord. 042604D, passed 4-26-2004)
CHAPTER 157: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
Section
   
157.01   Introduction
   
157.02   Applicability and interpretation
   
157.03   Severability
   
157.04   Prohibitions
   
157.05   Definitions
   
157.06   Liability insurance
   
157.07   Indemnification, reimbursement and hold harmless agreement
   
157.08   Design and installation
   
157.09   Setback requirements
   
157.10   Maintenance
   
157.11   Other conditions
   
157.12   Micro-WECS
   
157.13   Small wind energy conversion system (S-WECS)
   
157.14   Utility-scale wind energy conversion systems (U-SWECS)
   
157.15   Defaults, violations and remedies
   
157.16   Administration and enforcement
§ 157.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City
of Villa Grove Wind Energy Conversion Systems Ordinance.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the
permitting of wind energy conversion systems ("WECS") and provide restrictions
for the development of WECS to ensure the quality of life for the citizens of
the City of Villa Grove. Nothing in the chapter is meant to augment or diminish
existing opportunities for public participation.
   (C)   Effective date. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.02 APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter governs the siting of WECS and substations utilized for
commercial and noncommercial use within the City of Villa Grove and the one and
one-half mile area surrounding the city.
   (B)   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the city. These regulations are not intended to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or
laws of the city nor conflict with any statutes of the State of Illinois,
except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations
impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or
regulations.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to preempt any other applicable
state or federal laws and/or regulations.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.03 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions of these regulations, and the application of those
provisions to any persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.04 PROHIBITIONS.
   No WECS or substation shall be constructed, erected, installed, or located
within the City of Villa Grove and the surrounding one and one-half mile area
unless prior approval has been obtained for each individual WECS or substation
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The entity or person who submits to the City of Villa Grove an
application for the siting of any WECS or substation or thereafter operates or
owns a WECS.
   FAA. Refers to the Federal Aviation Administration.
   FALL ZONE. The area, defined as the farthest distance from the WECS tower
base, in which a WECS tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
This area is the total height of the structure plus length of blade.
   FEEDER LINE. Any power line that carries electrical power from one or more
wind turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind
turbines to the point of interconnection with the electric power grid.
   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE. A reasonable assurance from a credit worthy party,
examples of which include, a surety bond, performance bond, trust instrument,
cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit.
   HOST AGREEMENT. An agreement between the applicant and the city which
addresses the economic development and growth impacts to the city  caused by
hosting any WECS within the borders of the city and the one and one-half mile
area surrounding the city. It may also be referenced as a "community benefit
agreement".
   METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. For the purposes of this chapter, towers which are
erected primarily to measure wind speed and direction plus other data relevant
to siting WECS. For purposes of this chapter, meteorological towers do not
include towers and equipment used by airports, the Illinois Department of
Transportation, or other similar applications or government agencies, to
monitor weather conditions.
   MICRO-WECS. An electric generating WECS device which has a rated nameplate
capacity of up to five kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinate to a
permitted use on the same parcel. A system is considered a micro-WECS only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
   NON-PARTICIPATING LAND OWNER. Refers to a person who owns land or real
property in the WECS Regulatory Jurisdiction who is not an applicant, owner or
operator and has not entered into a contract, lease, option or agreement with
the applicant, owner or operator concerning a WECS project within the WECS
Regulatory Jurisdiction.
   OFF-GRID SYSTEM(S). Refers to a system that supplies electrical power solely
for on-site use.
   OPERATOR. Refers to the entity responsible for day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the WECS, including any third party subcontractors.
   OWNER. Of a WECS refers to the entity or entities with an equity interest in
the WECS including their respective successors and assigns. Owner does not mean
the real property owner where the WECS is located unless the property owner has
an equity interest in the WECS. Owner also does not mean any  person holding a
security interest in the WECS solely to secure an extension of credit, or a
person foreclosing on such a security interest provided that after foreclosure
such person seeks to sell the WECS within one year of such event.
   PARTICIPATING LAND OWNER. Refers to a person who owns land in the WECS
Regulatory Jurisdiction and is either personally the applicant, owner or
operator of a WECS or has entered into a contract, lease, option or other
agreement with an applicant, owner or operator of a WECS.
   PERSON. Refers to a real person or legal entity as recognized by Illinois
law.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. The structure that can be occupied by one or more persons
for either business or personal reasons, including residences, commercial
buildings, schools, churches, hospitals, retail buildings, day care facilities,
hunting sheds, storage sheds, pool houses, garages and barns.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. Refers to a qualified individual who is licensed as a
professional engineer in the State of Illinois.
   PROPERTY LINE. Refers to the boundary line of the area over which the entity
applying for a WECS permit has legal control for the purposes of installation
of a WECS.
   PUBLIC CONSERVATION LANDS. Land owned in fee title by state or federal
agencies and managed specifically for conservation purposes, including, but not
limited to, state wildlife management areas, state and federal parks, state
scientific and natural areas, federal wildlife refuges and waterfowl production
areas. For the purposes of this chapter public conservation lands will also
include lands owned in fee title by nonprofit conservation organizations.
Public conservation lands do not include private lands upon which conservation
easements have been sold to public resource management agencies or nonprofit
conservation organizations.
   RATED WIND SPEED. The lowest wind speed at which the rated output power of
an electric-generating wind device is produced.
   ROTOR. An element of a wind energy system that acts as a multibladed airfoil
assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, kinetic energy directly from the
wind.
   ROTOR DIAMETER. The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor
blades.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The alternating changes in light intensity caused by the
moving blade of a WECS casting shadows on the ground and objects, such as a
window and dwelling.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (S-WECS). An electric generating wind
device which has a rated nameplate capacity of greater than five kilowatts and
up to 100 kilowatts operating at the rated wind speed and which is incidental
and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The average weight at which sound energy is transmitted
through a unit area in a specified direction. The pressure of the sound
measured at a receiver.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale in
reported in decibels (db).
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A qualified individual who is licensed as a structural
engineer in the State of Illinois.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY. The real estate where a WECS is proposed to be located.
   SUBSTATION. Any electrical facility designed to convert electricity produced
by wind turbines for interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.
   TOTAL HEIGHT. The distance measured from grade to the upper most extension
of any blade or the maximum height reached by any part of a WECS.
   TOWER. The support structure to which the nacelle and rotor are attached,
free standing or guyed structure that supports the wind turbine generator.
   TOWER HEIGHT. The distance from the rotor blade at its highest point to the
top surface of the WECS foundation.
   TRANSMISSION LINE. Electrical power lines that carry voltages of at least
69,000 volts (69 KV) and are primarily used to carry electrical energy over
medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying
electric energy to retail customers.
   UTILITY-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (U-SWECS). Any device that
converts wind energy into electricity with a name plate capacity of 100
kilowatts or greater through the use of a wind turbine generator which includes
the turbine, blade, tower base and pad transformer, if any.
   WECS PROJECT. The collection of WECS and substations as specified in the
siting approval application.
   WECS REGULATORY JURISDICTION. The jurisdictional limits of the City of Villa
Grove and the one and one-half miles surrounding its zoning jurisdiction.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS ("WECS"). Any device or combination of
devices that convert wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind
turbine generator which includes, but is not limited to, the turbine, blade,
tower, base, pad transformer, supports, guy wires, generators and any other
accessory equipment, if any, including all U-SWECS, S-WECS and micro-WECS.
   WIND FARM. One or more Utility-Scale Wind Energy Conversion Systems (U-
SWECS) which are intended to produce electricity for sale to a rate regulated
or non-regulated utility or for use off site.
   WIND SITE ASSESSMENT. Any assessment meant to determine the wind speeds at a
specific area and the feasibility of use that site for construction of a wind
energy system.
   WIND TURBINE AND/OR WIND TURBINE GENERATOR. Any piece of electrical
generating equipment that converts the kinetic energy of moving or blowing wind
into electrical energy through the use of airfoils or similar devices to
capture the wind.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.06 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The owner or operator of any S-WECS or U-SWECS shall maintain a current
general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage and name
City of Villa Grove as an additional insured with limits of at least $5,000,000
per occurrence and of at least $10,000,000 of annual aggregate with a
deductible of no more than $5,000.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.07 INDEMNIFICATION, REIMBURSEMENT, AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   Any application for any WECS shall include an agreement in a form acceptable
to the city by the applicant, owner, or operator to the applicant to indemnify
and hold harmless the city and the city's officers, board members, trustees,
employees, and agents from and against any and all damages, costs, remediation,
claims, demands, lawsuits, appeals, losses, attorneys' fees and expenses to the
extent arising out of or resulting from a permit authorizing the development,
construction, building, operation, and/or maintenance of a WECS, WECS Project,
substation or wind farm.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.08 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
   Any provisions contained in this section are generally applicable to all
WECS unless otherwise specifically stated in the applicable section.
   (A)   Design safety certification and conformance to codes and standards.
WECS and all components shall conform to all applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute ("ANSI") and the
International Electrical Commission. Applicants shall submit certificates of
design compliance that equipment manufacturers have obtained from Underwriters
Laboratories ("UL"), Det Norske Veritas ("DNV"), Germanischer Lloyd Wind
Energie ("CGL"), or an equivalent third party. The WECS shall comply with all
applicable local and county codes for electrical, mechanical and structural
components of the facility. All documents provided for review shall be stamped
by a professional engineer.
   (B)   Each application shall contain a certification by a structural
engineer that the foundation and tower design of the WECS are within accepted
professional standards for the given proposed location.
   (C)   Controls and brakes. Any and all WECS shall be equipped with manual
and automatic controls and mechanical brakes to limit rotation of the blades to
a speed below the design limits of the WECS. A professional engineer must
certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication conform to
good engineering practices. No changes or alterations from the certified design
shall be permitted unless accompanied by professional engineer.
   (D)   Electrical lines. Any and all electrical wires and lines connecting
WECS to other WECS or substation shall be installed underground.
   (E)   Utilities. All electrical components of any WECS shall conform to all
applicable local utility standards and national electric codes.
   (F)   Color, finish, and appearance. The tower and the blades of the WECS
shall be uniform in style and color and shall be off-white, light gray, or
other neutral color. The finish of the tower and the blades shall be flat or
matte and nonreflective. The required coloration and finish shall be maintained
throughout the life of the system. The towers and blades shall be uniform in
direction of blade rotation. Any on site buildings shall be designed such that
they are unobtrusive to minimize the industrial character of the project. All
colors, finishes and design shall conform to all applicable FAA requirements.
Except for required warnings and tower identification, no lettering, company
insignia, advertising or graphics shall be on any part of the tower, hub or the
blades.
   (G)   Signage. No wind tower shall have any advertising material, writing,
picture, or signage other than warning, equipment identification or ownership
information. This prohibition shall include the attachment of any flag,
decorative sign, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or waiving, fluttering
or revolving devices, but not including meteorological/weather devices. Signs
warning of the high voltage associated with a WECS shall be posted at every
entrance to a WECS and at the base of all pad mounted transformers and
substations. A sign that provides emergency contact information, such as a
phone number, shall be posted near each tower and operations and maintenance
buildings. Visible, reflective, colored objects such as flags, reflectors or
tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guywires, if any, and along the
guywires up to a height of not less than eight feet from the ground. A sign
that provides emergency contact information, such as phone number, shall be
posted near the tower and the operations and maintenance building and each
tower shall have posted a unique number for identification purposes.
   (H)   Power lines. All electrical control wiring and power lines shall be
wireless or not aboveground except where wind farm collector wiring is brought
together for connection to the transmission or distribution network, adjacent
to that network.
   (I)   Access roads. The applicant shall minimize the number and width of
access roads, minimize cut and fill on sloping terrain and use natural terrain
where feasible for these access points.
   (J)   Lighting. Towers, blades, and/or other WECS components shall not be
artificially lit unless otherwise required by the FAA. If required by the FAA
to be lit, the lights shall meet the FAA requirements at the lowest intensity
allowed. U-SWECS shall use Aircraft Detection Lighting Systems approved by the
FAA which keep all lights off until an aircraft approaches. No glare shall
extend beyond the boundaries of the WECS. Red lights which are timed to
activate at intervals in unison are required for nighttime illumination. The
applicant shall use and seek leave from the FAA to utilize the least intrusive
lighting possible. The flash intervals of the lighting scheme of the entire
WECS project shall be synchronized.
   (K)   Landscaping. Applicant shall minimize the disruption of natural
environment, retain existing vegetation and native plant species to the maximum
extent feasible and replant with native vegetation. If existing vegetation is
disturbed during construction.
   (L)   Climb prevention. Any and all WECS shall be designed to prevent
unauthorized access to electrical and mechanical components or access to the
towers on the site. All U-SWECS must utilize a monopole design with an internal
ladder and locked access door and all other WECS such design is preferred and
guy wired towers are disfavored. All towers shall not be climbable from the
ground to 15 feet aboveground and all access doors to towers and equipment
shall be lockable.
   (M)   Avian and wildlife impact. Applicant of any U-SWECS or S-WECS shall
have a third party, qualified professional conduct an analysis to identify and
assess any potential impacts on wildlife and endangered species. The applicant
shall take the appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse
impacts identified in the analysis. The applicant shall identify and evaluate
the significance of any net effects or concerns that will remain after
mitigation efforts.
   (N)   Underground cable warnings. All cables, except where installed by
trenchless methods, shall have an underground warning tape buried a minimum 24
inches below grade and a minimum of 12 inches above cable in the same trench.
The warning tape shall be six-inches wide polyethylene plastic, shall be red in
color, and shall have the appropriate warning stenciled on it.
   (O)   Agency permits. In addition to any and all permits required by the
city, applicant shall obtain all required permits from other state and federal
governmental agencies (such as the Federal Aviation Administration) prior to
commencing construction or as otherwise required by the applicable laws and
regulations. Copies or evidence of such permits shall be submitted to the city.
   (P)   Signal interference. WECS shall not be installed in any location where
its proximity to existing fixed broadcast, retransmission or reception antennas
for radio, television or wireless phone or other personal communication systems
would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or
reception unless the applicant provides a replacement signal to the affected
party that will restore reception to at least the level present before
operation of the wind energy system. WECS shall not be installed in any
location within the line of sight of an existing microwave communications link
where operation of the wind energy system is likely to produce electromagnetic
interference in the link's operation unless the interference is insignificant.
WECS shall not be installed to negatively alter any Doppler Radar or other
warning system of any local or national weather service. The applicant shall
provide the project summary and site plan to all microwave transmission
providers, weather warning services and all communication tower operators
within five miles of any WECS to address potential conflicts. If after
construction of the WECS, the owner or operator receives a written complaint
related to interference with local broadcast residential television, the owner
or operator shall take reasonable steps to respond to and remedy the complaint.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.09 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All WECS towers shall be set back at least 3,500 feet from any primary
structure on a parcel of real property which is participating in a WECS project
by leasing, contracting, owning, selling, or allowing any portion of said real
property to be used for the placement of WECS. The distance for the
participating landowner setback shall be measured from the point of the primary
structure foundation closest to the WECS tower to the center of the WECS tower
foundation. A participating landowner may waive this requirement subject to
city approval of a variance but in no case shall the turbine be closer than 1.1
times the turbine height from any primary structure. All WECS shall be set back
from a primary structure on nonparticipating lands by at least 5,000 feet.
   (B)   All WECS shall be set back at least 3,500 feet from school property
lines.
   (C)   All WECS towers shall be set back a distance of at least 3,500 feet
from public roads, third party transmission lines, and communication towers.
   (D)   All WECS towers shall be set back a distance of at least 3,500 feet
from adjacent property lines. This requirement can be waived by a landowner
subject to an approved variance application with the city but in no event can a
turbine be closer to a property line than 1.1 times turbine height.
   (E)   All WECS towers shall be set back a distance of at least 3,500 feet
from the property line of any public conservation lands, and a distance of at
least 3,500 feet from any river bluff located on public or private property.
   (F)   The applicant will need to obtain a variance from the city upon waiver
by a property owner of any of the above setback requirements, which variance
request may or may not be approved by the city. Any waiver of any of the above
setback requirements shall run with the land and be recorded as part of the
chain of title in the deed of the subject property.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.10 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The owner or operator of the WECS must submit, on an annual basis, a
summary of the operation and maintenance reports to the city. In addition to
the above annual summary, the owner or operator must furnish such operation and
maintenance reports as the city reasonably requests.
   (B)   Any physical modification to the WECS that alters the mechanical load,
mechanical load path, or major electrical components shall require re-
certification under this chapter. Like-kind replacements shall not require re-
certification.
   (C)   An applicant or successor in interest shall have the facility
inspected annually by third party qualified wind power professionals at their
own expense. The third party qualified wind power professional shall be subject
to the approval of the City's Engineer or designated representative. Within 15
days of the inspection a copy of any report must be provided to the city. The
WECS may not operate unless a certificate is provided to the city indicating
that the annual maintenance has been completed and the facility is in good
working condition. Failure to provide this annual certification may cause the
revocation of the special use permit.
   (D)   Coordination with local fire department.
      (1)   The applicant, owner, or operator shall submit to the local fire
department a copy of the site plan.
      (2)   The applicant, owner, or operator will communicate with any fire
department(s) providing fire protection for the areas of the proposed WECS and
upon request by the fire department cooperate in the development or revision of
the fire department's emergency response plan.
      (3)   The applicant, owner, or operator shall where reasonably possible
link the WECS project's fire detection systems with the appropriate fire
departments.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall alleviate the need to comply with all
other applicable fire laws and regulations.
   (E)   Materials handling, storage and disposal.
      (1)   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the WECS shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of
in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
      (2)   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the WECS shall be handled, stored, transported and disposed of
in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
   (F)   Complaint resolution.
      (1)   The applicant of any U-SWECS or S-WECS shall develop a process to
resolve any complaints that may arise from neighboring property owners during
the construction and operation of the WECS. The process shall use an
independent mediator and shall include a time limit for acting on a complaint
that is received. The process shall not preclude the local government from
acting on a complaint. The applicant shall provide to the nearby residents a
phone number of the project manager during the construction of the facility if
a problem should arise.
      (2)   Applicant of any U-SWECS or S-WECS will respond to all complaints
from persons directly affected by the WECS project within 48 hours, will
attempt to resolve all complaints in a prompt and responsible manner, will keep
a log of all complaints and the method of resolution, will make the log
available to city, and will agree to participate in a non-binding mediation for
complaints that are not resolved with the cost of such to be paid directly by
applicant.
   (G)   Federal and state requirement compliance. The applicant will comply
with all applicable laws and regulations and WECS shall meet or exceed any
standards and regulation of the FAA and any other agency of the state or
federal government with authority to regulate WECS.
   (H)   City access. The applicant will allow city officials or their agents
to investigate any issues arising from the project at and by entering the
special use area and providing any requested documentation.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.11 OTHER CONDITIONS.
   The city may impose any additional conditions not contained herein to a
permit to further the purposes and intent of this chapter or to minimize
potential adverse impacts on citizens or other property in the area.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.12 MICRO-WECS.
   (A)   All micro-WECS are prohibited in all zoning districts except where
prior approval has been obtained pursuant to the procedure for a building
permit application and subject to the terms herein.
   (B)   General regulations.
      (1)   The building permit application for micro-WECS shall include
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower and base.
      (2)   The micro-WECS must comply with any and all regulations of the
Illinois Pollution Control Board, and any other applicable state and federal
laws.
      (3)   The micro-WECS shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the highest
point of the real property structure.
      (4)   The micro-WECS shall be no higher than 50 feet from ground level.
      (5)   No micro-WECS shall be installed until written evidence has been
given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
   (C)   Agricultural and Residential Districts.
      (1)   Micro-WECS shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the highest
point of any house or building on the subject property. Micro-WECS can be
mounted to the side of the house or building or be on a free standing pole of
no more than 50 feet tall.
      (2)   The blade tip of any rotor shall, at its lowest point, have ground
clearance of no less than 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc
of the blades. The lowest point of the arc of the blade shall also be ten feet
above the height of any structure within 50 feet of the base.
      (3)   Only one micro-WECS may be sited if approved per lot in residential
districts.
   (D)   Business and Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Micro-WECS shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the highest
point of the structure on the subject property. Micro-WECS can be mounted to
the side of a structure or be on a free standing pole of no more than 50 feet
tall.
      (2)   The blade tip of any rotor shall, at its lowest point, have ground
clearance of no less than 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc
of the blades. The lowest point of the arc of the blade shall also be ten feet
above the height of any structure within 50 feet of the base.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.13 SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (S-WECS).
   (A)   All small wind energy conversion systems (S-WECS) are prohibited in
all zoning districts except for the Agricultural District only if allowed as a
special use.
   (B)   Special use permit application requirements.
      (1)   The special use application for S-WECS shall include standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower and base and an
engineering analysis of the system showing compliance with the adopted building
codes of the city and certified by an Illinois licensed design professional.
      (2)   The special use application shall include a certification from an
engineering or acoustical professional that the Illinois Pollution Control
Board regulations will not be violated by the proposed special use. Said
application shall also include a base line study of the back ground noise
levels at the property lines of all adjacent properties.
      (3)   The application shall include the certification from an appropriate
design engineer or other professional approved by the City of Villa Grove that
there shall be no more than ten hours per year in shadow flicker on any
nonparticipating commercial or residential structure caused by the S-WECS.
      (4)   The special use applicant shall include an agreement to indemnify
and hold harmless the city as outlined in §
157.06.
   (C)   General regulations.
      (1)   Only one S-WECS may be approved per zoning lot.
      (2)   S-WECS may only be approved as an accessory use to a principal
structure, and no S-WECS shall be approved on a vacant parcel.
      (3)   Climbing apparatus. All climbing apparatus shall be located at
least 15 feet above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first 15 feet from top of foundation.
      (4)   S-WECS must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
      (5)   The sound pressure levels generated by a S-WECS shall comply with
all Illinois Pollution Control Board noise regulations. To demonstrate
compliance with Illinois Pollution Control Board regulatory limits, all
measurements must be taken at the borders of any non-participating property.
The applicant must immediately cease any violation of the Illinois Pollution
Control Board regulations unless said violation is excused and waived by the
affected landowners and occupants.
      (6)   No S-WECS shall be installed until evidence has been provided that
the utility company has been informed of the owner or operator's intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
      (7)   Any S-WECS that is not operated for a continuous period of three
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owners of such system shall
remove all structures within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city
notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the S-WECS is not removed within 90
days, the city may remove all structures at the owner's expense.
      (8)   A monopole construction is preferred for all S-WECS without the use
of guy wires; however, if guy wires or anchoring systems are employed they
shall extend no closer than 30 feet from an adjacent property line.
      (9)   The S-WECS shall not have any advertising material, writing,
pictures, or signage other than warning, equipment identification or ownership
information. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, the attachment
of any flag, decorative sign, lights, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or
waiving, fluttering or revolving devices, which are not directly used for the
generation of energy, but not including meteorological/weather devices.
      (10)   S-WECS shall not operate so as to cause microwave, television,
weather radar, radio or navigation interference to any non-participating
landowner, and if such interference occurs it shall be mitigated by the owner
or operator.
   (D)   Agricultural District.
      (1)   Maximum height (any fraction of an acre will be rounded down to the
closest whole number):
 
Lot Size (Acres) Maximum Tower Height (feet)
1 to 5           50
5 to 19          70
20+              100
 
      (2)   Minimum lot size - one acre.
      (3)   The blade tip of any rotor shall, at its lowest point, have ground
clearance of no less than 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc
of the blades. The lowest point of the arc of the blade shall also be ten feet
above the height of any structure within 50 feet of the base.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.14 UTILITY-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (U-SWECS).
   (A)   All utility-scale wind energy conversion systems (U-SWECS) are
prohibited in all zoning districts except the Agricultural District and then
only if allowed as a special use.
   (B)   Special use permit application requirements.
      (1)   The applicant for a U-SWECS special use shall file 25 copies of the
application, including ten full size copies with exhibits and 15 reduced copies
of all exhibits with the city together with the appropriate application and
site review fees. The applicant may be required to provide additional copies of
the application to the city upon request.
      (2)   Any executed community benefit agreement and/or host agreement
shall be appended to, and included as part of any U-SWECS special use
application filed with the city. The content of said community benefit
agreement and/or host agreement will be discussed and negotiated between the
applicant and the city's appointed counsel and/or representatives and will
address the issues including, but not limited to, payments in lieu of taxes,
economic issues, renewable energy credit sharing, carbon credit sharing,
reimbursement of city expenses including consultants, experts, and outside
attorneys' fees. The existence of an executed community benefit agreement and/
or host agreement or the lack thereof shall not in any way obligate, preclude,
assure or guaranty that any zoning or building permit shall or shall not be
issued.
      (3)   Site plan showing the following:
         (a)   Subject property. Survey of property or properties including any
and all existing and proposed structures on the property such as buildings, U-
SWECS towers, substations, and service roads.
         (b)   A depiction of the distance of the U-SWECS to nearest structure
and residential dwellings.
         (c)   Setback requirements.
         (d)   Any floodplains or wetlands on the subject property.
         (e)   Any existing or proposed roads and driveways.
         (f)   Routes to be utilized for transportation of components of U-
SWECS.
         (g)   Location, height and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures and fencing on the subject property.
         (h)   Any easements or above-ground utilities on the subject property.
         (i)   Surrounding zoning and uses within 3,500 feet of the subject
property including any existing structures.
         (j)   All existing proposed underground or above ground utilities.
         (k)   All rights of way, wooded areas, and public conservation lands
on the subject property.
         (l)   Ingress and egress from the site as proposed during construction
thereafter which indicates the proposed road service and cover, dust control
measures, the width and length of access routes.
         (m)   Certify easements, contracts, waivers, and option agreements for
proposed use of the land.
         (n)   Utility inter-connection details and a copy of written
notification of the utility company requesting the proposed interconnection.
         (o)   A description of the hours of operation for construction of the
maintenance of the facility, the number of employees expected during
construction and after construction is completed, and the type of traffic
expected to be generated at the site during construction and after.
      (4)   Project proposal that includes the following:
         (a)   Name, company, address and phone number of the owner, developer
or any other interested party and participating landowner. The applicant shall
describe its legal standing as to whether it is a corporation, limited
liability company, individual or other legal entity and shall identify its
officers and directors, shareholders and members. It shall also identify its
parent and subsidiary companies. The same information shall be provided for all
owners and operators of the U-SWECS system. Proof must be included that the
applicant has legal authority to bring the application in the name of any
participating landowner, owner, operator or other interested party.
         (b)   Project summary including the nameplate generating capacity;
equipment manufacturer; type and number of U-SWECS.
         (c)   Proposed maximum height for each electric-generating wind device
and the diameter of each U-SWECS rotor.
         (d)   Evidence that the site is suitable and feasible for a U-SWECS.
         (e)   Certification that all electronic equipment conforms to all
applicable city, state and national codes.
         (f)   An agreement indemnifying and holding harmless the city and its
officials from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of
action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities, including attorney
fees, arising from the approval and construction of the wind farm facility.
         (g)   Proof that the wind farm facility shall be operated without
offensive noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare, lighting, risk of fire,
explosion or other accident and shall not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and/or general welfare of the immediate neighborhood or community at
large.
         (h)   An avian and wildlife impact analysis.
         (i)   An environmental impact study.
         (j)   Noise. A modeling analysis of the proposed site shall be
included in the application performed by a third party independent professional
approved by the City Administrator which model shall predict the sound pressure
levels at all properties in the footprint and within two miles of a U-SWECS. To
demonstrate compliance with the Illinois Pollution Control Board regulatory
limits the modeling must be performed at the property line of the receiving
property. A nighttime baseline sound pressure study must be done at all
nonparticipating properties within one mile of a proposed U-SWECS before
construction commences.
      (5)   Property value protection plan. A plan shall be included to protect
the property values of any non-participating real property owner within two
miles of a U-SWECS tower or substation. Any such plan is subject to approval by
the city.
      (6)   Federal and state law compliance. The applicant shall provide
evidence that the U-SWECS meets or exceeds any and all standards and
regulations of any agency, state or federal government with authority to
regulate U-SWECS including, but not limited to, providing a determination that
the proposed structure(s) are compliant with all FAA regulations and do not
interfere or present a hazard to any public or private aircraft.
      (7)   Emergency services plan shall be included which provides:
         (a)   Emergency shutdown procedures.
         (b)   A street address for each electric generating wind device and
such address shall be prominently displayed along the road in front of the
facility.
         (c)   A plan for appropriate warning signs and safety procedures
including locking portholes and climbing prevention techniques.
         (d)   A formal education plan with all emergency service providers
involved in the administration of emergency services to the site(s).
      (8)   Shadow flicker study. The applicant shall have a third party
qualified professional approved by the city conduct an analysis on the
potential shadow flicker on the non-participating properties and public
roadways within two miles of any U-SWECS. The analysis shall identify locations
of shadow flicker that may be caused by the project and any expected durations
of flicker at these locations from sunrise to sunset over the course of a year.
The analysis shall include measures to eliminate or mitigate these problems at
the residences of non-participating landowners impacted by the shadow flicker.
The application shall include the certification from the third party qualified
professional that there shall be no more than ten hours per year in shadow
flicker on any non-participating landowners property unless waived by the
landowner. The study is subject to approval by the city.
      (9)   Project proposal road use plan. The application shall include a
road use plan that shall identify the city, township, and county roads which
will be used for construction, maintenance and transportation of supplies for
the U-SWECS. All routes for egress and ingress need to be shown and identified.
The routing shall be subject to approval of the designated Villa Grove
representative. The applicant shall provide a pre-construction baseline survey
performed by a qualified engineer approved by the city, to determine existing
road conditions for assessing potential future damage due to U- SWECS related
traffic. If any damage or change to the roadways will occur, a road use
agreement must be entered into and approved by the city or its designated
representative. The applicant's road use plan must ameliorate any and all
damage, installation or placement of roads that might be required. The road use
agreement must be executed by all parties and require that applicant provide
cash, an escrow account, bond or other financial assurance in an amount and
form approved by the City of Villa Grove to cover all potential future damage.
Any road construction or repair shall be completed in accordance with
recognized standards for road construction that are subject to the approval of
the city's designated engineer or representative. If the city determines at any
time that any road construction or repairs have not been completed in
accordance with these recognized standards, the applicant will be responsible
for correcting the work to the satisfaction of the city's designated engineer
or representative. Any vehicle that will exceed the maximum allowable weight to
a city roadway will only be permitted upon the entry of a roadway agreement
recommended by the city or designated representative.
      (10)   Drainage plan. The application shall include a drainage plan which
provides that any damage to waterways, drainage ditches, field tiles or any
other infrastructure caused by construction or maintenance of the U-SWECS shall
be completely repaired to near original condition so as not to impede the
natural flow of water. The plan shall provide that all repairs will be
completed within seven days unless otherwise agreed to by the city and affected
landowners. The plan must provide that the WECS owner will notify the city or
its designated representative when the construction of any part of the project
encounters underground field and drainage tiles and will provide proposals for
remediation which will be subject to the approval of the city or its designated
representative. The plan shall provide that all existing drainage tiles will be
crossed by private access roads shall be removed and replaced with load
resistant tile. The plan shall further provide that financial assurances will
be posted in the form of cash, an escrow account, surety bond or letter of
credit in a form and amount acceptable to the city to assure compliance with
the drainage plan.
      (11)   Decommissioning plan. The applicant shall provide a
decommissioning plan for the U-SWECS in the event that any U-SWECS are taken
out of service, abandoned or become inoperable. If a U-SWECS is out of service
or not producing electrical energy for a period of three months, it will be
deemed non-operational and decommissioning removal of that facility will need
to commence according to the provisions approved by the City of Villa Grove.
The decommissioning plan shall at a minimum provide that the U-SWECS will be
removed within 90 days of the U-SWECS being deemed non-operational and that:
         (a)   All wind turbines, above-ground improvements, including access
roads, and outside storage will be removed and soils returned to
preconstruction condition.
         (b)   Foundations, pads and underground electrical wires will be
reclaimed to a depth of eight feet below the surface of the ground.
         (c)   Hazardous material from the property will be disposed of in
accordance with federal and state law.
         (d)   Cost estimates will be provided of the decommissioning facility
prepared by a professional engineer or contractor who has expertise in the
removal of U-SWECS and is approved by the City Administrator or its appointed
representative. The decommissioning cost estimate must explicitly detail the
cost before considering any projected salvage value of out of service U-SWECS.
         (e)   The decommissioning plan must provide that there shall be a
decommissioning agreement executed by the applicant and the city which provides
financial assurances posted in favor of the city and as approved by the city in
cash, escrow account, surety bond, performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit before any construction commences.
         (f)   The decommissioning plan must include a restoration plan to
identify how the site will be restored to its original condition or improved.
      (12)   Complaint resolution plan. The applicant shall develop a process
to resolve any complaints that may arise from neighboring property owners or
non-participating landowners during the construction and operation of the U-
SWECS. The process may use an independent mediator or arbitrator and shall
include a time limit for acting on a complaint that is received. The process
shall not preclude the local government from acting on a complaint.
      (13)   Application fee and cost reimbursement. Each U-SWECS application
shall include a $50,000 non-refundable application fee which may be used to
reimburse any city personnel, outside consultants, engineers or attorneys
needed to review the application. The applicant must also acknowledge that it
will be responsible for the reimbursement of any such reasonable fees and costs
which exceed the $50,000 application fee.
      (14)   Outdoor storage. Only the outdoor storage of materials, vehicles
and equipment that directly support the operation and maintenance of the wind
farm facility shall be allowed with the exception of outdoor storage that is
expressly allowed in the zoning district as specified herein. The city shall
have the discretion in determining whether the outdoor storage is in compliance
with this provision. In any event all outdoor storage areas shall be paved with
a bituminous surface and fenced to prevent viewing from adjoining properties
and uses.
      (15)   Each U-SWECS shall be marked with a visible identification number
to assist with provision of emergency services, and the applicant shall file
with the appropriate local fire protection district and police department, a
wind farm facility map identifying wind turbine locations and numbers.
      (16)   Electrical components. All electrical components of the wind farm
facility shall conform to applicable local, state, and national codes, and
relevant national and international standards (e.g. ANSI and International
Electrical Commission).
      (17)   Controls/brakes. All wind towers shall be equipped with a
redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspend controls
(including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical
brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall
regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for overspend
protection.
      (18)   Shadow flicker. The U-SWECS shall not cause shadow flicker in
excess of ten hours annually at the residences or commercial buildings of any
non-participating landowner properties unless waived by the landowner.
      (19)   Noise. Noise levels must comply with the Illinois Pollution
Control Board Regulations. After the U-SWECS are constructed and operational, a
third party shall complete a sound pressure analysis of the existing
conditions. This analysis shall be completed and returned to the City of Villa
Grove within 60 days. The applicant, owner or operator must immediately cease
any violation of the Illinois Pollution Control Board regulations unless those
violations are excused and waived in writing by the effected landowner and
occupant and in no event shall U-SWECS exceed five decibels above the night-
time baseline sound pressure levels as identified in the preconstruction study.
All analyses and studies are subject to the approval of the city.
      (20)   Signal and electromagnetic interference. U-SWECS shall not be
installed at any location where its proximity to existing fixed broadcast,
retransmission, reception antennas for radio, Doppler radar systems, weather
warning systems, television or wireless phone or other personal communication
systems would otherwise produce electromagnetic interference with the signal
transmission or otherwise negatively impact reception unless the applicant
provides a replacement signal for the affected party that would restore
reception to at least the level present before the operation of the U-SWECS. U-
SWECS shall not be installed within the line of site of an existing microwave
communications link or Doppler radar or weather warning system unless the
interference is insignificant to be reasonably determined by the city.
      (21)   Waste disposal. All solid waste generated from including, but not
limited to, supplies, equipment, parts, packaging or operation of the facility
shall be removed from the site immediately and disposed of in an appropriate
manner. Any hazardous waste which is generated by the facility, including, but
not limited to, lubricating materials shall be removed consistent with all
local, state and federal rules and regulations.
      (22)   Conformance industry and code standard/engineer certification. The
U-SWECS shall comply with all applicable local and county codes for the
electrical, mechanical and structural components of the facility. All documents
provided for review shall be stamped and signed by a professional engineer.
      (23)   Operation and maintenance inspections. Each owner, operator or
successor in interest shall have the facility inspected annually by a third
party qualified wind power professional at their own expense. The third party
qualified wind power professional shall be subject to the approval of the city
or its designated representative. Within 15 days of the inspection a copy of
any report must be provided to the city. U-SWECS may not operate unless a
certificate is provided to the city indicating the annual maintenance has been
completed and the facility is in good working condition. Failure to provide
this certification may cause the revocation of the special use permit.
   (C)   Size regulations.
      (1)   Maximum height. Total height of the U-SWECS tower with blade or
meteorological tower used in conjunction with the U-SWECS shall not exceed 500
feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot size. Forty acres for U-SWECS and 1,000 acres (any
combination of rented, owned, or leased property) for a wind farm.
      (3)   The blade tip or any rotor of each U-SWECS shall, at its lowest
point, have ground clearance of no less than 75 feet.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.15 DEFAULTS, VIOLATIONS, AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   The applicant's, owner's, or operator's failure to materially comply
with any of the above provisions shall constitute a default under this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to implementation of the applicable city procedures for the
resolution of such default(s), the appropriate city body shall first provide
written notice to the owner and operator, setting forth the alleged default(s).
Such written notice shall provide the owner and operator a reasonable time
period, not to exceed 60 days, for good faith negotiations to resolve the
alleged default(s).
   (C)   If the city determines in its discretion, that the parties cannot
resolve the alleged default(s) within the good faith negotiation period, then
applicable city ordinance provisions addressing the resolution of such default
(s) shall govern.
   (D)   Upon finding a default or violation of the terms of any permit, the
city shall have the authority to revoke the permit after notice to the
applicant and after affording the applicant/permittee an opportunity to be
heard.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 157.16 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The city shall enforce the provisions of this section through an inspection
of the WECS facility every year. The city and its designated representative(s)
is hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of the
WECS at any time by coordinating a reasonable time with the operator/owner of
the facility. Any person, firm, or corporations who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25
nor more than $500 for each offense per day. Each tower, nacelle, or any
component of the WECS may be the subject of a separate violation and further
each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. Other actions may be taken by law or in equity to prevent or to remedy
any violation of this chapter and these remedies shall be in addition to any
other remedies, damages or penalties.
(Ord. 2021-MC03, passed 2-8-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Chapter
   
I.   ANNEXATIONS
   
II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
   
III.   EASEMENTS
   
IV.   FRANCHISES
   
V.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
   
VI.   VACATIONS
   
VII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Annexing certain premises being all that part of the
31273     3-12-1973   northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 16 North, Range
                      9 East.
4973      4-9-1973    Annexing certain premises beginning 780 feet east of the
                      center of Section 10, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain premises beginning at a point 392 feet
72373-2   7-23-1973   north and 40 feet west of the southeast corner of the
                      north half of the southeast quarter of Section 3,
                      Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing a certain territory beginning at the northwest
011378    1-13-1978   corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain territory beginning at the northwest
21378A    2-13-1978   corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain territory being the south 5 acres of the
21378B    2-13-1978   west 42.52 acres of the northwest quarter of Section 2,
                      Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain territory being the south 5 acres of the
102378A   10-23-1978  west 42.52 acres of the northwest quarter of Section 2,
                      Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain territory beginning at the northwest
102378B   10-23-1978  corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
1879      1-8-1979    Annexing parts of the northwest quarter of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing a certain territory beginning at the northwest
—       - -         corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
                      Annexing certain territory beginning at a point 333.55
071392    6-8-1992    feet north and 33 feet east of the southwest corner of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 16 North,
                      Range 9 East of the 3rd P.M. to the city.
                      Annexing 3 tracts of land located in the northwest corner
041599A   4-15-1999   of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 16 North,
                      Range 9 East of the 3rd P.M. to the city.
                      Annexing 3 tracts of land located in the northwest corner
041599B   4-15-1999   of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 16 North,
                      Range 9 East of the 3rd P.M. to the city.
                      Annexing 4 tracts of land in the southwest quarter of
                      Section 10, Township 16 North, Range 9 East; 2 tracts of
041599C   4-15-1999   land in the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 11, Township 16 North, Range 9 East; and 2 tracts
                      in the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 14, Township 16 North, Range 9 East to the city.
041599D   4-15-1999   Annexing contiguous territory known as the Richman
                      Property to the city.
                      Annexing contiguous uninhabited territory known as the
041599E   4-15-1999   City of Villa Grove, Illinois, Sewer Plant Site, and the
                      City of Villa Grove, Illinois, Reservoir/Park Site to the
                      city.
041599F   4-15-1999   Approving the annexation agreement between the city and
                      Villa Grove State Bank.
041599G   4-15-1999   Annexing contiguous territory known as the Lawless
                      Property to the city.
2023-MC23 12-26-2023  Annexing certain property known as the Tri City Country
                      Club Property.
                     
 
TABLE II: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
051181  5-11-  Adopting an agreement between the city and Waste Concepts, Inc. for solid
        1981   waste disposal.
070182  7-1-   Adopting an agreement between the city and United Waste Systems, Inc. for
        1982   solid waste disposal.
052687  5-26-  Authorizing the execution of a contract for membership in the Illinois
        1987   Municipal League Risk Management Association.
        11-12- Authorizing the lease of land located at the northeast corner of Lot 6 in
111296A 1996   Block 2 of B. F. Johnston’s Second Addition to Villa Grove for a term of 20
               years.
052698B 5-26-  Authorizing participation in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.
        1998
040798A 4-7-   Approving and authorizing the execution of a professional services agreement
        1999   between the city and Thomas N. Jacob & Associates.
062899A 6-28-  Adopting the State Gift Ban Act and prohibiting solicitation and acceptance
        1999   of gifts.
072899  7-28-  Approving and authorizing the execution of a redevelopment agreement between
        1999   the city and Development Coordination Corporation.
082800C 8-28-  Authorizing and approving an amended redevelopment agreement.
        2000
012802  1-28-  Approving a redevelopment loan agreement to Fred L. Blackburn and Donna S.
        2002   Blackburn.
        8-25-  Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
082503A 2003   Association and authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental cooperation
               contract.
092203A 9-22-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and the Village of
        2003   Camargo regarding water service.
042604B 4-26-  Authorizing the appointment of special assistant city attorneys and
        2004   authorizing a fee arrangement in connection therewith.
082304B 8-23-  Approving a redevelopment loan agreement to Terri Lee Wegeng d/b/a Thyme ‘N
        2004   Time Again Vintage Resale and Consignment Shoppe.
2005-   4-25-  Approving an economic incentive agreement between the city and Walter Jones
MC02    2005   Post 2876, Veterans of Foreign Wars, Inc.
2005-   6-13-  Repealing authorization of an economic incentive agreement with Walter Jones
MC04    2005   Post 2876, Veterans of Foreign Wars, Inc.
2007-   2-12-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC04    2007   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding tax increment financing
               funds.
2008-   3-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
MC02    2008   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
               granting the Chief of Police certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
2010-   5-24-  Authorizing and approving an economic incentive agreement between the city,
MC02    2010   Douglas County and Debra Ismailjoski.
2011-   6-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
MC05    2011   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
               granting the Chief of Police certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
2014-   5-27-  Authorizing and approving an economic incentive agreement between the city,
MC04    2014   Douglas County, and the Star Theatre of Villa Grove, LLC and James B.
               Whitmore, Jr.
2014-   6-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
MC06    2014   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
               granting the Chief of Police certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
2016-   2-22-  Adopting a mutual aid box alarm system agreement for the city.
MC02    2016
               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
2016-   9-26-  the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the public works and administrative
MC09    2016   bargaining unit and granting the Mayor certain powers regarding collective
               bargaining.
2017-   4-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
MC02    2017   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
               granting the Mayor certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
2017-   6-27-  Authorizing an agreement for sewer connection for 103 Henson.
MC08    2017
2017-   8-28-  Authorizing the City of Villa Grove to borrow funds from the Public Water
MC09    2017   Supply Loan Program.
2018-   7-23-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC05    2018   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding services of a school
               resource officer.
2018-   8-27-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Camargo
MC09    2018   Township regarding the sharing of heavy mechanical equipment.
2018-   9-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC10    2018   position of City Administrator.
2019-   4-8-   Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC04    2019   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding use of recreational
               facilities.
               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
2019-   6-24-  the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the public works department/admini
MC08    2019   strative office bargaining unit and granting the Mayor certain powers
               regarding collective bargaining.
2019-   6-24-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC09    2019   position of Director of Public Works.
2019-   8-12-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC10    2019   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding services of a school
               resource officer.
2020-   7-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC08    2020   position of Director of Chief of Police.
2020-   9-14-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC11    2020   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding services of a school
               resource officer.
2020-   9-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
MC14    2020   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
               granting the Mayor certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
2021-   1-25-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC01    2021   position of Director of Public Works.
2021-   10-12- Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC08    2021   position of City Administrator.
2021-   11-8-  Authorizing and approving a redevelopment agreement between the city and Roy
MC09    2021   Rentals, LLC.
2021-   12-13- Authorizing execution of an asset purchase agreement for the sale of city
MC10    2021   water and wastewater systems.
2023-   1-9-   Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC01    2023   position of the Public Works Director.
2023-   2-13-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC02    2023   position of Director of Community Center Programs and Services.
               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
2023-   5-8-   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the Public Works Department/Admi
MC09    2023   nistrative Office bargaining unit and granting the Mayor and City
               Administrative certain powers regarding collective bargaining.
               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the collective bargaining agreement between
2023-   5-8-   the city and the Teamsters Local 26 for the police bargaining unit and
MC10    2023   granting the Mayor and Administrator certain powers regarding collective
               bargaining.
2023-   6-12-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and the State of
MC14    2023   Illinois Department of Central Management Services regarding the local
               government health plan.
2023-   9-11-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and Villa Grove
MC16    2023   Community Unit School District No. 302 regarding services of a school
               resource officer.
2023-   11-13- Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement for participation in the Mutual
MC17    2023   Aid Box Alarm System (MABAS master agreement).
               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement modifications for
2023-   12-26- the City Administrator, Administrative Assistant (to the City Administrator),
MC22    2023   Chief of Police, Director of Community Programs and Services, and Director of
               Public Works.
2024-   2-12-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city, the City of Arcola
MC01    2024   and the City of Tuscola regarding county-wide economic development
               organization.
2024-   2-12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC02    2024   position of Accounting/Admin istrative Assistant.
2024-   9-12-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC08    2024   position of CPS Facility Lead.
2024-   10-15- Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreements by the city for
MC09    2024   the positions of Director of Community Programs and Services and Public
               Safety Director.
2024-   10-15- Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC10    2024   position of the Chief of Police.
2024-   11-12- Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC11    2024   position of CPS Programs Coordinator.
2025-   2-10-  Authorizing and approving a redevelopment agreement between the city and AF
MC02    2025   Antronics.
2025-   2-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC03    2025   position of Director of Public Works.
2025-   3-10-  Authorizing and approving a redevelopment agreement between the city and
MC04    2025   Jones and Jones Rentals LLCS.
2025-   3-10-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC05    2025   position of Accounting/Admin istrative Assistant.
2025-   4-14-  Authorizing and approving a redevelopment agreement between the city and
MC07    2025   Walter Jones VFW Post 2876 Inc.
2025-   4-14-  Authorizing the Mayor to execute the employment agreement by the city for the
MC08    2025   position of City Administrator.
2025-   5-12-  Authorizing and approving a redevelopment agreement between the city and Tri-
MC10    2025   City Country Club.
2025-   5-12-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the city and the State of
MC12    2025   Illinois Department of Central Management Services regarding the local
               government health plan.
              
 
TABLE III: EASEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
81577    8-15-1977   Authorizing the purchase of easements for wastewater force
                     main.
060887   6-8-1987    Dedication of drainage easement.
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Granting a franchise to the General Telephone Company of
—       1-10-1955   Illinois to construct, erect, maintain and replace lines
                      of poles, anchors, wires and the like to provide a
                      telephone system in the city.
                      Granting a franchise to the Central Illinois Public
—       4-16-1963   Service Company to construct, operate and maintain an
                      electric light, heat and power system in the city.
                      Granting an exclusive franchise to Villa Grove
032381    3-23-1981   Cablevision Company to install, operate and maintain a
                      cable television system in the city.
—       - -         Granting a franchise to the Citizens Gas Company for the
                      purpose of providing gas for public and private use.
                      Approval of merger of Casey Cablevision Co., Village
062783B   6-27-1983   Grove Cablevision Co., Tuscola Cablevision Co., and
                      Marshall Cablevision Co.
                      Granting a non-exclusive franchise to construct, operate
072495A   7-24-1995   and maintain a community antenna television system with
                      the city for a fifteen year term.
                      Ratifying the operation of a CATV system and the grant of
                      a cable franchise to Illini Cablevision of Illinois, Inc.
081400A   8-14-2000   and approving the transfer of control of the Illini cable
                      television franchise from Illinet Communications of
                      Central Illinois, L.L.C. to Mediacom Illinois, L.L.C.
                      Renewing for 20 years an existing franchise to Ameren,
2013-MC03 7-22-2013   Illinois to construct, reconstruct, excavate for, place,
                      remove, extend, maintain, and operate an electric utility
                      system.
2015-MC03 4-27-2015   Addressing the payment of cable television franchise fees
                      in the city.
                      Extending the authorization to Ameren Illinois Company D/
2015-MC04 4-27-2015   B/A Ameren Illinois its successors and assigns to
                      construct, operate and maintain a gas utility system in
                      the city.
                     
 
TABLE V: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
72373-1 7-23-  Authorizing the sale of the real property to Charles E. Rogers,
        1973   located at Lot 2, Block 22 of Johnston’s First Addition.
032480  3-24-  Authorizing the sale of real property being 116 North Main, to the
        1980   Town of Camargo.
        10-27- Authorizing the sale of certain land and property situated in the
102786  1986   city, being part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section
               3, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
032497  3-24-  Authorizing the sale of real property located at Lot 10, Block 8 of
        1997   Johnston’s Second Addition to the city.
               Authorizing the sale of the following real property: Lots 1 and 8 of
052802A 5-28-  Villa Grove Industrial Subdivision, a part of the northwest quarter of
        2002   the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 16 North, Range 9 East
               of the 3rd P.M.
               Authorizing the sale of the following real property: Lot 4 of Villa
011303B 1-13-  Grove Industrial Subdivision, a part of the northwest quarter of the
        2003   northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 16 North, Range 9 East of
               the 3rd P.M.
072803A 7-28-  Authorizing the sale of the following real property: Villa Grove
        2003   Industrial Subdivision, Lots 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10.
               Authorizing the sale of the following municipally-owned real estate:
               Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of Villa Grove Lakeview Subdivision, a part of the
042604C 4-26-  Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 11, Township 16
        2004   North, Range 9 East of the 3rd Principal Meridian, and a replat of
               Lots 1, 2, 3 and 8 of Block 1 of Johnson’s Second Addition to the
               city.
082304A 8-23-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from David McGhee.
        2004
2019-   1-3-   Approving a contract to purchase real estate located at North Third
MC01    2019   Street (known as “Fosser Property”).
2019-   1-3-   Approving a contract to purchase real estate located at North Third
MC02    2019   Street (known as “Fosser-Fisher Property”).
2019-   9-9-   Approving a contract for the city to sell real estate located at North
MC11    2019   Third Street (Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 in Block 2 of Henson's Third
               Addition) to Greg Izard.
2020-   8-8-   Approving a contract to sell real estate located at 409 West Wilson
MC10    2020   Street to Randy and Kristine Coffman.
2023-   5-22-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Bruce Colmark.
MC11    2023
              
 
TABLE VI: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
               Vacating a certain street being that portion of Peach Lane and Hawthorn Drive
82872   8-28-  and extending in a northwesterly direction from said junction containing
        1972   6,924.60 feet more or less and located between Lots 36 and 37 of Country Club
               2nd Subdivision to the city.
        12-10- Vacating a certain tract of land being Greger Subdivision of part of the
121073  1973   southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 16 North,
               Range 9 East.
        6-26-  Vacating a certain alley which intersects East Adams and East Monroe Streets
62678   1978   between North Sycamore and North Spruce Streets, which extends in a north and
               south direction in Block 15 of B.F. Johnston’s First Addition to the city.
               Vacating a certain street being North Spruce Street between Adams Street and
032480A 3-24-  the right-of-way of the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company on the south, which
        1980   extends in a north and south direction and is located between Blocks 14 and 15
               of B.F. Johnston’s First Addition to the city.
               Vacating the alley approximately 14 feet in width intersecting the north side
101182B 10-11- of Vine Street, and extending in a north-south direction between Lot 5 in Block
        1982   2 of F.G. Gamin’s Addition to the city, and Lot 3 in Block 1 of John B.
               Barrick’s Addition to the city.
111185  11-11- Vacating the street known as Elm Street, approximately 60 feet wide and 300
        1985   feet long between Blocks 10 and 11 in Johnston’s Second Addition to the city.
               Vacating James Avenue lying north of Lots 1 and 10 in Block 1 and Lot 1 in
               Block 2 of Paul McCoy’s First Subdivision of part of the northeast quarter of
060887A 6-8-   the southeast quarter, and James Avenue lying north of Lot 1 in Block 1, Lots 1
        1987   and 2 in Block 2 and Lot 1 in Block 3 of Paul McCoy’s Second Subdivision of
               part of the north half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter, all
               in Section 3, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
        10-10- Vacating all that part of East Elm Street lying west of a point beginning 75
101088  1988   feet west of the west line of Maple Street at the intersection of Maple and Elm
               in the city.
062689A 6-26-  Vacating all that part of South Elm Street lying between Arthur Avenue and Hays
        1989   Avenue in the city.
081092- 8-10-  Vacating the alley running in a north and south direction located between Lots
1       1992   7, 8 and 9 and 10, 11 and 12, all in Block 1 of the original town.
122793A 12-27- Vacating a certain part of Railroad Street lying south of Lincoln Avenue and
        1993   Block 30 in B. F. Johnston’s First Addition to the city.
072594B 7-25-  Vacating the alley running in a north and south direction located between Lot 1
        1994   and Lots 2, 3, 4, and 5, all in Block 1 of W. H. Hart’s Addition to the city.
100995D 10-9-  Vacating Maple Street south 152 feet from the intersection with Front Street.
        1995
        12-22- Vacating the alley immediately adjacent to and running in an east and west
122297A 1997   direction of the north side of Lot 1 in Block 2 of Barrick’s Addition to the
               city.
        7-24-  Vacating the portion of Walnut Street that is east of Henson Road and south of
072400A 2000   Lot 1, Block 1 of new Eastside Addition and north of Lot 6 of Eastside
               Addition.
        4-8-   Vacating the portion of East Elm Street that is east of Henson Road and south
040802A 2002   of Lot 1, Block 2 of New Eastside Addition, and north of Lot 6, Block 1 of New
               Eastside Addition.
        9-23-  Vacating the portion of Pine Street in the city commencing 75 feet north of the
092302A 2002   southwest corner of Lot 2 in Block 3 of Fry & Hessler’s Addition and extending
               north to the Embarrass River.
               Clarifying the vacation of a portion of 500 Block of North Pine Street: the
101502C 10-15- portion of Pine Street commencing 75 feet north of the southeast corner of Lot
        2002   2 in Block 3 of Fry & Hessler’s Addition and extending north to the Embarrass
               River.
080904A 8-9-   Vacating public park in Pheasant Pointe Subdivision, Second Phase.
        2004
2013-   12-9-  Vacating the north 4.4 feet of East Adams Street contiguous to the 142 feet
MC04    2013   south lot line of Lot 7 in Block 12 of B.F. Johnson’s First Addition.
2017-   5-8-   Vacating a portion of South Elm Street.
MC04    2017
2017-   5-8-   Vacating a portion of North Richman Street.
MC05    2017
              
 
TABLE VII: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
112772  11-27- Rezoning all of Block 12 of B.F. Johnston’s First Addition to the city, from
        1972   R-1 to R-2.
32673   3-26-  Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in Block 12 of B.F. Johnston’s First
        1973   Addition to the city, from R-2 to B-2.
051473  5-14-  Rezoning Lots 3 and 4 in Block 7 of Riverside Addition to the city from R-1 to
        1973   R-1 Special Use.
082773  8-27-  Rezoning Greger Subdivision of the city north of East Elm Street, from R-1 to
        1973   R-2 Special Use.
082674  8-26-  Rezoning the west half of Block 3 and the east half of Block 4 in Johnston’s
        1974   Addition to the city, from R-1 to B-2.
091277  9-12-  Rezoning Lot 5 in Block 6 of Johnston’s Second Addition to the city, from R-
        1977   2 to R-2 Special Use.
091277  9-12-  Rezoning Lots 7 and 8 in Block 10 of Johnston’s Second Addition to the city,
        1977   from R-2 to R-2 Special Use.
092677  9-26-  Rezoning Lot 19 in Block 1 of Pleasant View Subdivision to the city, from R-
        1977   1 to R-1 Special Use.
101077  10-10- Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 11,
        1977   Township 16 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2.
101077  10-10- Rezoning the west 258 feet of the north 210 feet of the northwest quarter of
        1977   Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
112877C 11-28- Rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 16 North,
        1977   Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-1 Special Use.
012378  1-23-  Rezoning a tract of land located in the west 42.52 acres of the northwest
        1978   quarter of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2.
031378  3-13-  Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 21 of Johnston’s Addition to the
        1978   city, from R-1 to R-2.
071078  7-10-  Rezoning Lot 1 in Block 7 in Richman’s Second Addition to the city, from R-
        1978   1 to R-1 Special Use.
—     10- -  Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Block 1 of B.F. Johnston’s First Addition
        1978   to the city from R-1 to B-2.
—     10- -  Rezoning Lots 13, 14, 15, 16 17 and 18 in Block 10 of B.F. Johnston’s First
        1978   Addition to the city, from R-1 to B-2.
022679  2-26-  Rezoning east half of Block 17, Johnston’s Addition to the city, from B-1 to
        1979   B-2.
032883  3-28-  Rezoning Lot 1 in Block 2 of Fry and Hessler’s Addition to the city from R-
        1983   1 to R-1 Special Use.
        11-14- Rezoning a certain tract of land being bounded from the southeast corner of
111483  1983   the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 16 North, Range 9 East, from M-
               P to R-2.
091487  9-14-  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 3,
        1987   Township 16 North, Range 9 East.
052990  5-29-  Rezoning the west half of Block 9 in Johnston’s Second Addition to the city,
        1990   from B-1 to R-1.
052891  5-28-  Rezoning the west half of Block 3 of B.F. Johnston’s Second Addition to the
        1991   city from R-1 to B-2.
122793L 12-27- Rezoning the east half of Block 10 of B.F. Johnston’s First Addition to the
        1993   city from B-1.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1992 Code of Ordinances
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Reference Code Section
ILCS Reference                          Code Section
3-4-6                                   30.04
3-4-6.1                                 30.04
3-11-7                                  30.04
8-11-1                                  35.107,
                                        35.120
11-45-6                                 35.045
11-98-4                                 35.075
11-706                                  71.042
11-707                                  71.042
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29                  10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2                     10.04
Ch. 5, Act 275, § 3(d)                 40.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 1-1 et seq.          31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15                 31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65                 37.070
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 10-10                31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 15-10                37.070
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5                 31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5                 31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)              31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)              31.07
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.        40.11
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 4                  40.01
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 7(11)              40.15
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 8                  40.16
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10                 40.10
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10(f)              40.12
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10(j)              40.13,
                                        40.14
                                        40.03,
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 11                 40.04,
                                        40.06,
                                        40.08
Ch. 35, Act 636, § 5-1 et seq.         Ch. 114
Ch. 50, Act 5, § 1                     40.09
Ch. 50, Act 5, § 2                     40.09
Ch. 50, Act 150                         39.30
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1127                70.01
Ch. 65, Act 5                           10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2                 10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1                 151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1               10.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9                 131.08
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-1                 150.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1               10.17
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-100–3.1-35-31.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1               31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.2–8-2-9.10  31.36
                                        35.200,
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1 et seq.    35.201,
                                        35.206,
                                        35.208
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2              35.201 -
                                        35.203
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3              35.202
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4              35.203
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2                35.135,
                                        35.136
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24               35.235,
                                        35.236
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5                132.05
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-6                40.06,
                                        40.07
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2                40.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12              151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2               151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8               151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2               151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.4-1 et seq.   35.210
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2           35.210
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a)          35.219
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(c)          35.219
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9)       35.219
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e)          35.219
Ch. 70, Act 1205, § 3-9                70.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104               35.136
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 1                    156.01
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215                71.103
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220                71.103
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360                71.103
                                        156.03,
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2                 156.07,
                                        156.09
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2(b)              156.03
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39.2(d)              156.06
Ch. 415, Act 5. § 39.2(e)              156.04
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3                  71.103
Ch. 520, Act 10, § 11(b)               155.233
Ch. 605, Act 120, § 1                  70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-100 et seq.        Ch. 77
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5 § 1-117.7               70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.15             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5           70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188                10.02,
                                        70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d)             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-401.5              70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609                72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616                72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101                79.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-107                79.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303                79.02
                                        71.080,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500                71.081,
                                        71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601                76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203               70.10,
                                        70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204               70.31,
                                        79.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205               70.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206               70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301               70.01,
                                        72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302               70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305               70.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306               70.31
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307               70.32
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308               70.33
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309               70.34
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310               70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311               70.36
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312               70.37
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313               70.38
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401               76.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402               76.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403               76.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404               76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406               76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a)            76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(b)            76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409               76.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410               76.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-415               76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § § 11-500–11-502   71.142
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501               79.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1             76.03,
                                        79.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)            76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601               71.001
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605               70.99,
                                        71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1             71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)            71.004
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611               71.003
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701               71.040
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702               71.041
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703               71.042
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704               71.043
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705               71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706               71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707               71.047
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708               71.046
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709               71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710               71.096
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711               71.106
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801               71.020
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802               71.021
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803               71.022
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804               71.023
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805               71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806               71.025
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901               71.060
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902               71.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903               71.062
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904               71.063,
                                        Ch. 77
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905               71.064
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906               71.065
                                        71.040,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907               71.048,
                                        71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5             71.040,
                                        71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908               71.040,
                                        71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001              74.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002              74.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003              74.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1            74.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004              74.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1            74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005              74.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006              74.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007              74.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008              74.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009              74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010              74.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011              70.99,
                                        74.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201              70.99,
                                        71.080
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202              71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204              70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205              71.082
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301              72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1            72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2            72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3            72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302              72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302.2            72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303              72.10,
                                        72.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304              72.01,
                                        72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305              72.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401              72.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402              71.095
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403              73.20
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1            73.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2(a)         73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404              73.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405              73.22
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406              71.097
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407              71.098
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410              71.099
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411              71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412              71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1            71.101
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413              71.103
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414              70.99,
                                        71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416              71.104
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418              71.105
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420              71.067
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425              71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1            71.142
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502              73.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503              73.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504              73.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505              73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1            73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506              73.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507              73.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1            73.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101               75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208               71.023,
                                        71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215               70.11,
                                        72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601               74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709               71.142
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801               70.01,
                                        71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802(a)            70.01
                                        70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803               71.045,
                                        71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-804               71.081
                                        70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805               71.045,
                                        71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101               75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101 et seq.      75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105               75.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106               75.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109               75.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 16-101 et seq.      70.99
Ch. 625, Act 10                         73.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12C-60(a) - (e)      132.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1 et seq.       79.02
Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4                  79.02
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402                79.02
Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(a)              37.070
Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(b)              37.070
Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2                  151.08
Ch. 775, Act 5                          39.20
Ch. 775, Act 5, § 6-101                37.070
Ch. 820, Act 192, § 15(p)              37.066
                                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1992 CODE OF ORDINANCES
1992 Code Section New Code Section
1992 Code Section New Code Section
10.99             10.99
11.01             11.01
11.02             11.02
12.01             12.01
30.02             30.02
30.03             30.03
30.04             30.04
30.16             30.16
30.17             30.17
30.18             30.18
30.19             30.19
30.20             30.20
30.21             30.21
30.22             30.22
30.23             30.23
30.35             30.35
30.36             30.36
30.37             30.37
31.01             31.01
31.02             31.02
31.03             31.03
31.04             31.04
31.05             31.05
31.06             31.06
31.15             31.15
31.16             31.16
31.17             31.17
31.30             31.30
31.32             31.32
31.33             31.33
32.01             32.01
32.02             32.02
32.03             32.03
32.04             32.04
32.15             32.15
32.16             32.16
32.25             32.25
32.26             32.26
32.27             32.27
32.28             32.28
32.40             32.40
32.41             32.41
32.42             32.42
32.43             32.43
32.44             32.44
32.45             32.45
32.46             32.46
32.47             32.47
32.99             32.99
33.01             33.01
33.02             33.02
33.03             33.03
33.04             33.04
33.05             33.06
33.15             33.15
33.16             33.16
33.17             33.17
33.18             33.18
33.19             33.19
33.20             33.20
33.21             33.21
33.22             33.22
34.01             34.01
34.02             34.02
34.03             34.03
34.04             34.04
34.05             34.05
34.06             34.06
34.07             34.07
34.08             34.08
34.09             34.09
34.10             34.10
34.20             34.20
34.21             34.21
34.22             34.22
34.23             34.23
35.001            35.001
35.015            35.015
35.030            35.030
35.045            35.045
35.060            35.060
35.075            35.075
35.090            35.090
35.091            35.091
35.092            35.092
35.093            35.093
35.094            35.094
35.105            35.105
35.106            35.106
35.107            35.107
35.108            35.108
35.109            35.109
35.110            35.110
35.111            35.111
35.120            35.120
35.121            35.121
35.122            35.122 
35.123            35.123
36.01             36.01
36.02             36.02
36.03             36.03
36.04             36.04
36.05             36.05
36.06             36.06
36.07             36.07
36.08             36.08
36.20             36.20
36.21             36.21
36.30             36.30
36.31             36.31
36.32             36.32
50.01             50.01
50.02             50.02
50.03             50.03
50.04             50.04
50.15             50.15
50.16             50.16
50.17             50.17
50.18             50.18
50.19             50.19
50.20             50.21
50.20             50.20
50.22             50.22
50.23             50.23
50.24             50.24
50.25             50.25
50.26             50.26
50.40             50.40
50.41             50.41
50.99             50.99
51.01             51.01
51.10             51.10
51.11             51.11
51.12             51.12
51.13             51.13
51.14             51.14
51.15             51.15
51.16             51.16
51.25             51.25
51.26             51.26
51.27             51.27
51.28             51.28
51.29             51.29
51.30             51.30
51.31             51.31
51.32             51.32
51.33             51.33
51.34             51.34
51.35             51.35
51.36             51.36
51.37             51.37
51.50             51.50
51.51             51.51
51.52             51.52
51.53             51.53
51.54             51.54
51.55             51.55
51.56             51.56
51.57             51.57
51.70             51.70
51.71             51.71
51.72             51.72
51.99             51.99
52.01             52.01
52.02             52.0
52.03             52.03
52.15             52.15
52.16             52.16
52.17             52.17
52.18             52.18
52.30             52.30
52.31             52.31
52.32             52.32
52.33             52.33
52.34             52.34
52.35             52.35
52.36             52.36
52.37             52.37
52.50             52.50
52.51             52.51
53.01             53.01
53.02             53.02
53.04             53.03
53.15             53.15
53.16             53.16
53.17             53.17
53.18             53.18
53.19             53.19
90.01             90.01
90.02             90.02
90.03             90.03
90.04             90.04
90.99             90.99
91.01             91.01
91.02             91.02
91.03             91.03
91.04             91.04
91.05             91.05
91.06             91.06
91.15             91.15
91.16             91.16
91.17             91.17
91.18             91.18
91.19             91.19
91.30             91.30
91.31             91.31
91.32             91.32
92.07             92.06
92.15             92.15
92.25             92.25
92.26             92.26
92.27             92.27
92.35             92.35
92.45             92.45
92.46             92.46
92.47             92.47
93.01             93.01
93.02             93.02
93.03             93.03
93.04             93.04
93.05             93.05
93.06             93.06
94.01             94.01
94.02             94.02
94.03             94.03
94.15             94.15
94.16             94.16
94.17             94.17
94.18             94.18
94.19             94.19
94.20             94.20
94.99             94.99
95.01             95.01
95.02             95.02
95.03             95.03
95.04             95.04
95.05             95.05
95.06             95.06
95.07             95.07
95.08             95.08
96.01             96.01
96.02             96.02
96.15             96.15
96.16             96.16
96.17             96.17
96.18             96.18
96.19             96.19
96.20             96.20
96.20             96.21
96.30             96.30
96.31             96.31
96.32             96.32
96.33             96.33
96.34             96.34
96.35             96.35
96.36             96.37
96.36             96.36
96.50             96.50
96.51             96.51
96.52             96.52
96.53             96.53
96.54             96.54
96.55             96.55
96.56             96.56
96.57             96.57
96.58             96.58
96.70             96.70
96.71             96.71
96.72             96.72
96.73             96.73
96.74             96.74
96.75             96.75
96.76             96.76
96.85             96.85
96.86             96.86
96.87             96.87
96.88             96.88
96.89             96.89
110.01            110.01
110.02            110.02
110.03            110.03
110.04            110.04
110.05            110.05
110.06            110.06
110.07            110.07
110.08            110.08
110.09            110.09
110.10            110.10
110.11            110.11
110.12            110.12
110.13            110.13
111.01            111.01
111.02            111.02
111.15            111.15
111.16            111.16
111.17            111.17
111.18            111.18
111.19            111.19
111.20            111.20
111.21            111.21
111.32            111.31
111.33            111.33
111.34            111.34
111.35            111.35
112.01            112.01
112.02            112.02
112.03            112.03
112.15            112.15
112.16            112.16
112.17            112.17
112.18            112.18
113.01            113.01
113.02            113.02
113.03            113.03
113.04            113.04
113.05            113.05
113.06            113.06
113.07            113.07
113.08            113.08
113.10            113.10
113.99            113.99
130.01            130.01
130.03            130.02
130.04            130.03
130.05            130.04
131.01            131.01
131.02            131.02
131.03            131.03
131.04            131.04
131.06            131.06
131.07            131.07
132.02            132.02
132.03            132.03
132.04            132.04
132.06            132.06
132.07            132.07
132.20            132.20
132.21            132.21
132.22            132.22
132.23            132.23
132.24            132.24
132.25            132.25
132.35            132.35
132.36            132.36
132.37            132.37
150.01            150.01
150.02            150.02
150.03            150.04
150.03            150.03
150.16            150.16
150.17            150.17
150.18            150.18
150.30            150.50
150.31            150.51
150.32            150.52
150.33            150.53
150.34            150.54
150.45            150.65
150.46            150.66
150.47            150.67
150.48            150.68
150.99            150.99
152.01            152.01
152.02            152.01
152.03            152.04
152.03            152.03
152.05            152.05
152.15            152.15
152.16            152.16
152.17            152.17
152.30            152.30
152.31            152.31
152.32            152.32
152.33            152.33
152.34            152.34
152.35            152.35
152.99            152.99
153.01            153.01
153.02            153.02
153.03            153.03
154.01            154.01
154.02            154.02
154.03            154.03
154.04            154.04
154.05            154.05
154.15            154.15
154.16            154.16
154.17            154.17
154.18            154.18
154.30            154.30
154.31            154.31
154.32            154.31
154.33            154.33
154.34            154.34
154.35            154.35
154.36            154.36
154.37            154.37
154.38            154.38
154.50            154.50
154.51            154.51
154.52            154.52
154.53            154.53
154.54            154.54
154.55            154.55
154.56            154.56
154.57            154.57
154.70            154.70
154.71            154.71
154.72            154.72
154.73            154.73
154.74            154.77
154.74            154.74
154.75            154.75
154.76            154.76
154.99            154.99
155.001           155.001
155.002           155.002
155.003           155.003
155.004           155.004
155.015           155.015
155.016           155.016
155.017           155.017
155.018           155.018
155.019           155.019
155.030           155.030
155.040           155.040
155.041           155.041
155.042           155.042
155.050           155.050
155.051           155.051
155.052           155.052
155.060           155.060
155.061           155.061
155.070           155.070
155.080           155.080
155.081           155.081
155.082           155.082
155.083           155.083
155.083           155.084
155.085           155.085
155.086           155.086
155.087           155.087
155.088           155.088
155.089           155.089
155.090           155.090
155.091           155.091
155.092           155.092
155.093           155.093
155.094           155.094
155.095           155.095
155.096           155.096
155.097           155.097
155.098           155.098
155.099           155.099
155.110           155.110
155.111           155.111
155.112           155.112
155.113           155.113
155.114           155.114
155.125           155.125
155.126           155.126
155.127           155.127
155.128           155.128
155.140           155.140
155.141           155.141
155.142           155.142
155.150           155.150
155.160           155.160
155.161           155.161
155.162           155.162
155.163           155.163
155.164           155.164
155.165           155.165
155.166           155.166
155.167           155.167
155.168           155.168
155.169           155.169
155.170           155.170
155.171           155.171
155.172           155.172
155.185           155.185
155.186           155.186
155.187           155.187
155.188           155.188
155.200           155.200
155.201           155.201
155.202           155.202
155.203           155.203
155.204           155.204
155.205           155.205
155.999           155.999
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
          - -         T.S.O. I
          - -         T.S.O. IV
          1-10-1955   T.S.O. IV
          4-16-1963   T.S.O. IV
                       155.001 
                       155.004,
                       155.015 
                       155.019,
                       155.030,
                       155.040 
                       155.042,
                       155.051 
                       155.052,
                       155.060 
                       155.061,
                       155.070,
          5- -1969    155.110 
                       155.114,
                       155.125 
                       155.128,
                       155.140 
                       155.142,
                       155.150 
                       155.160 
                       155.172,
                       155.185 
                       155.188,
                       155.200 
                       155.205,
                       155.999
82872      8-28-1972   T.S.O. VI
112772     11-27-1972  T.S.O. VII
112772     11-27-1972  155.114
31273      3-12-1973   T.S.O. I
32673      3-26-1973   T.S.O. VII
4973       4-9-1973    T.S.O. I
051473     5-14-1973   T.S.O. VII
72373-1    7-23-1973   T.S.O. V
082773     8-27-1973   T.S.O. VII
121073     12-10-1973  T.S.O. VI
082476     8-26-1974   T.S.O. VII
                       152.01 
                       152.05,
                       152.15 
71276      7-12-1976   152.17,
                       152.30 
                       152.35,
                       152.99
112276A    11-22-1976  Ch. 77, Sch. II,
                       Ch. 77, Sch. III
121376     12-13-1976  Ch. 78, Sch. I
                       113.01 
31477      3-14-1977   113.10,
                       113.99
080877     8-8-1977    31.32
81577      8-15-1977   T.S.O. III
091277     9-12-1977   T.S.O. VII
101077     10-10-1977  T.S.O. VII
111477B    11-14-1977  52.30,
                       53.03
112877B    11-28-1977  155.030
112877C    11-28-1977  T.S.O. VII
                       51.13 
                       51.16,
                       51.26,
                       51.36,
121277     12-12-1977  51.51 
                       51.52,
                       51.56,
                       51.71,
                       51.99
010578     1-5-1978    155.041,
                       155.042
011378     1-13-1978   T.S.O. I
012378     1-23-1978   T.S.O. VII
21378A     2-13-1978   T.S.O. I
21378B     2-13-1978   T.S.O. I
031378     3-13-1978   T.S.O. VII
                       155.080 
042478     4-24-1978   155.091,
                       155.093 
                       155.099
                       154.01 
                       154.05,
                       154.15 
                       154.18,
                       154.30 
061278     6-12-1978   154.38,
                       154.50 
                       154.57,
                       154.70 
                       154.77,
                       154.999
62678      6-26-1978   T.S.O. VI
071078     7-10-1978   T.S.O. VII
72478B     7-24-1978   33.15 
                       33.22
72478C     7-24-1978   53.01
          10- -1978   T.S.O. VII
          10- -1978   T.S.O. VII
                       155.051,
091487A    9-14-1978   155.052,
                       155.061
102378A    10-23-1978  T.S.O. I
102378B    10-23-1978  T.S.O. I
112778     11-27-1978  155.150
1879       1-8-1979    T.S.O. I
022679     2-26-1979   T.S.O. VII
22679A     2-26-1979   12.01
051479     5-14-1979   155.061
7979       7-9-1979    95.01
070979     7-9-1979    32.25 
                       32.28
                       35.105 
9-24-79A   9-24-1979   35.111,
                       35.999
                       35.106,
011480     1-14-1980   51.01,
                       51.72
011480B    1-14-1980   51.01,
                       51.72
12880A     1-28-1980   111.34
21180      2-11-1980   36.30 
                       36.32
032480     3-24-1980   T.S.O. V
032480A    3-24-1980   T.S.O. VI
72880      7-28-1980   52.30
092280     9-22-1980   111.15,
                       111.18
012681A    1-26-1981   31.16
032381     3-23-1981   T.S.O. IV
042781     4-27-1981   50.04
051181     5-11-1981   T.S.O. II
                       32.25 
052781     5-27-1981   32.28,
                       Ch. 77, Sch. I
011182A    1-11-1982   35.120 
                       35.123
011182B    1-11-1982   35.120 
                       35.123
042682     4-26-1982   155.061,
                       155.187
042682C    4-26-1982   150.03
070182     7-1-1982    T.S.O. II
082382     8-23-1982   53.03,
                       53.17
101182     10-11-1982  Ch. 77, Sch. II,
                       Ch. 77, Sch. III
101182B    10-11-1982  T.S.O. VI
                       Ch. 77, Sch. I,
101182C    10-11-1982  94.01 
                       94.03,
                       94.99
101182D    10-11-1982  155.087
011083     1-10-1983   95.07,
                       95.08
032883     3-28-1983   T.S.O. VII
061383     6-13-1983   Ch. 78, Sch. I
062783     6-27-1983   Ch. 78, Sch. I
062783B    6-27-1983   T.S.O. IV
111483     11-14-1983  T.S.O. VII
                       50.15 
51484      5-14-1984   50.26,
                       50.99
07984      7-9-1984    155.114
                       90.01,
10884      10-8-1984   90.02,
                       90.99
22585      2-25-1985   Ch. 78, Sch. I
52785      5-27-1985   Ch. 77, Sch. IV
090985     9-9-1985    35.105
111185     11-11-1985  T.S.O. VI
021086     1-13-1986   35.106
031086     3-10-1986   53.15,
                       53.17
08286A     7-28-1986   155.114
081186     8-11-1986   51.37
082586     8-25-1986   Ch. 77, Sch. I
092286     9-22-1986   Ch. 78, Sch. I
102786     10-27-1986  T.S.O. V
122286     12-22-1986  53.01
052687     5-26-1987   T.S.O. II
060887     6-8-1987    T.S.O. III
060887A    6-8-1987    T.S.O. VI
091487     9-14-1987   T.S.O. VII
011188     1-11-1988   53.01
                       90.01,
022288     2-22-1988   90.03,
                       90.04
080888A    8-8-1988    91.15,
                       94.01
080888B    8-8-1988    91.15
101088     10-10-1988  T.S.O. VI
101088A    10-10-1988  94.01
062689A    6-26-1989   T.S.O. VI
          - -1990     52.32 
                       52.37
052990     5-29-1990   T.S.O. VII
091090-2   9-10-1990   Ch. 77, Sch. III
          12-10-1990  Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                       Ch. 77, Sch. IV
021191     2-11-1991   Ch. 77, Sch. III
052891     5-28-1991   T.S.O. VII
          6-24-1991   155.126
090991-2   9-9-1991    53.03
090991-3   9-9-1991    53.01
102891-1   10-28-1991  90.02
112591-1   11-25-1991  95.06
120991-1   12-9-1991   32.26 
                       32.28
120991-2   12-9-1991   36.32
120991-3   12-9-1991   32.75 
                       32.77
032392     3-23-1992   Ch. 77, Sch. I
071392     6-8-1992    T.S.O. I
081092-1   8-10-1992   T.S.O. VI
          9-14-1992   132.01
          9-14-1992   31.30
091492A    9-14-1992   31.17
122793A    12-27-1993  T.S.O. VI
122793B    12-27-1993  132.38
122793C    12-27-1993  Ch. 77, Sch. IV
122793D    12-27-1993  Ch. 77, Sch. III
122793G    12-27-1993  111.31
122793H    12-27-1993  Ch. 77, Sch. I
122793J    12-27-1993  Ch. 78, Sch. I
122793K    12-27-1993  155.061
122793l    12-27-1993  T.S.O. VII
122793M    12-27-1993  53.17
122793N    12-27-1993  53.03
032894A    3-28-1994   Ch. 77, Sch. III
032894B    3-28-1994   Ch. 78, Sch. I
061394A    6-13-1994   Ch. 77, Sch. III
072594B    7-25-1994   T.S.O. VI
082294     8-22-1994   53.01
102494B    10-24-1994  53.01
                       97.01,
                       97.02,
                       97.15 
102494D    10-24-1994  97.19,
                       97.30 
                       97.42,
                       97.99
121294C    12-12-1994  150.30 
                       150.37
122794A    12-27-1994  155.041
122794B    12-27-1994  155.030
050895     5-8-1995    Ch. 77, Sch. III
092595A    9-25-1995   53.03
100995A    10-9-1995   Ch. 77, Sch. III
100995B    10-9-1995   Ch. 77, Sch. I
100995C    10-9-1995   Ch. 77, Sch. IV
100995D    10-9-1995   T.S.O. VI
100995E    10-9-1995   53.01
111395B    11-13-1995  31.16
121195C    12-11-1995  155.114
052896A    5-28-1996   50.40
070896A    7-8-1996    31.15
070896B    7-8-1996    31.16
070896D    7-8-1996    31.30
070896E    7-8-1996    31.34
                       98.01 
072296A    7-22-1996   98.03,
                       98.99
092396A    9-23-1996   150.33
102896A    10-28-1996  Ch. 77, Sch. III
102896B    10-28-1996  Ch. 77, Sch. IV
111296A    11-12-1996  T.S.O. II
112596A    11-25-1996  52.17
120996B    12-9-1996   111.18
012797A    1-27-1997   154.51
032497     3-24-1997   T.S.O. V
051297A    5-12-1997   Ch. 77, Sch. III
072897A    7-28-1997   155.052
072897C    7-28-1997   155.150
072897D    7-28-1997   33.05
082597A    8-25-1997   50.02
102797A    10-27-1997  150.17
112497A    11-24-1997  53.01
112497B    11-24-1997  155.126
122297A    12-22-1997  T.S.O. VI
011298B    1-12-1998   155.094
011298C    1-12-1998   155.112
012698B    1-26-1998   155.093
022398A    2-23-1998   111.18
022398B    2-23-1998   32.41,
                       32.42
022398C    2-23-1998   31.36
022398D    2-23-1998   31.30
051198A    5-11-1998   31.16
102698A    10-26-1998  155.041
112398A    11-23-1998  Ch. 77, Sch. I
112398B    11-23-1998  92.27
                       114.01 
122898A    12-28-1998  114.09,
                       114.98
012599A    1-25-1999   35.135 
                       35.142
012599B    1-25-1999   35.106
012599C    1-25-1999   35.110
040798A    4-7-1998    T.S.O. II
041599A    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599B    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599C    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599D    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599E    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599F    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
041599G    4-15-1999   T.S.O. I
042699A    4-26-1999   31.36
062899B    6-28-1999   91.20
072899     7-28-1999   T.S.O. II
022800A    2-28-2000   Ch. 78, Sch. I
072400A    7-24-2000   T.S.O. VI
072400B    7-24-2000   31.16
072400C    7-24-2000   94.20
081400A    8-14-2000   T.S.O. IV
082800A    8-28-2000   36.03
082800C    8-28-2000   T.S.O. II
102300B    10-23-2000  Ch. 77, Sch. IV
102300C    10-23-2000  Ch. 77, Sch. III
010801A    1-8-2001    155.126
021201A    2-12-2001   36.05
021201B    2-12-2001   31.35
051401A    5-14-2001   150.17
051401B    5-14-2001   150.17
051401C    5-14-2001   150.19
051401D    5-14-2001   150.17
051401E    5-14-2001   155.201
051401F    5-14-2001   155.151
051401G    5-14-2001   155.187
051401H    5-14-2001   155.128
052901A    5-29-2001   96.16
081301A    8-13-2001   51.72
081301B    8-13-2001   52.30
102201A    10-22-2001  Ch. 78, Sch. I
122601A    12-26-2001  111.15
122601B    12-26-2001  111.18
012802     1-28-2002   T.S.O. II
021102A    2-11-2002   Ch. 78, Sch. I
040802A    4-8-2002    T.S.O. VI
052802A    5-28-2002   T.S.O. V
                       37.010 -
                       37.014,
                       37.020,
                       37.021,
                       37.030 -
                       37.034,
                       37.042 -
                       37.047,
                       37.050 -
062402A    6-24-2002   37.056,
                       37.060 -
                       37.065,
                       37.070 -
                       37.076,
                       37.080,
                       37.081,
                       37.090 -
                       37.097,
                       37.100 -
                       37.102
                       10.99,
                       50.99,
                       51.99,
                       90.99,
081202A    8-12-2002   94.99,
                       113.99,
                       150.99,
                       152.99,
                       154.99,
                       155.999
081202B    8-12-2002   Ch. 77, Sch. III
090902A    9-9-2002    111.18
                       96.50,
                       96.53,
090902B    9-9-2002    96.55,
                       96.58,
                       96.74
092302A    9-23-2002   114.09,
                       T.S.O. VI
101502B    10-15-2002  31.16
101502C    10-15-2002  T.S.O. VI
102802A    10-28-2002  Ch. 78, Sch. I
111202B    11-12-2002  37.093
112502A    11-25-2002  10.99
011303A    1-13-2003   53.01
011303B    1-13-2003   T.S.O. V
062303B    6-23-2003   53.03
072803A    7-28-2003   T.S.O. V
082503A    8-25-2003   T.S.O. II
092203A    9-22-2003   T.S.O. II
020904A    2-9-04      53.01
041204A    4-12-04     37.061
042604B    4-26-04     T.S.O II
042604C    4-26-04     T.S.O. V
042604D    4-26-04     156.01 -
                       156.09
051004A    5-10-04     31.07
061404A    6-14-04     Ch. 78, Sch. II
080904A    8-9-04      T.S.O. VI
082304A    8-23-04     T.S.O. V
082304B    8-23-04     T.S.O. II
092704A    9-27-04     Adopting Ordinance
101403A    10-14-03    150.17
112204A    11-22-04    150.17
2005-MC02  4-25-2005   T.S.O. II
2005-MC04  6-13-2005   T.S.O. II
2005-MC06  8-22-2005   38.02
2005-MC07  8-22-2005   51.72
2005-MC08  8-22-2005   52.30
                       31.30,
2005-MC10  10-24-2005  32.16,
                       32.17,
                       32.26
                       51.01,
2005-MC11  10-24-2005  53.02,
                       53.18,
                       53.19
                       37.010 -
                       37.014,
                       37.020,
                       37.021,
                       37.030 -
                       37.034,
                       37.040 -
                       37.047,
                       37.050 -
2005-MC12  10-24-2005  37.056,
                       37.060 -
                       37.065,
                       37.070 -
                       37.076,
                       37.080,
                       37.081,
                       37.090 -
                       37.097,
                       37.100 -
                       37.102
                       32.15,
                       51.11,
                       51.12,
                       51.25,
                       51.28,
                       51.29,
                       51.32 -
                       51.35,
                       51.51 -
                       51.54,
                       51.57,
                       51.71,
                       52.31,
2005-MC13  10-24-2005  52.35,
                       52.36,
                       96.19,
                       96.32,
                       96.33,
                       96.36,
                       96.37,
                       96.50,
                       96.53,
                       96.55,
                       96.58,
                       96.72,
                       96.74,
                       96.75,
                       131.01
                       51.70,
                       52.01,
                       52.15,
                       52.17,
2005-MC14  10-24-2005  52.30 -
                       52.36,
                       52.51,
                       53.01,
                       53.03
2005-MC15  12-12-2005  Ch. 77, Sch. I
                       37.013,
                       37.053,
2005-MC16  12-12-2005  37.054,
                       37.056,
                       37.061
2006-MC05  8-14-2006   31.08
2006-MC06  8-14-2006   155.126
2006-MC07  8-14-2006   53.17-1
2006-MC08  8-28-2006   72.13
2006-MC09  9-11-2006   95.01
2006-MC10  12-11-2006  95.09
2006-MC11  12-11-2006  150.17
2007-MC01  1-22-2007   155.187
2007-MC02  1-22-2007   155.128
2007-MC03  1-22-2007   155.204
2007-MC04  2-12-2007   T.S.O. II
2007-MC05  2-26-2007   31.15
2007-MC07  4-23-2007   53.01
2007-MC10  7-9-2007    52.15
2007-MC11  7-23-2007   Ch. 77, Sch. III
2007-MC13  12-10-2007  150.17
2007-MC15  12-10-2007  150.05
                       99.01 -
2008-MC01  1-28-2008   99.10,
                       99.99
2008-MC-02 3-10-2008   T.S.O. II
2008-MC06  6-23-2008   31.09
2008-MC07  9-22-2008   31.16,
                       31.34
2008-MC08  10-27-2008  39.01 -
                       39.06
2009-MC01  2-23-2009   53.03
2009-MC02  3-9-2009    53.17
2009-MC03  3-9-2009    53.01
                       10.99,
                       50.99,
                       70.99,
2009-MC04  3-9-2009    71.999,
                       72.99,
                       90.99,
                       98.99
2009-MC05  4-27-2009   35.200 -
                       35.208
2009-MC07  4-27-2009   111.18
2009-MC08  6-22-2009   31.09
2009-MC09  9-28-2009   35.203
2010-MC02  5-24-2010   T.S.O. II
2010-MC03  8-23-2010   33.05
2011-MC01  4-25-2011   79.01 -
                       79.09
                       151.01 -
2011-MC03  5-9-2011    151.13,
                       151.99
2011-MC04  5-9-2011    Ch. 78, Sch. I
2011-MC05  6-13-2011   T.S.O. II
2011-MC06  6-27-2011   31.09
2011-MC07  8-8-2011    155.126
2011-MC08  9-12-2011   39.20
2011-MC10  12-27-2011  30.15
2012-MC02  6-25-2012   31.09
2012-MC03  8-13-2012   33.05
2013-MC02  6-24-2013   31.09
2013-MC03  7-22-2013   T.S.O. IV
2013-MC04  12-9-2013   T.S.O. VI
2014-MC01  2-10-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. I
2014-MC02  3-10-2014   111.18
2014-MC04  5-27-2014   T.S.O. II
2014-MC05  6-9-2014    31.09
2014-MC06  6-9-2014    T.S.O. II
2014-MC07  6-23-2014   37.055,
                       37.098
2014-MC08  7-14-2014   111.30
2015-MC01  1-26-2015   Ch. 78, Sch. I
2015-MC02  2-23-2015   53.01
2015-MC03  4-27-2015   T.S.O. IV
2015-MC04  4-27-2015   T.S.O. IV
2015-MC06  6-22-2015   31.09
2015-MC07  8-10-2015   36.05
2015-MC08  8-10-2015   111.18
2015-MC09  8-10-2015   Ch. 78, Sch. I
2016-MC01  2-22-2016   Ch. 78, Sch. I
2016-MC02  2-22-2016   T.S.O. II
2016-MC04  5-23-2016   32.43
2016-MC05  6-27-2016   31.09
2016-MC07  7-25-2016   53.20
2016-MC08  9-12-2016   31.16
2016-MC09  9-26-2016   T.S.O. II
2017-MC01  2-27-2017   39.30
2017-MC02  4-24-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-MC04  5-8-2017    T.S.O. VI
2017-MC05  5-8-2017    T.S.O. VI
                       71.140 -
2017-MC06  6-12-2017   71.143,
                       71.999
2017-MC07  6-12-2017   31.09
2017-MC08  6-27-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-MC09  8-28-2017   T.S.O. II
2017-MC10  11-27-2017  72.13
2017-MC12  12-11-2017  111.18
2017-MC13  12-11-2017  37.070
2018-MC01  1-8-2018    92.01 -
                       92.05
2018-MC02  3-26-2018   Ch. 78, Sch. I
2018-MC04  6-11-2018   31.09
2018-MC05  7-23-2018   T.S.O. II
                       113.02,
                       113.03,
2018-MC06  7-23-2018   113.05,
                       113.07 -
                       113.11
2018-MC07  8-13-2018   35.210 -
                       35.222
2018-MC09  8-27-2018   T.S.O. II
2018-MC10  9-24-2018   T.S.O. II
2018-MC11  10-9-2018   30.24
2018-MC12  10-22-2018  31.16
2018-MC13  10-22-2018  37.070
2018-MC16  11-13-2018  52.04
2019-MC01  1-3-2019    T.S.O. V
2019-MC02  1-3-2019    T.S.O. V
2019-MC04  4-8-2019    T.S.O. II
2019-MC05  4-8-2019    91.05,
                       91.06
2019-MC07  6-10-2019   30.05,
                       30.15
2019-MC08  6-24-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-MC09  6-24-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-MC10  8-12-2019   T.S.O. II
2019-MC11  9-9-2019    T.S.O. V
2019-MC12  10-15-2019  53.01
2020-MC03  3-12-2020   155.004
2020-MC04  3-20-2020   40.01 -
                       40.17
                       115.01 -
2020-MC07  5-26-2020   115.06,
                       115.99
2020-MC08  7-13-2020   T.S.O. II
2020-MC09  7-13-2020   53.01
2020-MC10  8-8-2020    T.S.O. V
2020-MC11  9-14-2020   T.S.O. II
2020-MC14  9-14-2020   T.S.O. II
2021-MC01  1-25-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-MC02  2-8-2021    155.030,
                       155.126
2021-MC03  2-8-2021    157.01 -
                       157.16
2021-MC05  5-10-2021   72.14,
                       Ch. 78, Sch. I
2021-MC06  7-26-2021   70.99
2021-MC08  10-12-2021  T.S.O. II
2021-MC09  11-8-2021   T.S.O. II
2021-MC10  12-13-2021  T.S.O. II
                       155.030,
                       155.041,
                       155.042,
2021-MC12  12-13-2021  155.051,
                       155.052,
                       155.061,
                       155.215 -
                       155.234
2023-MC01  1-9-2023    T.S.O. II
2023-MC02  2-13-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-MC03  2-27-2023   111.03,
                       111.36
2023-MC04  3-13-2023   111.18
2023-MC08  4-10-2023   39.40 -
                       39.42
2023-MC09  5-8-2023    T.S.O. II
2023-MC10  5-8-2023    T.S.O. II
2023-MC11  5-22-2023   T.S.O. V
                       Ch. 77, Sch. I,
                       Sch. II,
2023-MC12  6-12-2023   Sch. III,
                       Sch. IV,
                       Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                       Sch. II
2023-MC13  6-12-2023   30.15
2023-MC14  6-12-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-MC16  9-11-2023   T.S.O. II
2023-MC17  11-13-2023  T.S.O. II
2023-MC18  11-27-2023  37.066
2023-MC22  12-26-2023  T.S.O. II
2023-MC23  12-26-2023  T.S.O. I
2024-MC01  2-12-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-MC02  2-12-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-MC03  3-11-2024   52.04
2024-MC05  7-8-2024    35.210 -
                       35.222
2024-MC07  9-12-2024   36.05
2024-MC08  9-12-2024   T.S.O. II
2024-MC09  10-15-2024  T.S.O. II
2024-MC10  10-15-2024  T.S.O. II
2024-MC11  11-12-2024  T.S.O. II
2024-MC12  12-9-2024   131.08
2024-MC17  12-23-2024  155.250 -
                       155.252
                       31.30,
2025-MC01  1-14-2025   31.33,
                       31.35
2025-MC02  10-15-2024  T.S.O. II
2025-MC03  2-10-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC04  3-10-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC05  3-10-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC06  3-10-2025   35.235 -
                       35.237
2025-MC07  4-14-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC08  4-14-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC10  5-12-2025   T.S.O. II
2025-MC11  5-12-2025   150.15
2025-MC12  5-12-2025   T.S.O. II
                      
 
 
