CITY CODE
of
VIRGINIA
ILLINOIS
2009
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-8, passed August 11, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Virginia, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-8, passed August 11, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 09-16
An ordinance adopting and enacting a new code for the city of Virginia,
Illinois; providing for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein;
providing a penalty for the violation thereof; providing for the manner of
amending such code; and providing when such code and this ordinance shall
become effective.
   Whereas, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, has caused a new
code to be published in typewritten form;
   Whereas, the new code updates and clarifies various ordinances lawfully
passed by the Virginia city council in years past and also eliminates
inconsistent and archaic ordinances, or parts of ordinances, not applicable to
the existing conditions of the city;
   Whereas, it has been determined the new code will better protect individual
rights of due process by these clarifications;
   THEREFORE, be it ordained by the city council of the city of Virginia,
Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1. The code entitled "City Code Of Virginia, Illinois," published by
Sterling Codifiers, consisting of titles 1 through 11, each inclusive, is
adopted.
   Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before March 9, 2009, and not included in the code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
   Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
   Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $750.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided
by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to
the amendment of any code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in
the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city
may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.
   Section 5. Additions or amendments to the code when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the
code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the code, so that reference to the
code includes the additions and amendments.
   Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 9, 2009, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the code.
   Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage.
   Passed by the city council of the city of Virginia, Illinois, at a regular
meeting thereof held on the 12th day of October 2009, and approved by the mayor
on the same day.
AYES  5 NAYS  0 ABSENT  1
 
   /s/  Steve Sudbrink, Mayor
ATTEST:
   /s/  Sarah Fanning, City Clerk   
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
VIRGINIA CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Custody Of City Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Virginia. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the VIRGINIA CITY CODE, and it is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be kept up to date
as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the city attorney, acting for the
city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title
in any legal documents. (1981 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the city of a general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1981 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
When any ordinance or part thereof shall be repealed, modified or amended by
subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part thereof so repealed, modified or
amended shall continue in force until the taking effect of the ordinance so
repealing, modifying or amending the same. No ordinance or part thereof
repealed by the city council shall be deemed to be revised by the repeal of the
repealing ordinance unless it shall therein so expressly provide. All
ordinances passed by the city council shall be deposited in the office of the
city clerk and shall be duly recorded by the clerk in a book known as the
"ordinance record" and appropriately indexed by titles or subject matters. The
city clerk shall file and carefully preserve the original of all ordinances so
deposited in his office. (1925 Code § 13-2)
1-1-4: CUSTODY OF CITY CODE:
All the printed code books shall be deposited with the city clerk who shall
deliver one copy thereof to each officer of the city, taking receipt therefor
and charge the same to such officer. Said officer shall, at the expiration of
his term of office, return the same to the city clerk. (1925 Code § 38-8)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Proceedings Under Former Ordinances Valid
1-2-4: Conflicting Provisions
1-2-5: Severability
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed by the mayor and city council prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (1981 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1981 Code)
1-2-3: PROCEEDINGS UNDER FORMER ORDINANCES VALID:
No suit, proceeding, fine, forfeiture, penalty, debt, right or liability
whatsoever instituted, incurred, created, given or accrued by or under any
ordinance of the city prior to its repeal or modification shall be annulled,
released, discharged or in any way affected by the passage of such repealing,
modifying or amending ordinances; but the same may be prosecuted, recovered,
completed and enjoined as fully in all respects as if such ordinance or part
thereof had remained in full force, unless otherwise expressly provided in the
ordinance making such repeal, modification or amendment. (1925 Code § 13-7)
1-2-4: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
When the provisions of different ordinances or of the different chapters of any
ordinance conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions and
requirements of each ordinance or chapter shall prevail as to all subjects,
matters and questions embraced within or arising out of the subject matter
thereof. But if different or conflicting provisions be found in different
sections of the same ordinance or chapter, the provisions of the section last
in numerical order shall prevail, unless such construction would be repugnant
or inconsistent with the obvious meaning and intent of such ordinance or
chapter. (1925 Code § 8-3)
1-2-5: SEVERABILITY:
The invalidity of any portion or any section of this code shall not affect the
validity of any other portion or section which can be executed without such
invalid part. (1925 Code § 38-7)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be held,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Virginia".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2009 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Virginia, county of Cass, state of Illinois.
CODE: The city code of the city of Virginia.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Virginia.
COUNTY: The county of Cass, state of Illinois.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished, and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1981 Code; amd. 2009 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1981
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Collection Of Attorney Fees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   General Penalty Imposed: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
code or state statute, any person found to have been in violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such
fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A penalty
for each offense may include a requirement that the offending party perform
some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, picking up
litter in public parks or upon public highways or performing maintenance of
public facilities. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   B.   Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of an
ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of the state
is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of
incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed
six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal
procedure of the state, and the city shall be required to establish guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
   C.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense. (2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2009 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2009
Code)
1-4-4: COLLECTION OF ATTORNEY FEES:
In furtherance of the goal of efficient enforcement of the ordinances of the
city, it is hereby provided that in any ordinance prosecution maintained by the
city in which the alleged violator is found guilty of violating any ordinance
of the city, the city shall have, in addition to any fine imposed, the payment
of its reasonable attorney fees for the maintenance of such prosecution. (Ord.,
10-5-1987)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Qualifications; Term Of Office
1-5-2: Bond
1-5-3: Compensation
1-5-4: Vacancy In Office
1-5-5: General Powers And Duties
1-5-6: Duties Regarding City Officers
1-5-7: Approval, Veto Of Ordinances
1-5-8: Deputy Mayor; Temporary Chairperson
1-5-1: QUALIFICATIONS 1 ; TERM OF OFFICE:
The chief executive officer of the city shall be the mayor, who shall be a
qualified elector of the city and shall have resided within the city at least
one year next preceding the election, and who shall hold his office for four
(4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. (1925 Code § 6-1;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-11-3 of this title.
1-5-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall execute a bond
to the city in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with such
sureties as the city council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of his office. (1925 Code § 6-2; amd. 1981 Code)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION:
The mayor of the city shall receive as compensation for his services a salary
of three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per annum for fiscal year
2003/2004 and all subsequent years. (1925 Code § 6-11; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 7-
6-1981; Ord., 9-2002)
1-5-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
If a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the vacancy must be filled by
the city council electing one of their members as acting mayor. Except as set
forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-50(d), the acting mayor shall
perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor until a
mayor is elected at the next general municipal election and has qualified.
(1925 Code § 6-3; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5-5: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The mayor shall:
   A.   Do and perform all such duties as are enjoined upon him by the laws of
the state and the ordinances of the city, and shall take care that all the
ordinances of the city are duly enforced, respected and observed.
   B.   Preside at all meetings of the city council, but shall not vote except:
      1.   In the case of a tie;
      2.   When half of the alderman elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion;
      3.   When a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
require by state statute or local ordinance to adopt an ordinance resolution,
or motion; or
      4.   As otherwise allowed or required by law.
   C.   Preserve order and decorum at all meetings.
   D.   At the first regular meeting of the city council of each fiscal year,
and from time to time thereafter, give the city council information in writing
relative to the affairs of the city, and he shall recommend for their
consideration as he may deem expedient.
   E.   In the fulfillment of such duties, devote so much of his time as a
faithful and efficient discharge thereof may require.
   F.   Decide upon all applications for licenses or reject the same, but it
shall be his duty to grant all such applications when the same are in
accordance with the laws and the ordinances of the city, and the applicant is
of lawful age, and of good moral character and is qualified according to law
and the ordinances of the city to receive the same; and the mayor shall have
power to revoke any license so granted by him for a violation of the laws or
ordinances of the city or for gross misconduct on the part of the licensee.
Provided, that the party aggrieved may appeal to the city council at its next
regular meeting when, if a majority of all the members elected to the city
council so vote, said license shall again become valid and in full force.
   G.   Sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted, issued or
drawn by the order of the city council or authorized by ordinance of the city.
He shall sign all contracts where the city is a party unless otherwise
provided, and it shall be his special duty to see that the other contracting
party faithfully complies with the contract; and in all suits where the city is
a party, he shall advise with and assist the city attorney in prosecuting or
defending the same, as the case may be. (1925 Code §§ 6-5, 6-6, and 6-10; amd.
Ord. 2020-01, 1-13-2020)
1-5-6: DUTIES REGARDING CITY OFFICERS:
   A.   The mayor shall, by and with the advice and approval of a majority of
the city council, appoint all officers of the city whose appointments are not
otherwise provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office
which by law or ordinance he is empowered and required to fill, he shall, at
the next regular meeting of the city council after such vacancy, communicate to
the city council the name of his appointee to such office, and pending the
concurrence of the council in such appointment, he may designate some suitable
person to discharge the function of such office. (1925 Code § 6-7)
   B.   The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all of the officers of the
city and:
      1.   See that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of
their respective offices.
      2.   Inquire into all reasonable complaints made against any officer, and
cause any violation or neglect of duty to be promptly corrected.
      3.   In case he becomes satisfied that any officer wilfully neglects or
violates his duty, cause such officer to be prosecuted and punished. (1925 Code
§ 6-8)
      4.   Have the power to remove any officer appointed by him on any written
charge if, in his opinion, the best interests of the city demand such removal,
but he shall report the reasons for such removal to the city council at a
meeting to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days
after such removal. If the mayor shall fail or refuse to file with the city
council a statement of the reasons for such removal or if the city council, by
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by
yeas and nays, to be entered upon its record, disapproves of such removal, such
officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he was
removed, but he shall give new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer
shall be removed a second time for the same offense. (1925 Code § 6-8; amd.
2009 Code)
1-5-7: APPROVAL, VETO OF ORDINANCES:
The mayor shall carefully inspect all ordinances passed by the city council and
affix his official signature to such as he may approve and return them to the
city clerk within ten (10) days after their passage. All ordinances passed as
aforesaid which do not meet his approval, he shall return to the city council
with his objection thereto in writing at the next regular meeting of the
council occurring not less than five (5) days after the passage thereof. Such
veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations contained in any
ordinance making an appropriation or to the entire ordinance; and in case the
veto only extends to one or more items of appropriation of such ordinance, the
residue thereof shall take effect and be in force. In case the mayor shall fail
to return any ordinance, with his objections thereto, by the time aforesaid, he
shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance and the same shall take effect
accordingly. (1925 Code § 6-9; amd. 2009 Code)
1-5-8: DEPUTY MAYOR; TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON:
   A.   Only those serving as a duly elected or appointed alderperson of the
City of Virginia shall be eligible for appointment to the position of deputy
mayor.
   B.   The deputy mayor shall perform the duties and possess all of the rights
and powers of the mayor, consistent with the rights and duties set forth in 65
ILCS 5/3.1-35-35(a), when the mayor is absent from the city, is under
disability and thus incapable of acting as mayor, or when the position of mayor
is vacant as defined by the Illinois Municipal Code. The mayor shall be deemed
absent or incapable of acting as mayor when so declared by such mayor or when
so designated by the mayor's personal attending physician. A notice of absence
or incapacity shall be in writing and signed either by the mayor or the mayor's
personal attending physician and delivered to city hall to be filed with the
city's official records.
   C.   When acting in the capacity of mayor, the deputy mayor shall not be
entitled to vote in both capacities as mayor and as alderperson, consistent
with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35(a).
   D.   The deputy mayor shall receive no additional compensation while acting
in the capacity of mayor.
   E.   At times when the deputy mayor is not acting in the capacity of mayor,
the deputy mayor shall perform the duties and possess all of the rights and
powers of an alderperson.
   F.   In the event that both the deputy mayor and mayor are absent or
incapacitated as defined herein, the corporate authorities may elect one of
their members to act as a temporary chairman consistent with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-
35(b). Written notice of absence or incapacity of the deputy mayor for the
purpose of this subsection F shall be provided in the same manner as set forth
in subsection B above. A temporary chairman shall have only the powers of a
presiding officer and a right to vote only in the capacity as alderperson or
trustee on any ordinance, resolution, or motion.
   G.   A temporary chairperson shall receive no additional compensation while
acting as temporary chairperson.
   H.   In the event both the positions of mayor and deputy mayor are vacant,
as defined by the Illinois Municipal Code, the corporate authorities may elect
a mayor pro tern consistent with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35(a). (Ord. 2025-6, 6-9-
2025)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Composition; Powers; Vacancy
1-6-2: Qualifications
1-6-3: Term Of Office
1-6-4: Meetings
1-6-5: Voting Requirements
1-6-6: Signature On Bonds Prohibited
1-6-7: Compensation
1-6-8: Standing Committees
1-6-9: Special Committees
1-6-1: COMPOSITION; POWERS; VACANCY:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen from each
ward. The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of
its own members and exercise the powers conferred upon it by the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the city. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of
alderman, the vacancy must be filled by the mayor or acting mayor in accordance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-50(e). (1925 Code § 10-1; amd. 2009
Code)
1-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS 1 :
No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman if:
   A.   He is not a qualified elector and does not reside within the ward from
which he is elected.
   B.   He is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other liability due the
city.
   C.   He is directly or indirectly interested in any contract whatever to
which the city is a party. There shall be compliance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 regarding interests in contracts 2 .
   D.   He shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery or other corrupt
practices or crimes.
   E.   At the same time as he serves, he holds any other office under the city
government. (1925 Code § 10-2; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-11-3 of this title.
2 2. See also section
  1-11-6 of this title.
1-6-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
Each alderman shall hold his office for the term of four (4) years and until
his successor is elected and qualified. (1925 Code § 10-2; amd. 1981 Code)
1-6-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be
held in the city hall or such other place as the city council shall desire on
the second Monday of each and every month at seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
Adjourned meetings may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished
business of the regular meeting at such time or times to which the regular
meeting is adjourned. (Ord., 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 2025-5, 5-12-2025)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any
three (3) aldermen when, in their discretion, they may deem it necessary, in
which event, the meeting shall be called in the following manner: The mayor, or
three (3) aldermen, as the case may be, shall file in the city clerk's office a
statement in writing setting forth the object and purpose of such special
meeting and directing the clerk to give notice of the same. Thereupon, the
clerk shall cause to be served personally upon each member of the council or
left at his usual place of business a notice of such special meeting, setting
forth the object and purpose thereof and the time of holding the same. No
business other than that mentioned in the call shall be transacted at such
special meeting. (1925 Code § 10-4)
   C.   Open And Closed Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public
except for those closed meetings authorized by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/2(c). (2009 Code)
   D.   Order Of Business: The city council may, by resolution, duly adopt and
enter of record their proceedings and pass such rules pertaining to the order
of business and mode of procedure in transacting business as they may, from
time to time, see fit. (1925 Code § 10-6)
   E.   Electronic Attendance At Meetings: Any member of the public body,
including the Mayor, may attend any meeting of a public body as defined in the
Open Meetings Act via electronic means, provided that there is compliance with
the rules for such attendance as set forth in subsection F of this section. The
terms "electronic means" and "electronically" are defined to mean by video or
audio conferencing.
   F.   Rules For Attendance By Electronic Means:
      1.   Qualifications: A member of the City Council, including the Mayor,
may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following
conditions:
         a.   The member must notify the Clerk at least twenty four (24) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical (such as in the case of the sudden onset
of an illness or an emergency), so that necessary communications equipment can
be arranged. Failure to make the necessary technical arrangements will result
in denial of a request for remote attendance.
         b.   The member must assert one of the following reasons why he or she
is unable to attend the meeting in person:
            (1)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
            (2)   The member cannot attend because of his or her employment
obligations or because the member is attending to the business of the City of
Virginia; or
            (3)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other
emergency.
      2.   Authorization To Participate:
         a.   The Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request,
shall inform the Mayor and City Council of the request for electronic
attendance.
         b.   After establishing that a quorum is otherwise physically present
at a meeting where an Alderman or Mayor desires to attend electronically, the
presiding officer shall state that: 1) a notice was received by a member of the
City Council or Mayor in accordance with these rules, and 2) the member will be
deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion
objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved
by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council physically present at
the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails
to achieve the required vote by the members of the City Council physically
present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting
electronically shall be deemed approved by the City Council and the presiding
officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by
the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not
be reconsidered.
      3.   Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically
and other members of the City Council must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the
meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the City
Clerk shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
      4.   Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
      5.   Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically
will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded
by the Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
      6.   Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of this Code and/or
City Council. (Ord. 2017-07, 11-24-2017)
1-6-5: VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Members Required To Vote; Prohibited Voting: No member shall vote on
any question in which he is directly and personally interested. On all other
questions which may be brought before the Council for action, every member
shall vote unless such member be excused by the Mayor. (1925 Code § 10-7)
   B.   Yeas And Nays Required: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and on propositions to create any liability against
the City, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all
other cases, at the request of any member, which request shall be entered on
the journal of its proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of all the
members elect in the City Council shall be necessary to the passage of any such
ordinance or proposition; provided, it shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
all the Aldermen elect to sell any City property. (1925 Code § 10-8)
   C.   Reconsideration: No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or
rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such special meeting, there shall be
present as many Aldermen as when such vote was taken. (1925 Code § 10-9)
1-6-6: SIGNATURE ON BONDS PROHIBITED:
No member of the Council shall sign any bond in any case wherein the City is
interested. (1925 Code § 10-2; amd. 1981 Code)
1-6-7: COMPENSATION:
Aldermen shall receive one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per annum
for the fiscal year 2003/2004 and all subsequent years. (Ord., 9-2002; amd.
2009 Code)
1-6-8: STANDING COMMITTEES:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Committees Established: It shall be the duty of the Mayor, at the
regular meeting of the City Council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter
as may be, and in the case of a newly established committee, as soon as
practical after passage of an ordinance establishing said committee and then in
May of each year thereafter, or as soon thereafter as may be, to appoint the
following standing committees of the City Council: (Ord. 12-05, 3-12-2012)
   Finance Committee
   Ordinance Committee
   Water and Sewer Committee
   Streets, Alleys and Lights Committee
   Buildings Committee
   Police Committee
      TIF Committee
(1925 Code § 11-1; amd. 1981 Code; Ord. 12-05, 3-12-2012)
      2.   Composition; Chair: With the exception of the TIF Committee, which
hereafter will be provided for, the committees appointed under this section
shall, in each case, consist of three (3) Aldermen. The Mayor shall be ex
officio member of every committee whose appointment is provided for in the
ordinances of the City and shall have the privilege of receiving notice and
being present at the meetings of all committees, but shall have no right to
vote on any question before said committees unless the vote on a particular
matter results in a tie, whereupon, the Mayor shall cast the deciding vote. In
each instance, the Alderman first named in order of appointment shall be the
Chair of his respective committee and preside over its deliberations, but as
such Chair, he shall not be deprived of his vote on any subject, and unless
excused by the committee, he shall be compelled to cast his vote. The TIF
Committee shall consist of one Alderman, City Treasurer, and four (4) citizens,
all of which shall be appointed by the Mayor to said committee as established
herein. (Ord., 10-2-1995; amd. Ord. 12-05, 3-12-2012)
      3.   Duties Generally: Notwithstanding any of the provisions with
reference to any standing committee of the City as hereinafter set out, the
said standing committees of the City shall not be limited in their action
thereby, but they shall at all times and in all manner exercise all of the
necessary duties that may pertain to their respective committees, anything in
said provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, but it shall be the duty of
the said standing committees to keep a close watch on the affairs of the City
government. Each committee shall promptly and thoroughly investigate all
matters which may be referred to it and report thereon in writing at its
earliest opportunity and do and perform all other duties as the City Council
may from time to time prescribe by resolution, motion or otherwise. (1925 Code
§ 11-13)
      4.   Reports: Any report of a committee of the City Council shall be
deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting of the same,
after the report is made upon the request of any two (2) Aldermen upon any
subject referred to it, shall report in writing and shall attach to their
report all papers or documents in the possession of the committee relative to
the matters so referred. (1925 Code § 11-14)
   B.   Committee On Finance:
      1.   The Committee On Finance of the City Council shall from time to time
examine the books, accounts and reports of the City officers and see if they
are regularly and accurately kept and preserved, and that the books and papers
belonging to the various departments and offices are secure from loss by fire
or otherwise. The committee shall report to the City Council any neglect or
failure of any officer to keep and maintain his books and accounts properly and
to preserve the papers pertaining to his office.
      2.   The Finance Committee shall, at the close of each fiscal year and at
such other times as the City Council may direct, examine and compare the
reports and accounts of all the City officers that may in any way relate to the
finances of the City, and shall report thereon to the City Council.
      3.   The Committee On Finance shall, each year during the months within
which said report may be required by law, prepare a budget and then make an
estimate of the probable receipts and expenditures for Municipal purposes for
the ensuing year, and make a table of appropriations to be recommended to the
City Council.
      4.   The Committee On Finance shall see to the borrowing of money,
issuing of bonds, and preparation of ordinances for the appropriation and levy
of taxes. The committee shall make arrangements for the payment of debts
maturing against the City and shall be charged with all matters pertaining to
the finances of the City. (1925 Code § 11-4; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Committee On Ordinances: The Committee On Ordinances shall have a
general supervision of the preparation and revision of the ordinances of the
City. The committee shall, from time to time, report to the City Council such
ordinances as the committee deems advisable to be passed, and the committee
shall at all times assist the City Attorney in the preparation of the
ordinances required by the City Council. (1925 Code § 11-6)
   D.   Committee On Water And Sewer: The Committee On Water and Sewer shall
exercise general supervision of all sewers and drains within the City. The
committee shall see that the same are kept in good repair and in sanitary
condition and shall have the power to condemn any sewer as in the committee's
judgment should be condemned and make such reports as may be deemed necessary
to keep the sewer system of the City in proper working condition. The committee
shall, from time to time, recommend to the City Council such additional sewers
or systems of sewers that, in the committee's judgment, should be installed, or
the enlarging of such sewers as the growth of the City has rendered necessary.
(1925 Code § 11-10; amd. 1981 Code)
   E.   Committee On Streets, Alleys And Lights: The Committee On Streets,
Alleys and Lights shall have the general supervision of the streets, alleys and
sidewalks in the City. The committee shall take such steps as it deems
necessary to keep the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the City in a good,
passable and safe condition. The committee shall give directions from time to
time to the Public Works Director who shall follow the instructions so given.
The committee shall report to the City Council from time to time when, in its
opinion, it may deem necessary, such changes, repairs and improvements upon the
streets of the City, but no improvements shall be made upon the streets or
alleys, excepting ordinary and necessary repairs, until the City Council has
ordered the same upon the recommendation of the committee. The committee shall
see that all sidewalks are kept in good repair and in a passable condition, and
shall, from time to time, with the concurrence of the City Council, order such
improvements to be made and repairs performed upon the sidewalks as in its
opinion may be requisite or necessary. The committee shall have the power to
order old walks condemned and ordinary walks altered in accordance with the
requirements of the City Council and the ordinances of the City. The committee
may prepare a standard of grades and file a report thereof in the Office of the
City Clerk. (1925 Code § 11-11; amd. 1981 Code)
   F.   Committee On Buildings: The Committee On Buildings shall have the
general supervision of buildings. The committee shall supervise the maintenance
and repair of City buildings, and seek bids for each additional construction of
buildings for the City.
   G.   Committee On Police: The Committee On Police shall have general
supervision of the Police Department of the City. The committee shall recommend
to the Council its recommendations for the Police Department. (1981 Code)
   H.   Committee On TIF: The Committee On TIF shall have general supervision
of the City TIF program. Additionally, this committee shall review requests for
reimbursement related to any TIF redevelopment agreement and make
recommendations to the City Council which bills are eligible for reimbursement
and should be paid from the appropriate TIF account. The committee shall also
review redevelopment plans submitted to the City and make recommendations to
the City Council on the funding of redevelopment projects. The committee shall
also be charged with such other duties as necessary for the implementation and
administration of the TIF program and take action thereon with City Council
approval. (Ord. 12-05, 3-12-2012)
1-6-9: SPECIAL COMMITTEES:
Whenever a matter is presented to the City Council, the subject matter of which
does not come under the control of any of the regular committees appointed
under this chapter or which embraces more than one subject under the
supervision of two (2) or more committees of the City Council, or whenever a
matter is presented of such importance as to require special attention, the
Mayor may appoint a special committee, consisting of as many members of the
City Council as he deems advisable, to which said matter may be referred, with
such directions as the Council shall deem proper, and whenever any special
committee is so appointed, said committee shall be governed by the same rules
and make report in the same manner as the regular committees of the City
Council, unless otherwise instructed. (1925 Code § 11-15)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Oath And Bond
1-7-2: Powers And Duties
1-7-3: City Revenues
1-7-4: Compensation
1-7-1: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk shall take the
oath prescribed for other city officers and shall execute a bond to the city in
the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with such sureties as may
be approved by the city council, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties of his office and the payment of all monies that may be received by
him according to law and the ordinances of the city, which monies shall be
filed with the city treasurer. (1925 Code § 7-1; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
1-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Custodian Of Seal And Documents: The city clerk shall keep the
corporate seal, to be provided by the city council, and all papers belonging to
the city.
   B.   Attend Council Meetings: The city clerk shall attend all meetings of
the city council and keep a full and complete record of its proceedings in a
suitable book to be styled "Record Of City Council", and copies of all papers
duly filed in his office and transcripts from the journals and other records
and files of his office, certified by him under the corporate seal, shall be
evidence in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced.
   C.   Issue Notices Of Meetings: The city clerk shall issue and cause to be
served upon all aldermen notices of all special meetings of the city council,
also notices to the members of the different committees of that body and all
other persons whose attendance may be required before any such committee when
so directed by the chair thereof. (1925 Code § 7-3)
   D.   Deliver Reports And Communications: Upon adjournment of each meeting of
the city council, the city clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the several
committees of that body and to the officers of the city all petitions and
communications, reports, resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred
to such committees or officers by the city council. He shall also, without
delay, deliver to the mayor all ordinances or resolutions in his charge which
may require the approval or other action by the mayor. (1925 Code § 7-5)
   E.   Record And Publish Ordinances: The city clerk shall record and properly
index in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances passed by the city
council, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, he shall
make a memorandum of the date of passage and of the time and manner of
publication of such ordinance, which record and memorandum, or certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal publication of
such ordinance for all purposes whatsoever. He shall cause all ordinances
imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any
appropriation, to be published within thirty (30) days after its passage in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, and he shall file and preserve in
his office one or more copies of the newspaper containing ordinances so
published. (1925 Code § 7-7; amd. 2009 Code)
   F.   Prepare Official Papers: The city clerk shall prepare all commissions,
licenses, permits or other official documents required to be issued by him
under the laws and ordinances of the city, and shall attest the same with the
city seal, and he shall in a like manner attest all deeds for the sale of real
estate owned and conveyed by the city. He shall furnish certified copies of any
ordinance, bond or other papers in his keeping to any city officer when so
required. (1925 Code § 7-8)
   G.   Records Kept; Deliver To Successor: The city clerk shall have the
charge, custody and control of all deeds, leases, warrants, contracts, bonds,
obligations, vouchers, books, records, maps and papers of every kind belonging
to the city, the custody of which is not herein given to another officer, and
upon the expiration of his official term, he shall deliver all of such books,
records, papers and effects to his successor in office. (1925 Code § 7-11)
   H.   Furnish Report Forms: The city clerk shall provide and constantly keep
on hand and furnish on request, without charge, to any person required by law
or ordinance to make reports to the city, all blanks necessary for such
reports. (1925 Code § 7-13)
   I.   Attest Licenses; Record Kept: The city clerk shall attest all licenses
granted by the mayor or city council and shall keep a register of the same,
showing the date of issue, time of expiration, business licenses and amount
paid. (1925 Code § 7-14)
   J.   Monthly Reports: It shall be the duty of the city clerk to make a
report to the city council at the regular meeting each month of the exact
condition of each fund or appropriation, the total amount which has been used
or expended thereof, the balance, if any, which is subject to be drawn upon,
and whenever any fund or appropriation is exhausted, the clerk shall, without
delay, so notify the city council, and he shall not thereafter draw any warrant
against such fund or appropriation until the same shall be renewed. (1925 Code
§ 7-15; amd. 2009 Code)
   K.   Additional Duties: In addition to the foregoing duties, the city clerk
shall perform all such other and further duties pertaining to his office as are
or may be imposed by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (1925 Code §
7-16)
1-7-3: CITY REVENUES:
   A.   General Supervision; Report Of Estimates: The city clerk shall exercise
a general supervision over all the officers of the city charged in any manner
with the receipt, collection or disbursement of corporation revenues and the
collection and return of all revenues into the treasury. He shall, on or before
May 15 in each year, and before the annual appropriations are made by the city
council, submit to the city council a report of his estimates, as nearly as may
be, of monies necessary to defray the expenses of the corporation during the
current fiscal year. He shall, in said report, class the different objects and
branches of expenditures, giving as nearly as may be, the amount required for
each; and for the purpose of making such report, he is authorized to require of
all officers their statement of the condition and expenses of their respective
offices or departments, with any proposed improvements and the probable expense
thereof, all contracts made and unfinished, and amount of any and all
unexpended appropriations of the preceding fiscal year. He shall, in such
report, show the aggregate income of liabilities outstanding upon which
interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts due and payable during the year,
when due and when payable, and in such report, he shall give such other
information to the city council as he may deem necessary to the end that the
city council may duly understand the money exigencies and the demands upon the
city for the current year. (1925 Code § 7-4)
   B.   Warrants: The city clerk shall draw all warrants on the city treasurer
for claims allowed by the city council and shall keep in a suitable book an
accurate list of all warrants drawn, showing the name of the person in whose
name drawn, the date, number and amount of each, and he shall take the receipt
of every person for the warrant drawn, upon the delivery thereof. All warrants
drawn upon the city treasurer shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by
the clerk and shall specify therein the particular fund or appropriation to
which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and no money shall
be paid otherwise than upon such warrants so drawn. The clerk shall preserve
all warrants returned to him. (1925 Code § 7-6)
   C.   Accounts Of Revenues; Record Of Bonds: The city clerk shall open and
keep in a neat methodical manner a set of books in which shall be kept a
detailed account of the city revenues and of each separate fund, crediting the
same with all receipts or appropriations and charging it with all warrants
drawn thereon. He shall keep an accurate account of all debts due from or owing
the city and shall keep, in a book or books kept expressly for that purpose, an
accurate list of all outstanding bonds of the city, showing the number and
amount of each, and for and to whom said bonds were issued. When any city bonds
are purchased or paid or canceled, said book or books shall show the fact, and
in his annual report, he shall describe particularly the bonds sold during the
year and the terms of sale, with each item of expense thereof. He shall also
keep a list of all notices and other obligations given by or payable to the
city and shall show the date, the person to or by whom payable and such other
particulars as shall be necessary to a full understanding thereof. Such books
and all other instruments kept in the clerk's office shall be subject to the
examination of the mayor and the members of the city council. (1925 Code § 7-
12)
1-7-4: COMPENSATION:
The city clerk shall receive, as compensation for his services, a salary of one
thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per annum for the fiscal year 2003/
2004 and all subsequent years, payable monthly at the end of each month. (1925
Code § 7-16; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 9-2002)
CHAPTER 8
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Qualifications; Appointment
1-8-2: Powers And Duties
1-8-3: Compensation
1-8-1: QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINTMENT:
To be eligible to the office of city attorney, a person must be regularly
licensed to practice law in the courts of the state. The city attorney shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the concurrence of the city council. (1925 Code §
8-1; amd. 1981 Code)
1-8-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Draft Documents; Legal Advice: The city attorney shall draw such
ordinances, deeds, leases, contracts and other papers as shall be required of
him by the mayor, city council or any committee thereof. He shall examine all
instruments pertaining to the interests of the city submitted to him by the
mayor, city council or any committee thereof and pass on the legality of the
same. He shall, when required, advise the mayor, city council or any city
officer in all matters of law in which the interests of the city are involved,
and shall, when required, furnish written opinions when requested by the mayor
or city council. (1925 Code § 8-2)
   B.   Prosecute And Defend Suits: The city attorney is charged with the
prosecution of all action for violations of the ordinances of the city and with
the conducting of all proceedings before a court of record and all actions in
which the city is a party in any of the courts of record in the county, or upon
appeal taken from any court of record. He shall institute and prosecute all
actions in every case where there has been a violation of any city ordinance
when instructed so to do by the mayor, city council or any committee thereof,
or upon the complaint of any person claiming, in his judgment, the public
interest requests that the same shall be prosecuted. He shall defend, on behalf
of the city, all cases wherein the interest of the city is involved. No plea of
guilty for the violation of any ordinance shall be received before the court of
record unless the city attorney, or his regularly consulted assistant, is
present or has been previously notified of the pendency of the proceeding and
the time set for hearing. Said notice shall be served by the chief of police or
other officer attending on said court. (1925 Code § 8-3; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Collect Judgments: The city attorney shall collect all judgments
recovered in favor of the city and shall cause execution to be issued thereon.
In all cases wherein judgments are rendered against the city, he shall examine
all fee bills and certify to their correctness and the liability of the city
therefor. (1925 Code § 8-4)
   D.   Keep Records; Deliver To Successor:
      1.   The city attorney shall keep, in a proper book to be provided for
that purpose, a register of all actions in courts of record prosecuted or
defended by him in which the city may be a party and all proceedings had
therein, and also a record of all written opinions furnished by him to the
city, which said record shall be open to the inspection of the mayor, the city
clerk or any member of the city council. (1925 Code § 8-7)
      2.   Upon the expiration of his term of office, or resignation or removal
therefrom, the city attorney shall forthwith turn over to his successor in
office all books, papers or other instruments in his hands belonging to the
city, together with a statement in writing showing what action if any has been
taken in any action then pending, wherein the city is a party, and giving such
information as he may possess with respect to evidence or witnesses in such
action or actions. (1925 Code § 8-8)
1-8-3: COMPENSATION:
The city attorney shall receive as compensation such sums as shall be
determined by the city council. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
CHAPTER 9
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-9-1: Oath And Bond
1-9-2: Private Use Of City Funds
1-9-3: Report Delinquent Officers
1-9-4: Special Assessment Funds
1-9-5: General Financial Procedures
1-9-6: Reports Required
1-9-7: Compensation
1-9-1: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city treasurer shall take
the oath prescribed for city officers and shall execute a bond, with securities
to be approved by the city council, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), with not less than two (2) good and sufficient sureties,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his office and the payment of all
monies received by him according to law and the ordinances of the city. The
premium on said bond shall be paid by the city. (1925 Code § 9-1; amd. 1981
Code; 2009 Code)
1-9-2: PRIVATE USE OF CITY FUNDS:
The city treasurer shall keep all monies belonging to the city, and in his
hands, separate and distinct from his own monies, and he is hereby expressly
prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, city monies or warrants
in his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or that of any other
person or persons whomsoever. Any violation of this section shall subject the
treasurer to immediate removal from office by the city council, who shall, when
such conversion of funds is brought to the knowledge thereof, by satisfactory
evidence, declare the office vacant. (1925 Code § 9-3)
1-9-3: REPORT DELINQUENT OFFICERS:
The city treasurer shall report to the city clerk any officer authorized to
receive money who may fail to make return of the monies received by him at the
time required by law and the ordinances of the city. (1925 Code § 9-5)
1-9-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the city
treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and said monies shall be used for no other
purpose whatever unless to reimburse the city for monies expended for such
improvement. (1925 Code § 9-4)
1-9-5: GENERAL FINANCIAL PROCEDURES:
The city treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city and shall
keep books of account in such a manner as to show with entire accuracy all
monies received by him, and from whom and on what account they shall have been
received, and of all monies paid out by him and on what account they shall have
been paid, and shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and
debits and credits belonging thereto, in such a way that said books and
accounts will exhibit at all times the true financial condition of the city,
and in such a manner that said books may be readily understood and
investigated. He shall give every person paying money into the treasury a
receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid,
and he shall file copies of such receipts with the city clerk at the date of
his monthly report, which books and papers and files of said office shall at
all times be open to the examination of the mayor, the city clerk, the finance
committee or any member of the city council. (1925 Code § 9-2)
1-9-6: REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Monthly Statements: The city treasurer shall, at the regular meeting
each month, render an account to the city council, under oath, showing the
state of the treasury at the date of such account and the balance of money in
the treasury. He shall accompany such accounts with a statement of all monies
received in the treasury and upon what account, together with all warrants
redeemed and paid by him, which said warrants, with any and all vouchers held
by him, shall be delivered to the city clerk and filed with his said account in
the clerk's office upon the date of such settlement. He shall return all
warrants paid by him stamped "Paid". He shall keep an accurate register of all
warrants redeemed and paid by him, showing the number, date and amount of each,
the fund from which paid and the name of the person to whom and when paid, and
shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed by him. (1925 Code § 9-6; amd.
2009 Code)
   B.   Annual Report; Publication: The city treasurer shall annually, within
six (6) months after the end of the fiscal year, make out and file with the
city clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the
city and all his transactions as such city treasurer during the preceding
fiscal year, which said statement shall exhibit under separate and appropriate
headings the several accounts with the several funds or appropriations. It
shall be the duty of the city clerk to submit his counter annual financial
report, together with the report of the treasurer aforesaid, to the mayor and
the committee on finance of the city council, and if the mayor and the
committee shall be satisfied that the treasurer's report properly exhibits the
true financial condition of the city, they shall return the same to the city
clerk who shall immediately cause such report to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. (1925 Code § 9-7; amd. 2009 Code)
1-9-7: COMPENSATION:
The city treasurer shall receive as compensation for his or her services one
thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per annum for fiscal year 2003/2004
and all subsequent years. The city treasurer shall receive no other
compensation by reason of his office. Said compensation shall be paid
quarterly. (Ord., 2-8-1985; amd. Ord., 9-2002)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-10-1: Office Created; Appointment; Removal
1-10-2: Oath Of Office
1-10-3: Records Kept
1-10-4: Compensation
1-10-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
There is hereby created the office of public works director. The public works
director shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of
the city council, at the first meeting of the city council after the beginning
of each municipal year or as soon thereafter as may be, and he shall hold
office during the municipal year in which he was appointed; provided, however,
the public works director shall be subject to removal from office at any time
by a majority of the city council. (2009 Code)
1-10-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Upon entering upon the duties of his office, the public works director shall
take the oath prescribed for city officers. (1925 Code §§ 16-1, 16-8; amd. 1981
Code)
1-10-3: RECORDS KEPT:
The public works director shall keep a correct list of all implements,
materials and other property belonging to the city in his charge and
possession, and upon the expiration of his term of office or his resignation
thereof or removal therefrom, he shall turn over the same to his successor in
office. (1925 Code § 16-6; amd. 2009 Code)
1-10-4: COMPENSATION:
The public works director shall receive as compensation such sums as shall be
determined by the city council, to be paid in semimonthly installments, in lieu
of all other compensation, prerequisite or benefit in any form whatever. (1925
Code § 16-9; amd. 1981 Code)
CHAPTER 11
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-11-1: Elective Officers; Term
1-11-2: Appointive Officers
1-11-3: Qualifications
1-11-4: Oath And Bond
1-11-5: Commission Of Officers
1-11-6: Conditions Of Office
1-11-7: Property To Successors
1-11-8: Pension Systems
1-11-9: Holidays
1-11-10: Travel, Meal And Lodging Expenses
1-11-1: ELECTIVE OFFICERS; TERM:
There shall be elected at the general election for City officers in the year
1923 and every four (4) years thereafter a Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer
and one (1) Alderman in each of the three (3) wards in the City, for a term of
four (4) years and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. (1925
Code § 5-1; amd. 1981 Code)
1-11-2: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
   A.   Created: There are hereby created the following appointive offices of
the City:
City Attorney
Chief of Police
Public Works Director
Deputy Mayor
and as many assistants for any of said offices as the City Council shall, by
resolution, determine are necessary. Said appointive officers shall hold their
offices for a term of one (1) year or until their successors are appointed and
qualify. (Ord., 10-2-1995; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Appointment And Approval: The Mayor shall, at the regular meeting of
the City Council in the month of May in each year, after the general election
for City officers has been had, submit to the City Council names of the
appointive officers enumerated in subsection A of this section for the
succeeding year, whereupon the City Council shall proceed by an aye and nay
vote to approve or disapprove such appointments, and no officer shall be
commissioned or permitted to serve as said officer whose appointment has not
received the approval of a majority vote of the members of the City Council. If
the City Council shall fail to approve the name of any person submitted by the
Mayor, the Mayor shall submit another name for said office, and if such name
fails to receive the approval of the Council, he shall, at each succeeding
Council meeting, submit other names for the approval of the Council. (1925 Code
§ 5-3; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2025-6, 6-9- 2025)
1-11-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to any elective office of the City who is not
qualified as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-5. (Ord., 8-14-
2000; amd. 2009 Code)
1-11-4: OATH AND BOND:
   A.   Oath Of Office: All officers of the City, whether elected or appointed,
shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective office, take and
subscribe the following oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of the office of                 , according to the best
of my ability. B. Bond Requirements: All officers, except Aldermen, shall,
before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, execute a bond
payable to the City and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties
of the office, and the payment of all monies received by said officer,
according to law and the ordinances of the City.C. Oath And Bond Filed: Said
oath or affirmation so subscribed and bond so executed shall be filed in the
Office of the City Clerk, except the bond of the Clerk, which shall be filed
with the City Treasurer. (1925 Code § 5-7)
1-11-5: COMMISSION OF OFFICERS:
   A.   All the officers of the city, whether elected or appointed, shall be
commissioned by warrant under the corporate seal of the city, which said
commission shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, or in
case of absence or inability of the mayor or clerk to act, then by the person
acting as presiding officer of the city council and the person serving in the
capacity of clerk; except, that the commission of the mayor shall be signed by
the clerk who shall cause the official seal to be affixed thereto, and the
commission of the clerk shall be signed by the mayor who shall cause the
official seal to be affixed thereto.B. The commission for the elective officers
shall be as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS,
COUNTY OF CASS,
CITY OF VIRGINIA
TO ALL MEN TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING:
KNOW YE, THAT I,                , Mayor of the City of Virginia, County of Cass
and State of Illinois, do hereby certify that by a canvass of the returns of
the General Election held in the City of Virginia on the                 day of
April, 20        , it appears that                , was duly elected to the
office of                 in and for said City and has duly qualified as such
officer.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused to be fixed the
official Seal of the City of Virginia, Illinois, this          day of
               , 20        .
         Mayor
      City Clerk C. The commission for the appointive officers shall be as
follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS,
COUNTY OF CASS,
CITY OF VIRGINIA
TO ALL MEN TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING:
KNOW YE, THAT I,                , Mayor of the City of Virginia, County of Cass
and State of Illinois, do hereby certify that at a regular meeting of the City
Council of the City of Virginia, Illinois, held in the Council Chamber in the
City Hall Building, in the City of Virginia, Illinois, on the                
day of                , 20         was duly appointed to the office of
               , in and for said City and has duly qualified as such officer.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF I have hereunto set my hand and caused to be fixed the
official Seal of the City of Virginia, Illinois, this            day of
               , 20        .
         Mayor
      City Clerk (1925 Code § 5-5)
1-11-6: CONDITIONS OF OFFICE:
   A.   Interest In City Contracts: No officer shall be directly or indirectly
financially interested in any contract, work or business of the city, or the
sale of any article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from
the treasury, or by any assessment levied by any act or ordinance, nor in the
purchase of any property that: 1) belongs to the city; 2) is sold for taxes and
assessments; or 3) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the city.
There shall be compliance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10. (1925
Code § 5-5; amd. 2009 Code)B. Hold Other City Office: No Mayor, Alderman, City
Clerk or City Treasurer shall hold any other office under the City government
during the term of his office. (1925 Code § 5-6)
1-11-7: PROPERTY TO SUCCESSORS:
Any person having been an officer of the City shall, within five (5) days after
written notification and request, deliver to his successor in office all
property, books and effects of every description in his possession belonging to
the City or appertaining to his office. (1925 Code § 5-9; amd. 2009 Code)
1-11-8: PENSION SYSTEMS:
   A.   City To Provide: The City Council, as it may from time to time
determine to be in the best interests of the City, may provide for pensions,
individual retirement accounts or other benefits for City employees and make
contributions thereto on behalf of such employees. (Ord., 1-4-1982)B. Social
Security:1. It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City to
extend to the eligible employees thereof 1 , effective as of January 1, 1955,
the benefits of the Federal old age and survivors insurance system, as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto.2. The
Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the State
employees' retirement system of the State of Illinois (social security unit) to
secure coverage of eligible employees as provided herein.3. Withholdings from
salaries or wages of employees are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts
and at such times as may be required by applicable State or Federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid over to the State agency in such amounts and at
such times as are designated by State laws or regulations, and employer
contributions and administrative expenses shall be paid to the State agency in
accordance with applicable State laws and regulations from amounts appropriated
for such purposes. (Ord., 11-4-1955)
 
Notes
  1. Ordinance dated April 2, 1979, amended agreement to include as eligible
  employees, employees of the City of Virginia, Illinois, except all elected
1 officials in the legislative class (Aldermen), all elected officials in the
  judicial class (if any), and services for which the remuneration is on a fee
  basis.
1-11-9: HOLIDAYS:
   A.   Established: The following holidays are hereby established for all City
employees:New Year's DayMartin Luther King's birthdayPresident's DayGood
FridayMemorial DayIndependence DayLabor DayVeterans DayThanksgivingFriday
following ThanksgivingChristmas Day (Ord., 7-6-1981; amd. 2009 Code)B.
Compensation: Any employee of the City who works on a holiday with the consent
of the Mayor shall be paid time and a half for such hours as are worked. (Ord.,
7-6-1981)
1-11-10: TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES:
   A.   Definitions:
    ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the City to carry out the
responsibilities of City business.
   TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the City or by wards or charges of the City involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   B.   Reimbursement: The City shall only reimburse the types of travel, meal,
and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the maximum
allowable amounts that would otherwise be considered allowable business
related, deductible expense under the Federal Internal Revenue Code as it
exists or may be amended from time to time. Said expenses will be reimbursed
based on the most recent maximum rate published by the Internal Revenue Service
for such expense or such category of expense.
   C.   Request Form: No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses
incurred by a City employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "Travel,
Meal, and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form", on file in the City, has
been submitted and approved. All documents and information submitted with the
form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 1 .
   D.   Exceeding The Maximum Amount: Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging
of:
      1)   any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement
allowed under the regulations adopted under subsection B of this section or
      2)   any member of the Corporate Authorities of the City may only be
approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the Corporate Authorities of
the City. However, in the event of an emergency or other extraordinary
circumstances, the Corporate Authorities may approve more than the maximum
allowable expenses set forth above.E. Entertainment Expenses: The City shall
not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer for any activities
which would be considered entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be
considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the prohibition on
reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the program or event,
may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord.
2017-1, 1-9-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
ARTICLE A. ETHICS
SECTION:
1-11A-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-11A-2: Definitions
1-11A-3: Interpretation
1-11A-4: Prohibited Acts
1-11A-5: Penalties
1-11A-6: Amendments
1-11A-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-11A-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 430/10-40 of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this article), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
1-11A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 04-02,
6-14-2004)
1-11A-3: INTERPRETATION:
This article does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this article however, the provisions of this article shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a). (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
1-11A-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by an officer or any employee of the city is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the city under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act by any officer or employee of the city is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
1-11A-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this article shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act. (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
1-11A-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by
reference without formal action by the city council. (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
1-11A-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this article shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This article shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the city council if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme
court.
   B.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this article shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
article relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the city council. (Ord. 04-02, 6-14-2004)
CHAPTER 12
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Wards
1-12-2: Elections
1-12-1: WARDS:
The corporate limits of the city shall embrace all the territory or area
described in this section defining the boundaries of the three (3) wards
composing the city, and the city is hereby divided into three (3) wards to be
known as the first, second and third wards: (1925 Code §§ 1-1, 1-2)
   A.   First Ward: The first ward shall be bounded as follows: Commencing at
the northeast corner of the boundary of said city, thence along the northerly
line of said city in a northwesterly direction to the point where the west line
of Morgan Street, if protracted, would touch the northern boundary of said
city; thence southwardly on a straight line along the westerly line of Morgan
Street to Beardstown Street; thence eastwardly along the northerly line of
Beardstown Street to Front Street; thence southerly along Front Street to the
north line of Beardstown Street; thence eastwardly along the north line of
Beardstown Street; thence northwardly at a right angle with Washington Avenue
to the center of lot 144; thence eastwardly parallel with Washington Avenue to
Main Street; thence southerly along Main Street to the north line of Washington
Avenue; thence eastwardly along the north line of Washington Avenue and what
would be a protraction of the same line, to the line of the corporation; thence
along the corporation line to the place of beginning.
(1925 Code § 1-3; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Second Ward: The second ward shall be bounded as follows: Commencing on
the northerly line of the corporation at a point where the west line of Morgan
Street, if protracted, would touch the said northerly line of said corporation;
thence in a northwesterly direction along the corporation line to the northwest
corner thereof; thence along the corporation line to the southwest corner
thereof; thence along the northerly corporation line to the west line of Morgan
Street; thence northerly along the westerly line of Morgan Street to Washington
Avenue; thence eastwardly along Washington Avenue to Front Street; thence
northerly on Front Street to Beardstown Street; thence westwardly to the west
line of Morgan Street; thence northerly along the west line of Morgan Street
and a protraction of the same line to the place of beginning.
(1925 Code § 1-4; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Third Ward: The third ward of the city shall be composed of the
territory of the city not included in the first and second wards, as above
described and bounded, and the third ward north line on Washington Street,
intersecting Front Street, run in a northerly line on Front Street to
Beardstown Street; thence east on Beardstown Street to Main Street; thence
southwardly on Main Street to Washington Street. This part of the city,
including the south side of the public square, is transferred to the third ward
1 .
(1925 Code § 1-5; amd. Ord., 2-9-1943)
 
Notes
1 1. This change is made to provide a voting place for the third ward.
1-12-2: ELECTIONS:
Elections within the city shall be held in compliance with the general election
laws of the state, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 13
ORDINANCES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Introduction And Passage
1-13-2: Publication
1-13-3: Effective Date
1-13-4: Passage Over Mayor's Veto
1-13-1: INTRODUCTION AND PASSAGE:
   A.   No ordinance shall be passed by the city council at the same meeting -
whether it be a regular or special meeting - at which the same was introduced.
If any ordinance shall be amended at any meeting subsequent to its
introduction, the same shall not be passed at the meeting at which the same was
amended. Provided, however:
      1.   In the case of an emergency or urgency in the passage of the
ordinance, which said emergency and/ or urgency shall be expressed in the
preamble or body of the ordinance in a section reciting the existence of an
emergency or urgency, an ordinance may be passed at the meeting in which it was
introduced. The emergency section shall be passed upon and shall be adopted by
a two-thirds (2/3-rds) vote of all the alderman elected, including the mayor.
The vote to pass such emergency clause shall be taken by yeas and nays and
entered upon the journal. The ordinance containing the emergency clause may
then be passed, by a majority vote (unless a greater vote is required by
ordinance or statute), at the meeting at which it was introduced. If the vote
to pass the emergency clause does not receive the required two-thirds (2/3-rds)
votes, then it shall fail, and the ordinance may be considered in the ordinary
course of voting, upon two readings; and
      2.   Ordinances providing for local improvements may be finally passed at
the same meeting of the city council at which they were presented.
   B.   The passage of all ordinances, for whatever purpose, require the
concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the city
council, including the mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by statute.
The passage of an ordinance to sell any school property shall require the
concurrence of three-fourths (3/4) of all aldermen then holding office. The
yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the designated
ordinances and recorded in the journal of the city council. In addition, the
city council at any meeting may, by unanimous consent, take a single vote by
yeas and nays on the several questions of the passage of any two (2) or more of
the designated ordinances placed together for voting purposes in a single
group. The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal under the
designation "omnibus vote", and in that event, the clerk may enter the words
"omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal in each case instead of
entering the names of the members of city council voting "yea" and those voting
"nay" on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, included in the
omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of a single or omnibus vote and the
entries of the words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal shall be
a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this subsection to all intents
and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been taken
separately by yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance
included in the omnibus group and separately recorded in the journal. (1925
Code § 13-3; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 2020-02, 1-13-2020)
1-13-2: PUBLICATION:
   A.   The city clerk shall cause every ordinance of the city council making
any appropriation or imposing any fine, penalty, forfeiture or imprisonment to
be published at least once in some newspaper of general circulation in the city
within thirty (30) days after the passage thereof, and it shall be his duty to
see that the same is correctly printed and published. Provided, however,
nothing in this subsection contained shall be deemed to apply to any ordinance
included in any revision or compilation of ordinances which may be collectively
published in book or pamphlet form by authority of the city council. (1925 Code
§ 13-4; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   The clerk shall, at the foot of the record of each ordinance recorded
as aforesaid, make a memorandum of the date of the passage and of the
publication of such ordinance, which record and memorandum, or a certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal publication of
such ordinance for all purposes whatsoever. (1925 Code § 13-5)
1-13-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
All ordinances of the city required to be published shall take effect ten (10)
days after the passage and due publication thereof, and all other ordinances,
resolutions and orders shall take effect from and after their passage unless
otherwise provided therein. (1925 Code § 13-6)
1-13-4: PASSAGE OVER MAYOR'S VETO:
In case the mayor shall veto any ordinance or part of any ordinance and return
the same to the council, together with his objections thereto, the vote by
which the same was passed shall be reconsidered by the council; and if, after
such consideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected to the city
council shall agree by yeas and nays to pass the same, it shall go into effect
notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to approve it. The vote on the question of
passage over the mayor's veto shall be recorded in the journal. (1925 Code §
13-10; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 14
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-14-1: Description
1-14-2: Use; Custodian
1-14-1: DESCRIPTION:
The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in form with the inscription
"Seal of the City of Virginia, Illinois" around the outer edge. Said seal shall
be set in the center with a star and rays radiating therefrom. (1925 Code § 3-
1)
1-14-2: USE; CUSTODIAN:
   A.   The corporate seal shall be used in all cases where it shall be
required by the laws of the United States and the several respective states of
the United States and the ordinances of the city, and in all cases in which, by
laws and customs of nations, it shall be necessary to use a seal by a
corporation. (1925 Code § 3-2)
   B.   The seal shall be and remain in the custody of the city clerk, to be
used by said clerk and the mayor of the city whenever a necessity therefor
shall arise by virtue of the ordinances of the city or any law of the state or
any law of the United States shall require. (1925 Code § 3-3)
CHAPTER 15
CITY FINANCES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Fiscal Year
1-15-2: Contracts And Purchases
1-15-3: Property Tax Rebate Program
1-15-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the city shall be from May 1 to April 30 of the following
year. (1925 Code § 12-10; amd. 1981 Code)
1-15-2: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES:
   A.   Bidding Requirements: When bids shall be required for any purchase or
contract, such purchase or contract shall be advertised for bids by publishing
a solicitation for bids in any newspaper published in the county for two (2)
successive weeks, and such bids received shall not be opened until forty eight
(48) hours following the last publication thereof. Nothing in this subsection
shall prohibit other methods of solicitation of bids in addition to
publication. (Ord., 9-8-1981)
   B.   Nonbid Purchasing Limitations: The city may purchase items of property
for less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) without securing public bids
therefor. (Ord., 10-1-1990; amd. 2009 Code)
1-15-3: PROPERTY TAX REBATE PROGRAM:
The city treasurer is authorized and directed to implement and administer the
property tax rebate program heretofore known as the city of Virginia new
construction incentive program. Such program shall allow a rebate of the city's
portion of the property tax up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year,
with a maximum rebate over the eligibility period not to exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) aggregate and shall be limited to five (5) new residential
constructions per year. Said rebate eligibility period shall not extend beyond
a period of five (5) years from the date of application for the first rebate.
Persons may become eligible by submitting an application to the city treasurer
on such forms as he/she may proscribe. Said program shall not be deemed to have
created any right to the applicant, any rebate shall have no cash value, and
shall be further limited as set forth on the application form utilized by the
city treasurer. Lastly, any rebate created under said program shall not be
deemed an obligation of the city of Virginia. (Ord. 10-06, 9-13-2010)
CHAPTER 16
IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-16-1: Identity Protection Policy Adopted
1-16-1: IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts the identity protection policy as may be amended from
time to time and is on file with the City. (Ord. 11-04, 5-9-2011; amd. Ord.
2016-09, 9-12-2016)
CHAPTER 17
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY REGISTRATION RULES
SECTION:
1-17-1: Definitions
1-17-2: Establishment Of Registry
1-17-3: Maintenance Of Registry
1-17-4: Registration By Residents
1-17-5: Registration By Organizations
1-17-6: Determination Of Eligibility
1-17-7: Renewal And Termination
1-17-8: Amendment To Registration
1-17-9: Registries Available For Public Inspection
1-17-10: Notices To Be Sent To Interested Parties
1-17-11: Noninterference
1-17-12: Amendment Of Registration Rules
1-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions set
forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes section 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY: City of Virginia, a unit of government under section 6(a) article VII of
the 1970 constitution of the state of Illinois.
INTERESTED PARTY(IES):
   A.   Any organization(s) active within the city;
   B.   Any resident(s) of the city; and
   C.   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to register
in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with these registration
rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that: a) is intended
to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a "redevelopment project area"
under the act and b) is subject to the "interested parties" registry
requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to these registration rules or such
revised form as may be approved by the city consistent with the requirements of
the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the city pursuant to section 11-74.4-
4.2 of the act for the redevelopment project area. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established. The city shall establish a new registry
whenever it has identified an area for study and possible designation as a
redevelopment project area. In any event the process of establishing the new
registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices
required by section
1-17-10 of this chapter or any other notices required by the act with respect
to the proposed redevelopment project area. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registries shall be maintained by the city clerk or his or her designee. In
the event the city determines that someone other than the clerk should maintain
the registries, the city may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the
registries to such other department provided that the city: a) gives prior
written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior
to such transfer and b) publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-4: REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS:
An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
city clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver's
license, lease, utility bill, financial statement or such other evidence as may
be acceptable to the clerk to establish the individual's current city
residency. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-5: REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS:
An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
city clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a one page statement
describing the organization's current operations in the city. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-
2011)
1-17-6: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the city clerk's receipt
of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the city clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give written
notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and
supporting documentation. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-7: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of
three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period the city clerk
may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating
that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews such
registration within thirty (30) days of the clerk's mailing of written notice.
To renew such registration, the interested person shall, within such thirty
(30) day period, complete and submit the same registration form and supporting
documentation then required of initial registrants in order to permit the clerk
to confirm such person's residency or such organization's operations in the
city. The registration of all individuals and organizations whose registration
form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner and complies
with this chapter shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three (3)
year period. If the city clerk determines that a registrant's renewal
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not
comply with this chapter, the clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such
registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the clerk's notice. If all
defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days of the interested person's
receipt of the city clerk's notice, the interested person's registration shall
be terminated. Any interested person whose registration is terminated shall be
entitled to register again as if a first time registrant. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-
2011)
1-17-8: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the
city clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) a change in address
for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of
the contact person; and c) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such
notice, the clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 11-
09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-9: REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal city
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-10: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the availability of a
proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain
this information, such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the
proposed redevelopment plan.
Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes to proposed
redevelopment plans that do not: a) add additional parcels of property to the
proposed redevelopment project area, b) substantially affect the general land
uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, c) substantially change the nature of
or extend the life of the redevelopment project, or d) increase the number of
low or very low income households to be displaced from the redevelopment
project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area the total displacement of households will exceed ten
(10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following
the city's adoption by ordinance of such changes.
Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(c) of the act, notice of amendments to previously
approved redevelopment plans that do not: a) add additional parcels of property
to the redevelopment project area, b) substantially affect the general land
uses in the redevelopment plan, c) substantially change the nature of the
redevelopment project, d) increase the total estimated redevelopment project
costs set out in the redevelopment plan by more than five percent (5%) after
adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted, e) add additional
redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment project costs
set out in the redevelopment plan or f) increase the number of low or very low
income households to be displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided
that measured from the time of creation of the redevelopment project area the
total displacement of households will exceed ten (10); such notice shall be
sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following the city's adoption by
ordinance of any such amendment.
Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(d)(9) of the act for redevelopment plans or
projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten (10) or
more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or more
inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual report
described by subsection 74.4-5(d), including how to obtain the annual report;
such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after
completion of the certified audit report.
Pursuant to subsection 74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary public
meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area that
will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential units
or which will contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units,
such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days
before the date of such preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
1-17-11: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere
with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for
receipt of information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 11-09,
8-8-2011)
1-17-12: AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES:
These registration rules may be amended by the city subject to and consistent
with the requirements of the act. (Ord. 11-09, 8-8-2011)
CHAPTER 18
PUBLIC MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-18-1: Public Comment At City Meetings
1-18-1: PUBLIC COMMENT AT CITY MEETINGS:
   A.   Pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/
2.06(g), any person shall be permitted an opportunity to address public
officials under the rules established and recorded by the public body. Public
participation at meetings of the City of Virginia shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
      1.   Public Comment At The Beginning Of City Council Meetings:
         a.   Any individuals desiring to address and/or comment on an agenda
item shall submit a paper to the City Clerk prior to the start of the City
Council meeting containing his/her name, and the agenda item to be discussed.
Comment shall be limited to three (3) minutes.
      2.   Public Comment At The End Of The City Council Meeting:
         a.   Public comment at the end of a City Council meeting shall be open
to all matters of public concern. This comment period shall be limited to three
(3) minutes per speaker.
      3.   Public Comment At Other City Meetings:
         a.   Public comment, not exceeding three (3) minutes per person unless
otherwise allowed additional time by the presiding officer, shall be allowed at
all City Committee meetings, Planning and TIF Commission meetings, Zoning Board
of Appeals, and all other meetings of a public body of the City.
   B.   All individuals being called to address and comment before the City
Council shall prior to speaking, state his/her name for the record. Such
comments by any one (1) person shall be limited to three (3) minutes unless an
extension of time is granted at the presiding officer's discretion. Citizens
shall not yield unused time to other speakers. The presiding officer shall have
the right at any time to close comment by that person, when, in the presiding
officer's discretion, such input violates the provisions of these rules, or is
otherwise irrelevant, repetitious or disruptive. After a reasonable period of
time has been devoted to public comments, and even though all those desiring to
provide comment have not had a chance to do so, the public comment portion of
the agenda may be closed upon a motion and second of the City Council and a
majority vote in favor thereof. Any person who was not able to address the City
Council will be encouraged to attend a subsequent meeting to address the City
Council or to provide written comments.
   C.   If numerous persons wish to comment on a single topic, the City Council
may recognize a specified number of individuals who wish to speak in favor of,
against or wish to make general comments regarding the topic. The City Council
shall not be required to allow every person who wishes to address the issue to
do so, but as many views as possible are encouraged to be heard. Any person who
is not able to speak during the time for public comment shall be allowed and
encouraged to present his/her views to the City Council in writing.
   D.   Members of the public, as an alternative to speaking, may submit
written materials to the City Council regarding any matter of public concern.
   E.   Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive
comments at a City meeting and are expected to comply with these rules. All
comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in threatening,
slanderous or disorderly behavior when addressing a City meeting shall be
deemed out-of- order by the presiding officer and his/her time to address the
meeting shall end. An individual who violates these rules may be removed from
the meeting at the discretion of the presiding officer. (Ord. 2016-10, 10-10-
2016)
CHAPTER 19
SEXUAL HARASSMENT 1
SECTION:
1-19-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-19-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-19-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-19-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-19-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-19-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
 
Notes
  1. This policy was drafted using the Illinois Department of Human Rights
1 Sexual Harassment Model Policy and has been modified to conform to Public Act
  100-0554.
1-19-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Virginia to prohibit harassment of
any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or
Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All Municipal
officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
1-19-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   A.   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment,
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2.   Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
"reasonable person". (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
1-19-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   A.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
Director of Human Resources, an Ethics Officer, the Public Works Director, or
the Mayor of the City.
   B.   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      1.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said
or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the Municipality.
However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and
the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component
of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
1-19-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal
agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any Municipal
employee due to a Municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy,
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   B.   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate
against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other
proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation 3 .
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4 , it is a civil rights
violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate
against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in
good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three
hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a).
3 3. 740 ILCS 174/15(b).
4 4. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
1-19-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a State or Federal agency. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
1-19-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-8-2018)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment And Terms
2-1-2: Vacancies; Compensation
2-1-3: Organization
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-5: Reports Required
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor is hereby authorized, with the approval of the
city council, to appoint a board of nine (9) trustees for the library
association, in accordance with the statutes in such case made and provided.
(1925 Code § 37-3)
   B.   Terms Of Office: The trustees shall hold office, one-third (1/3) for
one year, one-third (1/3) for two (2) years and one- third (1/3) for three (3)
years from July 1 following their appointment, and at their regular meeting
shall cast lots for their respective terms, and annually thereafter, the mayor
shall, before July 1 of each year, appoint as before three (3) trustees to take
the place of the retiring trustees, who shall hold office for three (3) years
and until their successors are appointed. The mayor may, by and with the
consent of the city council, remove any trustee for misconduct or neglect of
duty. (1925 Code § 37-4)
2-1-2: VACANCIES; COMPENSATION:
Vacancies on the board of trustees occasioned by removal, resignation or
otherwise shall be reported to the city council and be filled in like manner as
original appointments. No trustee shall receive compensation for his services.
(1925 Code § 37-5)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
The trustees shall, immediately after appointment, meet and organize by the
election of one of their number as president and one as secretary and by the
election of such other officers as they may deem necessary. They shall make and
adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and for the
government of the library and reading room as may be expedient, not
inconsistent with this code. (1925 Code § 37-5; amd. 2009 Code)
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have those powers and duties set out in 75 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-7. (2009 Code)
2-1-5: REPORTS REQUIRED:
Within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each fiscal year of the city,
the board shall make a report of the condition of their trust on the last day
of the fiscal year to the city council. This report shall be made in writing
and shall be verified under oath by the secretary, or some other responsible
officer of the board. The report shall contain: a) an itemized statement of the
various sums of money received from the library fund and from other sources; b)
an itemized statement of the objects and purposes for which those sums of money
have been expended; c) a statement of the number of books and periodicals
available for use and the number and character thereof circulated; d) a
statement of the real and personal property acquired by legacy, purchase, gift
or otherwise; e) a statement of the character of any extensions of library
service which have been undertaken; f) a statement of the financial
requirements of the library for the ensuing fiscal year for inclusion in the
appropriation of the city council, and of the amount of money which, in the
judgment of the board, it will be necessary to levy for library purposes in the
next annual tax levy ordinance; g) a statement as to the amount of
accumulations and the reasons therefor; h) a statement as to any outstanding
liabilities including those for bonds still outstanding or amounts due for
judgments, settlements, liability insurance, or for amounts due under a
certificate of the board; and i) any other statistics, information and
suggestions that may be of interest. A report shall also be filed at the same
time with the Illinois state library. (1925 Code § 37-8; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Designated
2-2-1: COMMISSION DESIGNATED:
The Virginia zoning board of appeals 1  is hereby designated as the Virginia
planning commission. (Ord., 8-2-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 3, article A of this code.
CHAPTER 3
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Creation; Appointment; Membership
2-3-2: Powers And Duties
2-3-3: Finances
2-3-4: City Council Authority Regarding Sustained
2-3-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created the Virginia commission for economic development. Said
commission shall be organized and operated as follows:
   A.   The mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the city council,
appoint two (2) citizens of the city to one year terms and three (3) citizens
of the city to two (2) year terms to the council of the Virginia commission for
economic development.
   B.   Any concerned and interested resident of the city may be a member of
the commission and be entitled to have both voice and vote at all commission
meetings.
   C.   The mayor of the city shall be an ex officio member of the council.
   D.   The mayor may, from time to time, appoint other ex officio members of
the council. (Ord., 10-2-1989)
2-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The council shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To negotiate economic development proposals on the behalf of the city.
   B.   To appoint such steering committees as may be deemed appropriate by the
council.
   C.   To make recommendations to the city council. (Ord., 10-2-1989)
2-3-3: FINANCES:
The mayor and city council may, from time to time, provide funds from the
general revenue fund of the city for the operation of the Virginia commission
for economic development and its council. (Ord., 10-2-1989)
2-3-4: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY REGARDING SUSTAINED:
Nothing herein shall limit or derogate the power and authority of the city
council to make and approve all contracts and binding agreements for and on
behalf of the city. (Ord., 10-2-1989)
CHAPTER 4
BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment And Term
2-4-2: Funding
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
A beautification committee of three (3) persons shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of the city council, for a term of four (4) years.
(1981 Code)
2-4-2: FUNDING:
Funding for the committee shall be raised by voluntary donations for the
purpose of improving the business district of the city and the city proper.
(1981 Code)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Duties Of Public Works Director
3-1-2: Sidewalks
3-1-3: Construction Of Curbs And Gutters
3-1-4: Excavations
3-1-5: Obstructions And Encroachments
3-1-6: Projections Into Or Over Public Ways
3-1-7: Fences
3-1-8: Damage To Streets
3-1-9: Deposits Prohibited
3-1-10: Animals And Bicycles On Public Ways And Property
3-1-11: Penalty
3-1-1: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The public works director shall:
   A.   Have charge of the improvements, repairs and cleaning of all streets,
alleys and public grounds in the city, and shall supervise the construction and
repair of all sidewalks therein; but no improvement or repairs, except such as
may be actually necessary, shall be made by him without the previous order of
the city streets, alleys and lights committee. He shall, without delay, cause
all necessary repairs to be made on the streets and public alleyways and shall
inspect, annually, all streets, alleys, sidewalks, crossings, culverts and
drains and report the condition of the same to the city council and recommend
such improvements or repairs as he may deem necessary. (1925 Code § 16-2; amd.
1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Cause all ordinances in relation to the streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds to be enforced. He shall carry into effect all such orders,
general or special, as he may receive from the city council, the mayor or the
committee on streets, alleys and lights. (1925 Code § 16-3; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Oversee and direct the street laborers and workers and see that they
faithfully perform their work. He shall keep in a suitable book a correct
account of the time of all persons working under him and shall certify to the
city council his payroll, stating therein the name of each laborer, his time
and the amount of his wages. (1925 Code § 16-4; amd. 1981 Code)
3-1-2: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Grade: All sidewalks constructed in the city shall be upon a grade
prescribed by the committee on streets, alleys and lights and under the
supervision of the public works director. (1925 Code § 32-1; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Construction Requirements And Costs:
      1.   It shall be lawful for any person owning any lot or lots in the
city, along which the city has or may hereafter order any sidewalk built and
the grade, slope and width of such walk having been established by the city, to
build said sidewalk of good first class concrete consisting of a mixture of
necessary materials in accordance with the specifications provided by the city.
      2.   Said property owner or owners shall do all of the grading at their
expense and pay for all of the labor costs involved in the construction of the
sidewalk. The city will pay for all of the materials or ingredients necessary
to make the concrete.
      3.   The dirt shall be removed and placed on the streets or alleys as
directed by the city streets, alleys and lights committee, and no dirt will be
allowed to be removed and used for private purposes. Where there is a scarcity
of dirt to complete the grade, application shall be made to the streets, alleys
and lights committee, which will designate where and in what manner same may be
obtained to complete the grade.
      4.   If any person shall refuse or neglect to finish the grade to the
satisfaction of the streets, alleys and lights committee within thirty (30)
days after such walk is completed, the city will complete the grade and charge
the expense of the same to the property owner; or the city may require a cash
deposit of an amount of money reasonably necessary to cover the expenses of all
grading to be made before construction work is begun for a sidewalk. (Ord., 8-
2-1965; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Incline Ratio: All sidewalks shall have an incline toward the gutter or
street of one inch (1") in four feet (4') (1:4) and shall be built of such
material and in such a manner as the city council shall direct; provided, that
no walk shall be constructed within the fire limits of the city of material
other than ready mix cement or batch mix five to one (5:1) ratio. (1925 Code §
32-7; amd. 1981 Code)
   D.   Openings In Sidewalks: Every aperture or opening in any sidewalk over
any vault or coal hole shall be covered with a substantial iron grate or plate
with a rough surface. No steps, platform or other fixture shall extend into or
upon any sidewalk in the city, and no open cellar or basement way shall be
permitted in any sidewalk or alley. (1925 Code § 32-8)
   E.   Dangerous Sidewalks:
      1.   Removal: Whenever it shall be brought to the notice of the committee
on streets, alleys and lights that any neglected or dilapidated sidewalks have
become dangerous to the public safety, said committee shall order the public
works director to immediately remove the same. The director shall report his
actions to the city council at its next regular meeting. (1925 Code § 32-3;
amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Repair And Replacement: The city shall undertake a program of
sidewalk repair under the following terms and conditions:
         a.   When, in the discretion of the mayor and the public works
director, it is determined that an existing sidewalk is dangerous and in need
of repair, the city may repair such sidewalk at no cost to the abutting
property owner.
         b.   The city shall not bear the cost of repair to sidewalks which are
damaged by an abutting property owner or other person, and may repair or
replace such sidewalk and direct the party responsible for the damage to make
full payment therefor.
         c.   If a sidewalk is deteriorated to the point that it may not be
repaired and must be replaced, the city may, in its discretion under the
procedures above described for sidewalk repair, replace the sidewalk and direct
the abutting property owner to pay for one-half (1/2) of the cost of
construction of said new sidewalk.
         d.   If a property owner wishes repairs to be made to a sidewalk
fronting his property or to replace such sidewalk, and in the discretion of the
city, such repair or replacement is not necessary, or to install a sidewalk
where none exists, such property owner may have the city undertake such repairs
or replacement, and such property owner shall bear the entire cost thereof.
(Ord., 9-8-1981)
3-1-3: CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   The city, by its streets, alleys and lights committee, will determine
when it is necessary, proper and will be a benefit to the general public as
well as to adjoining property owners for drainage of surface waters to
construct along any of its streets a curb, gutter or both.
   B.   No person, as owner of property adjoining any street in the city, shall
be permitted to construct or repair any curbs or gutters without having first
obtained permission from the streets, alleys and lights committee, and
executing an agreement with said committee as to cost of said construction or
repairs. Furthermore, such construction must be made in accordance with the
directions and specifications of said committee, and the work, when completed,
must be satisfactory before the city will be obligated to pay any part of said
costs.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall in no way affect the levy of a
special assessment to pay for the costs of construction of curbs or gutters, or
both, as provided by the statutes of the state. (Ord., 8-2-1965; amd. 1981
Code)
3-1-4: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Filling Excavations; Repairing Streets:
      1.   Any person making or causing to be made any excavation or ditch for
any purpose in any street, alley, avenue or sidewalk by permission from the
proper authority or under the ordinances of the city shall, without unnecessary
delay, cause the same to be filled up to the proper level of the street, alley
or sidewalk.
      2.   Any person taking up or removing any paved street, alley or sidewalk
or any bridge or culvert for any purpose or injuring the same shall, without
delay, cause the same to be repaired and placed in the same condition as before
the break or injury thereof. (1925 Code § 32-5; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Unprotected Excavations: No contractor, officer or any other person
making any excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk of the city shall leave
the same open and unprotected during the night or daytime without lights,
temporary fence or other good and sufficient protection so as to endanger the
safety of persons or animals passing by from being injured. (1925 Code § 32-6;
amd. 2009 Code)
3-1-5: OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 1 :
   A.   Obstructions: No person shall place or permit to be placed or suffer to
remain on any sidewalk in the city or on any street or alley in the city any
obstructions, barriers, impediments or any box, barrel, merchandise, goods,
materials or any kind of obstruction whatever; provided, that the public works
director may permit temporary obstructions by persons when receiving, selling
or removing fuel, lumber, merchandise, materials, and other articles of trade;
and that such obstructions shall be removed as soon as possible and shall in no
event be permitted to remain longer than twenty four (24) hours at any one
time. Provided, further, that the owner or occupant of any building in the city
shall be permitted to use, for his own benefit, two feet (2') of the sidewalk
immediately in front of such building where such walk is not less than eight
feet (8') in width for the purpose of exhibiting his wares or articles of
merchandise or manufacture; such space of two feet (2') to be next to said
building, and the wares or goods as aforesaid to be of such character and kind
as not to inconvenience or endanger persons passing along such sidewalk and not
to injure, rot or destroy such sidewalk or the materials out of which the same
may be made. (1925 Code § 32-9)
   B.   Vehicles Blocking Public Ways: When any street, avenue or alley shall
be obstructed by a press of teams, vehicles, animals or persons, the mayor or
any police officer of the city may give such orders and directions as shall be
deemed necessary to abate the obstruction. (1925 Code § 32-14; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Utility Poles And Wires: No person shall set or cause to be set any
telephone or telegraph pole or any poles in any street or alley in the city, or
string or hang any wire along or across any street or alley unless authorized
so to do by the city council. (1925 Code § 32-17; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Removal Of Encroachments: No owner of any building or fence or of any
structure or enclosure erected or built, extending into or encroaching upon any
street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the city, shall fail to remove the
same immediately after being notified in writing so to do by the public works
director. (1925 Code § 32-11; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-4 of this code.
3-1-6: PROJECTIONS INTO OR OVER PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Buildings: The face of the main wall, pilaster or column of the first
story of any building shall not project beyond the line of the lot on which it
is erected. (1925 Code § 33-4; amd. 2009 Code)B. Balconies Or Bay Windows: Bay
windows or balconies may be constructed on buildings above the first story to
project and stand not to exceed four and one-half feet (41/2') beyond the line
of the lot into the public square or street. The same shall be constructed in
an ornamental and substantial manner and subject to the approval of the
committee on streets, alleys and lights. (1925 Code § 33-5)C. Awnings 1 :1. It
shall be lawful for persons in the city to erect in front of their stores or
houses, projecting into the streets, awnings of iron framework suspended by
brackets or supports from the wall of the building and covered with canvas.
Provided, that no part of any awning shall be less than eight feet (8') from
the sidewalk at its lowest point, and shall in no manner interfere with,
obscure or obstruct the light of any public lamp; and provided, that the city
council may permit awnings to be constructed of fireproof materials within the
fire limits and in such manner as they see fit, but no such awning shall be
erected without first obtaining permission from the city council. (1925 Code §
33-6)2. Hereafter, no wooden awnings shall be erected in front of stores and
houses within the fire limits of the city and projecting into any street, nor
shall any wooden awning now erected within the fire limits of the city be
repaired or rebuilt; but when the same shall become unsafe or in any manner in
need of repair, it shall then be declared a nuisance, and such awning shall be
immediately removed. (1925 Code § 33-7; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  9-1-4B of this code.
3-1-7: FENCES:
   A.   Projecting Into Or Over Public Ways Prohibited: No person shall make or
cause to be made any enclosure, fence, bridge, arched way or building of any
kind extending upon, over or across any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk
within the city. (1925 Code § 32-10; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Barbed Wire Prohibited: No outside line fence or fences shall be built
wholly or in part of what is commonly known as a sage hedge or barbed wire
within the city. Any person who shall erect or cause to be erected any outside
line fences contrary to this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a nuisance.
(1925 Code § 33-8; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   C.   Removal Of Unlawful Fences: It shall be the duty of the court rendering
judgment for the violation of this section to make, as part of the judgment, an
order that the fence be removed and abated as a nuisance and shall issue his
writ to the chief of police or other police officer commanding him to remove
the same at the cost of the defendant. (1925 Code § 33-12; amd. 1981 Code)
3-1-8: DAMAGE TO STREETS:
   A.   Lug Wheels: It shall be unlawful for any traction engine, tractor or
other vehicle having iron wheels to be driven along or across any paved street
without first removing the lugs if the same are detachable, and if such lugs
are not detachable, then the street shall be properly planked with oak or other
plank of sufficient strength to properly protect the pavement. If said engine,
tractor or other vehicle is of such weight that there is danger of injuring the
pavement after the lugs are removed, the owner or person in charge thereof may
be required to plank the said pavement as above provided when directed so to do
by any police officer of the city. In addition to the penalty provided in
section
3-1-11 of this chapter, any person violating this subsection shall be required
to repair all damage caused by said violation. (1925 Code § 32-13; amd. 2009
Code)
   B.   Tire Marks On Pavements: Except for making a bona fide emergency stop,
it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in such a way,
whether from a stopped position or otherwise, so as to cause the tires of said
vehicle to squeal or so as to leave tire marks on the pavement of any public
street within the city. (Ord., 1-7-1985; amd. 2009 Code)
3-1-9: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
No person shall throw, place or leave, or cause or permit to be thrown, placed
or left, any ashes, dirt, paper, filth or rubbish in or upon any street,
avenue, alley or sidewalk of the city in front of or adjoining any building or
premises owned or occupied by him or subject to his control. (1925 Code § 32-
19; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
3-1-10: ANIMALS AND BICYCLES ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY:
No person shall suffer or permit or lead or drive any horse, cow, mule or sheep
upon any sidewalk or public park or public grounds in the city, or ride any
bicycle over or upon any sidewalk 1  or footpath except in crossing a street,
alley or crossing. (1925 Code § 28-24; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-1-9 of this code.
3-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Planting On City Property Prohibited
3-2-2: Forestry Program
3-2-1: PLANTING ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person shall plant or set out any tree or shrubbery of any kind upon any
property of the city. Any violation of this section will subject the offender
to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord., 5-7-1962; amd. 2009 Code)
3-2-2: FORESTRY PROGRAM:
   A.   Program Adopted: Pursuant to article 11, public works, buildings and
property, division 73 of the Illinois municipal code, the city does hereby
adopt a forestry program for the establishment and maintenance of a long term
forestry program for the propagation and preservation of community trees and
for the removal of dead or diseased trees. (Ord., 4-21-1965; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Tax Imposed: An annual tax of not to exceed five hundredths percent
(0.05%) of the full fair cash value of all taxable property in the city shall
be levied for the establishment and carrying out of the forestry program. This
tax shall be in addition to all taxes authorized by law to be levied and
collected in the city and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be
levied for general city purposes. (Ord., 4-21-1965)
CHAPTER 3
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
3-3-1: Water Department
3-3-2: Duties Of Public Works Director
3-3-3: Water Collector
3-3-4: Application For Service
3-3-5: Meters And Equipment; Tap Charge
3-3-6: Entry Powers Of City Officials
3-3-7: Authority To Shut Off Or Restrict Water
3-3-8: Rules And Regulations
3-3-9: Restrictions On Use Of Water; Changes In Rates And Charges And Rules And
Regulations
3-3-10: Bills For Service; Delinquencies; Revenues And Accounts
3-3-11: Nonliability Of City
3-3-12: Penalty
3-3-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created and established a department of the city which shall be
known as the water department. The officers of the water department shall
consist of three (3) members of the city council as the standing committee on
water and sewer and the public works director. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code;
Ord., 5-2-1983; 2009 Code)
3-3-2: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
   A.   The public works director shall have general supervision of the entire
waterworks system. He shall ascertain the conditions and needs thereof, and
shall from time to time report the same to the mayor and city council, and
shall have general supervision of the water department and employees of the
water department.
   B.   The public works director shall be subject to the supervision of the
city council and shall be in direct charge of and accountable for the operation
of all machinery and equipment of the waterworks system. He shall be subject to
the rules as set forth by the city council. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   The public works director shall direct the reading of all water meters
and report such readings as required. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-
2-1983; 2009 Code)
   D.   The public works director shall keep a full and correct list of all
applications made and granted for the supply and use of water. He shall keep a
complete record of all taps made in the various water mains and pipes of the
city, giving their exact location with reference to lot lines, curb lines,
blocks, additions, street intersections, their number and size, and the length
of pipe laid.
   E.   The public works director shall do all other mechanical work necessary
to keep the waterworks system in the best possible condition. He shall prevent
injury to the water system and waste of water, and shall institute legal
proceedings for the punishment of those violating the provisions of this
chapter or any ordinance hereafter created governing the water department.
   F.   The public works director shall make or cause to be made all repairs
occasioned by leaks or breaks in the water mains of the system, and shall shut
off water from all premises where leaks are permitted to go unrepaired. (Ord.,
4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code)
   G.   At least annually, the public works director shall carefully examine
and test all fire hydrants and street valves, and in case any of them are found
to be in an unsatisfactory condition, he shall at once have them placed in good
working order. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   H.   The public works director is authorized to sell copper pipe or any
material or fittings that the city has in stock to any entity for which the
city has an existing contractual relationship for public works services,
including entities with which the city has contracted for the sale of water, at
cost plus ten percent (10%) handling charge. (Ord. 13-06, 5-13-2013)
   I.   The public works director shall supervise and inspect all work done for
and in connection with the water department, and he shall supervise and inspect
all repairs and alterations to the same. He shall keep a copy of this chapter
on file in his office; and in addition to the foregoing, do and perform all
other duties that may be imposed upon him by law and by the ordinances and
resolutions of the city council. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code)
   J.   The public works director shall examine and approve all bills and
accounts against the city arising out of the operation of the water department.
(Ord., 2004)
3-3-3: WATER COLLECTOR:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment; Bond: There is hereby created the office
of water collector of the city. Said officer shall be appointed by the mayor,
by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be required
to give bond in sufficient amount as approved by the city council.
   B.   Duties: The water collector shall:
      1.   Make out all bills for water from the readings of meters furnished
by the public works director;
      2.   Collect all monies due to the city for water rent or charges and
shall pay over the same to the city treasurer once each month, taking the
treasurer's receipt therefor;
      3.   Keep an accurate and complete set of books of accounts, showing the
names and addresses of each water user, the amount of water used by each, the
rate charged for such water, and showing all monies paid to him from whatever
source; (Ord., 2004)
      4.   Render an account in writing to the city council at their monthly
meeting; and (Ord., 2004; amd. 2009 Code)
      5.   Report the amount of delinquent bills he holds for collection.
   C.   Accounts, Books And Records: All accounts, books and records of the
water collector are to be supplied by the public works director and are to
remain the property of the city. (Ord., 2004)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
No water shall be furnished or supplied to any customer for any purpose
whatsoever until such customer or water taker shall make application for water,
in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city. Said application shall state
the use of water and shall be signed by the owner or renter of the premises to
be served with water. The consumer shall thereafter be required to pay water
rates for all water passing through the water meter, to be furnished by the
water department, and said water meter shall remain the property of the water
department. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
3-3-5: METERS AND EQUIPMENT; TAP CHARGE:
   A.   Responsibility For Meters And Equipment; Tap Charge:
      1.   The water department will install the water meter, water pit cover
and cup, yoke, and sufficient three-fourths inch (3/4") or one inch (1") K
copper pipe to reach the property line of the water consumer or property owner.
A tap charge will be calculated based on material cost plus fifteen percent
(15%) and shall be charged for each new tap made by the city. (Ord., 9-8-1987;
Ord., 10-2-1995; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   The water consumer or property owner must furnish and install all
other necessary equipment.
   B.   Location Of Meters: The location of the water meter shall be at the
discretion of the public works director but shall at least abut the property
line of the premises to which water is brought.
   C.   Installation Requirements: All water meters shall be placed and
installed in a box known to the trade as the meter box and meter box cover. All
water installations must be approved by the public works director.
   D.   Damage To Meters:
      1.   The water customer shall be liable for any damage to the meter,
except ordinary wear. (Ord., 9-8-1987)
      2.   Where there is a possibility of water backing into the water meter,
a suitable check valve shall be provided between the meter and the building to
protect the meter. The customer shall be liable for all damages to the meter by
water backing into the meter. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
3-3-6: ENTRY POWERS OF CITY OFFICIALS:
Every customer or water user shall, at all reasonable times, permit the public
works director or his duly authorized agents to enter his premises or building
to examine the water pipes or fixtures therein and the manner in which the
water is used and to read or repair or remove the water meter, and said
customer must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all
questions put to him relative to the manner in which water is used or wasted.
(Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
3-3-7: AUTHORITY TO SHUT OFF OR RESTRICT WATER:
The city reserves the right to shut off water at any time for the purpose of
maintenance, replacing or repairing the mains, cleaning, making connections
with or extensions to same, or for concentrating water in any part of the city
in case of fire, and for restricting the use of water in the case of deficiency
of the supply. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
3-3-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations hereinafter fixed shall be a part of the contract
with every user supplied by the department of water of the city, and every
user, by taking water, shall be considered as bound thereby to observe and
accept said rules and regulations:
Rule One: No more than one dwelling house or building shall be supplied with
water from the water system from the same service pipe, and each water user
shall have a separate curb or shutoff cock. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code)
Rule Two: The water bill shall become due as provided in section
3-3-10 of this chapter, and any consumer refusing or neglecting to pay his bill
as provided in said section shall be deprived of the use of water, and it is
hereby constituted the duty of the city to shut off the water supply to such
customer until such time as all past due bills are fully paid and the service
charge as provided in subsection
3-5-1A2 of this title is paid for the restoration of the water service. (Ord.,
12-4-1989; amd. 2009 Code)
Rule Three: No water consumer of the city shall permit any other person not
residing on the premises for which a permit was issued to use water from his
service pipe or connection.
Rule Four: Every person or property owner to whom shall be granted a permit to
tap the water mains shall do so at his own expense and shall furnish all pipe
and fittings for his premises. No person shall be permitted to cut through or
into the pavement or sewers without a special permit to do so, and any
pavement, sewer or sidewalk which is removed or disturbed after obtaining a
permit to do so shall be put back by the property owner, and said trench and
pavements and sidewalks and sewers shall be maintained and kept in repair by
the person to whom the permit is issued for the period of one year. (Ord., 4-2-
1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-2-1983)
Rule Five: The person to whom a permit is issued to tap a water main shall take
every possible precaution to prevent injury to the persons and property of
others during the work of laying said service pipes and installation of taps,
goosenecks, curb cocks and curb boxes. All trenches must be lighted at night
and protected and must be promptly backfilled as soon as the pipes and fittings
are inspected and tested. Liability for injury to persons or property of others
due to accidents occurring during the installation of service pipes and
fittings shall be that of the person or persons to whom the permit was issued,
and neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be liable in any
way.
Rule Six: The public works director, with the consent of the mayor, may permit
any building contractor or other person to take water from the distribution
system where said water is to be used only temporarily and for other than
domestic or commercial purposes. Wherever practical, a meter shall be
temporarily installed to measure the water thus taken and used. All water so
taken and used shall be measured by meter, or otherwise, and the person or
persons using the same shall pay therefor at the same rates as regular
customers or users; provided, however, that where a temporary connection is
made to the water distribution system through a fire hydrant or otherwise, the
person or persons desiring to use said water shall pay for all necessary
plumbing and fittings, together with a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for making
such temporary connections. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-2-1983;
2009 Code)
Rule Seven: The city council is authorized to make necessary changes in any
section of this chapter or any future ordinance and to decide any disputes that
may arise. Such changes and decisions shall be final and binding on the city
and all parties concerned and shall be assented to by them and become a part of
every contract for water between the city and all water customers or water
users. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-2-1983)
Rule Eight: No permit to use water will be granted to any person who owes the
city any back water bill or who owes the city any money and refuses to pay any
such back bills or debts.
Rule Nine: No person shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from
which the water is or has been turned off on account of nonpayment of water
bills, or for any other bills of any kind, without having first obtained a
permit from the public works director.
Rule Ten: Whoever, by himself or through any other person acting under his
authority, uses or takes water from any part of the water system without
license or permit to so do, or who shall open, uncap or cut, or injure any fire
hydrant, valve box, stop cock, or any other fixture appertaining to the water
system, or who shall let water into or shut off water from any pipes wherever
located, without a permit so to do, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. This rule shall not be construed to
penalize any officer or agent of the city who is acting within the discharge of
his duties.
Rule Eleven: Any water customer connected to the sewer system in the city using
city water and creating a nuisance by the disposition of sewerage shall be
notified by written notice delivered by the public works director to abate same
within a specified time, and if failing so to do, the water will be turned off
with notice and under the same penalties for turning off the water as obtained
for failure to pay water bills when due.
Rule Twelve: For violation of any of the foregoing rules, or for the nonpayment
of water bills, the city reserves the right to turn off the water without
notice and to forfeit any payments made, and after the water has been turned
off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment of water bills or violation
of rules, the same will not be turned on again until all back bills and
penalties are paid, together with the service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for reconnecting, and no water will be furnished to any person who is indebted
to the city on account of water consumed, materials or repairs. Such charges
shall be paid to the water collector, and such sums shall be turned over to the
treasurer and accounted for by him in the same manner as his other collections.
(Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-2-1983; 2009 Code)
Rule Thirteen: After water is turned on to any premises for which application
has been made and granted, no person shall make or employ any other person to
make any tap or connection, addition or alteration without the written permit
from the public works director as in the first introduction of water in or on
the premises. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 5-2-1983)
Rule Fourteen: Owners of swimming pools may request the public works director
to fill their swimming pools from a hydrant or other primary source of water.
Such customers shall pay the straight meter rate for the water thus provided.
In addition thereto, the public works director is authorized to impose a two
hundred dollar ($200.00) service charge for performing such service. The
metered rate for such water service shall not include that portion of the rate
attributable to sewer usage. The public works director is hereby authorized to
deny persons within the city the right to fill their swimming pool during
periods of drought when, in the opinion of the public works director, the city
water supply is in jeopardy. (Ord., 9-6-1983; amd. 2009 Code)
3-3-9: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF WATER; CHANGES IN RATES AND CHARGES AND RULES AND
REGULATIONS:
Water for all purposes, except city fire hydrants, shall be supplied through
water meters only. Any arrangements for the use of water for purposes other
than as herein provided shall be subject to the written approval or shall be
authorized by resolution passed by the city council. The right is reserved by
the city to make such reasonable changes in rates and in conditions hereby
established and to establish further rules and regulations from time to time as
may be found expeditious or necessary. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
3-3-10: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES; REVENUES AND ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Rendition And Payment Of Bills; Liability For Service:
      1.   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly.
      2.   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city.
      3.   Bills for water service shall be sent out by the water collector on
the fourth day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed.
      4.   All water bills are due and payable ten (10) days after being sent
out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the
fifteenth day of the month.
   B.   Shut Off Of Water For Delinquent Payments: If the charges for such
services are not paid within the ten (10) days as hereinabove mentioned after
the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be
discontinued with notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims are
settled.
   C.   Lien Provisions:
      1.   Lien Claim And Notice: Whenever a bill for water remains unpaid for
twenty (20) days after it has been rendered, the city treasurer may file with
the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill and a notice that the authority claims a lien for this amount as well as
for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. If the user whose
bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city treasurer has
notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
address be known to the treasurer, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the
period of forty five (45) days after it has been rendered. The failure of the
city treasurer to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the
owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien
for unpaid bills as mentioned herein.
      2.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid forty five (45) days after it has been rendered.
   D.   Revenues:
      1.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water
system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund. All such
revenues and monies shall be held by the city treasurer separate and apart from
his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and
all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the
mayor and city council.
      2.   The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "water fund of the city". The treasurer shall administer
such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the revised
cities and villages act, effective January 1942 1 .
   E.   Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water
system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
   F.   Notice Of Rates: A copy of this section, properly certified by the city
treasurer, shall be filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds and
shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the water
system of the city on their properties. (Ord., 4-4-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
3-3-11: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property resulting
from a shutoff or turn on of the water service including, but not limited to,
situations where water service is left on between a change of customer
occupying the premises, at the request of one of the customers, or the service
is disconnected for nonpayment. (Ord. 07-06, 6-11-2007)
3-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter, or of any of the rules and regulations set forth herein, unless
otherwise provided, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord., 4-2-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
ARTICLE A. WATER WELL SETBACK ZONES
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Purpose And Scope
3-3A-2: Definitions
3-3A-3: Prohibitions
3-3A-4: Waivers, Exceptions And Certifications Of Minimal Hazard
3-3A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-125-4, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.2 and 5/14.3, and 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7-4-2, and in the interest of securing the public health,
safety and welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of ground water
resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for present and
future generations; and to preserve ground water resources currently in use and
those aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the
provisions of this article shall apply to all properties located within the
minimum setback zone established under section 14.2 of the environmental
protection act ("act"), 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.2, and this article
and the maximum setback zone established under section 14.3 of the act, 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.3.
   B.   Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
7-4-2, all property which: 1) is owned by a municipality; and 2) lies outside
the corporate limits of a municipality; and 3) does not lie within the
corporate limits of any municipality, shall be subject to the ordinance,
control, and jurisdiction of the municipality in all respects the same as the
property owned by the municipality which lies within the corporate limits
thereof. (Ord. 03-03, 5-12-2003)
3-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as stated in this article, and unless a different meaning of a word or
term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this
article shall be the same as those used in the act and the Illinois ground
water protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 55/1.
ACT: The environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et
seq.
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around the city water supply well established
under section 14.3 of the act and this article, and described in appendix A
attached to ordinance 03-03 and made a part hereof.
MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around the city water supply well established
under section 14.2 of the act and this article, and described in appendix A
attached to ordinance 03-03 and made a part hereof. (Ord. 03-03, 5-12-2003;
amd. 2009 Code)
3-3A-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   1. Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section or section
3-3A-4 of this article, no person shall place a new potential primary source,
new potential secondary source, or new potential route within the minimum
setback zone of four hundred feet (400') of wells 3 and 4 (IEPA #52083 and
#00970), all shown on appendix A attached to ordinance 03-03 and made a part
hereof, and located in the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
section 5, township 18-19 north, range 10 west, Cass County, Illinois.
      2.   Subsection A1 of this section shall not apply to new common sources
of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the act and the
regulations adopted thereunder by the agency; however, no such common sources
may be located within the applicable minimum distance from the city water
supply well specified by such regulations.
   B.   Except as provided in section
3-3A-4 of this article, no person shall place a new potential primary source
within the maximum setback zone of one thousand feet (1,000') of wells 3 and 4
(IEPA #52083 and #00970), all as shown on appendix A attached to ordinance 03-
03 and made a part hereof, and located in the northwest quarter of the
northwest quarter of section 5, township 18-19 north, range 10 west. (Ord. 03-
03, 5-12-2003)
3-3A-4: WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD:
   A.   Waivers: If, pursuant to section 14.2(b) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is granted a waiver by the agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from subsection 3-3A-3A1 of this article.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from subsection 3-3A-3A1 of this article.
      2.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating) is granted
an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to
the same extent from subsection 3-3A-3B of this article.
   C.   Certificate Of Minimal Hazard: If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the act,
the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or
new potential route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the agency,
such owner shall not be subject to subsection 3-3A-3A1 of this article to the
same extent that such owner is not subject to section 14.2(d) of the act. (Ord.
03-03, 5-12-2003)
ARTICLE B. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Definitions
3-3B-2: Unlawful Contamination Or Cross Connections
3-3B-3: Backflow Prevention Devices
3-3B-4: Inspection Of New Construction
3-3B-5: Inspection Of Existing Buildings, Structures Or Improvements And
Termination Of Water Supply
3-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than in the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or harmful or offensive substances into the distribution
system of the city water supply as a result of reduced or reversed pressure.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device which, when properly installed between the
city water supply system and the terminus or point of ultimate use, will
prevent backflow.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby the city water system is
connected with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool,
storage reservoir or any other source of water supply which contains or may
contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquids which may be
harmful to human health or which may deleteriously affect the city water
supply. (Ord., 1-3-1989)
3-3B-2: UNLAWFUL CONTAMINATION OR CROSS CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or other user of
city water to introduce or permit the introduction of pollution or
contamination of any kind into the city water supply system. It is unlawful for
any person to install or maintain any cross connection within the city. A
violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord., 1-3-1989; amd. 2009 Code)
3-3B-3: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed by the property owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or other user of city water where the nature and
extent of the activities conducted or the materials used or stored on the
premises would present a hazard to the public health or be deleterious to the
quality of the city water supply should a cross connection occur. Even though
cross connections may not exist at the time, backflow prevention devices shall
be installed under circumstances including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply.
      2.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable,
or having intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to
ascertain whether or not cross connections exist.
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot reasonably be made.
      4.   Premises having a history of cross connections being established or
reestablished.
      5.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure or as to
permit the entry of such substance into the public water supply.
      6.   Premises having pumps or pumping devices which may affect the
pressure within any line connected to the city water supply.
   B.   All backflow prevention devices shall be installed by the property
owner at his expense, and shall be of a type commensurate with the degree of
hazard which exists or which could exist. An air gap separation or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a
toxic nature, or other contaminants which could cause a public health hazard.
In all other cases where the contaminant may be objectionable but not hazardous
to the public health, a double check valve assembly, an air gap separation, or
a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed. All
backflow prevention devices and the installation thereof shall be approved by
the public works director or his duly authorized representative.
   C.   All backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this article,
except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and tested by a
certified tester at the time of initial installation and annually thereafter,
or more often if deemed necessary by the city. Whenever a backflow prevention
device is found to be defective, it shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced
at the owner's expense. The public works director shall retain adequate records
of all inspections, tests or repairs made pursuant to this article.
   D.   If a backflow prevention device is found to be necessary, the owner,
tenant, occupant or lessee of the property shall apply in writing to the city
clerk for an installation permit, specifying the type and location of such
device or devices. It shall be unlawful to install, relocate or remove a
backflow prevention device without a permit. (Ord., 1-3-1989)
3-3B-4: INSPECTION OF NEW CONSTRUCTION:
No building, improvement or other structure shall be connected to the city
water supply after the effective date hereof unless and until such structure
has been inspected by the public works director or other authorized officer of
the city and found free of any cross connections or other conditions for which
a backflow prevention device is required by this article. (Ord., 1-3-1989)
3-3B-5: INSPECTION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR IMPROVEMENTS AND
TERMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY:
Inspections by the city or its authorized agent may be made of any existing
building, structure, or improvement of any nature receiving water from the city
water supply. The public works director or his authorized agent may make an
inspection of any building, improvement or structure of any nature receiving
water from the city water supply if there appears probable cause to believe
that a cross connection exists or that a backflow prevention device should be
installed pursuant to this article, and if the mayor of the city agrees in
writing as to the existence of such probable cause. Whenever a cross connection
or other source of contamination to the water supply is found, or it is
determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary, the city shall cease
delivery of water to such premises, and the water supply shall not be resumed
until the cross connection or source of contamination is eliminated or a
backflow prevention device has been installed in accordance with this article.
(Ord., 1-3-1989)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
3-4-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
3-4-4: Building Sewers And Connections
3-4-5: Extensions Of Public Sewers
3-4-6: Use Of Public Sewers
3-4-6-1: Discharges Into System
3-4-6-2: Interceptors Or Traps
3-4-6-3: Pretreatment Or Flow Equalization
3-4-6-4: Control Manhole
3-4-6-5: Measurements, Tests, Analyses And Inspections
3-4-6-6: Special Agreements
3-4-6-7: Penalty
3-4-7: Damage To, Tampering With System
3-4-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
3-4-9: Use Of Municipally Owned Sewer Equipment
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Unless
the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in
this chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection
agency.
   Federal Act: The federal water pollution control act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.,
as amended by the federal water pollution control act of amendments of 1972
(pub. l. 92-500 and 93-243).
   Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by title II, "grants for
construction of treatment works" of the act and implementing regulations.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal water pollution control amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge
of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
PERSONS, INSPECTORS, AUTHORITIES:
   Authority Or Approving Authority: The city of Virginia.
   Director: The public works director of the city of Virginia, or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   Inspector: The person or persons duly authorized by the authority to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the
public sewer system.
   Person: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity,
discharging any wastewater to the wastewater treatment works.
   Public Authority: Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by law over
construction and use of a wastewater collection or treatment facility.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater
and stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage.
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the authority
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Private Sewer: A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city
of Virginia, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city
funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and ground water
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970 1 .
   State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system, and shall be in accordance with the provisions outlined in
chapter 5 of this title.
   Depreciation: An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption and
obsolescence of the treatment works.
   Industrial Cost Recovery: Recovery from the industrial users of a treatment
works of the grant amount allocable to treatment of wastes from such users,
exclusive of interest.
   Industrial Cost Recovery Period: That period during which the grant amount
allocable to the treatment of wastes from industrial users is recovered from
the industrial users of such works. The "industrial cost recovery period" shall
be equal to thirty (30) years or the useful life of the treatment works,
whichever is less, as determined by the authority.
   Metered Usage: The metered water usage of any individual customer, unless
separate metering of sewage flow is provided for the customer, wherein the term
shall mean metered sewage flow of any individual customer.
   Operation And Maintenance Costs: All costs, direct and indirect, necessary
to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing basis, conform with at
related federal, state and local requirements, and assure optional long term
facility management.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
"replacement".
   Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Significant Industry: Any industry that will contribute greater than ten
percent (10%) of the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the
treatment works.
   Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge which is
levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established in subsection 3-4A-3B of this chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated, and shall be thirty (30) years from the date
of start up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state grant.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be in accordance with the
provisions outlined under article A of this chapter and chapter 5 of this
title, and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge and a surcharge,
if applicable.
USER TYPES:
   Classes Of Users: The division of wastewater treatment customers by waste
characteristics and process or discharge similarities.
   Industrial User: A. Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment
works identified in the standard industrial classification manual, 1972, office
of management and budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, forestry and fishing.
Division B - Mining.
Division D - Manufacturing.
Division E - Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services.
Division I - Services.
   B.   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by
the authority that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Residential Or Commercial Or Nonindustrial Users: Any user of the treatment
works not classified as an "industrial user" or excluded as an "industrial
user" as provided in this section.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20°C).
Combined Sewage: A combination of both sanitary and industrial wastewater and
stormwater or surface water.
Compatible Pollutant: A pollutant for which the treatment works is designed to
treat and includes biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, or a pollutant for which the plant is able to remove to a
substantial degree, being eighty percent (80%) or greater.
Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
Fecal Coliform: Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that will separate
by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility approved by
the authority.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
Incompatible Pollutant: Any pollutant that is not defined as a "compatible
pollutant", including nonbiodegradable dissolved solids.
Industrial Wastes: The liquid wastes from industrial process, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industry that either: a) has a flow of fifty
thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; or b) has a flow greater
than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the public sewer system receiving
the waste; or c) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under section 307(a) of PL 92-500; or d) has a significant
impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on
a treatment works or on the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, "parts
per million", to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results
of water and wastewater analysis.
Normal Domestic Sewage: As defined for the purposes of determining surcharge, a
wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended solids concentration of
not more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), and average
daily BOD of not more than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
The "pH" of any discharge into the public sewer system shall not be less than
5.5 nor more than 9.5.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One "population equivalent" is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and 0.22
pound of suspended solids.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one inch (1") in any dimension.
Sewage: The combination of liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. The three (3) most
common types of sewage are:
   A.   Sanitary Sewage: The combination of liquid and water carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   B.   Industrial Sewage: A combination of liquid and water carried wastes
discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any trade or
process carried on in that establishment, including wastes from pretreatment
facilities and polluted cooling water.
   C.   Combined Sewage: Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage,
stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer.
Slug: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer
than sixty (60) minutes more than 2.5 times the average twenty four (24) hour
concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system.
Standard Methods: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at
the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
Suspended Solids: The solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
Total Solids: The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
Toxic Amount: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants
which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will cause adverse
effects such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations as
defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of PL 92-500.
Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Volatile Organic Matter: The material in the sewage solids transformed to gases
or vapors when heated at five hundred fifty degrees centigrade (550°C) for
fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minutes.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
3-4-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon
public or private property in any area under the jurisdiction of the authority
any human or animal excrement, garbage, objectionable waste, wastewater or
other polluted waters which ordinarily would be regarded as sewage or
industrial wastes, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.
   B.   Discharges Into Natural Outlets: No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged to any natural outlet, under the jurisdiction of the authority,
any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the NPDES
permit.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owners of all houses,
buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated within the jurisdiction of the authority and abutting
any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located any public sewer of the authority, are hereby required, at
their expense, to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect
such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official
notice so to do; provided, that the public sewer is within two hundred feet
(200') of the property line. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection
3-4-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, each person shall first obtain a written permit signed
by the authority. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
      2.   Application For Permit; Fee: The application for such permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the authority which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed
necessary by the approving authority. A minimum permit and inspection fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the authority at the time the
application is filed.
   C.   Construction Specifications; Lot Area: The type, capacities, location
and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the state private sewage disposal licensing act and code 1
and with the state environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet 2 . No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlet. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Inspection Of Construction: A permit for a private sewage disposal
system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the approving authority. The authority shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the approving authority when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within forty eight (48) hours of the receipt of
written notice by the approving authority.
   E.   Operation And Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the authority. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
   F.   Availability Of Public Sewers; Connection Required: At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in subsection
3-4-2D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
   G.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the department of public health. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
2 2. See also subsection
  6-4-3F of this code.
3-4-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public
works director. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications:
         a.   There shall be five (5) types of building sewer permits:
            (1)   For single-family residential dwelling units and commercial
service.
            (2)   For multi-family residential dwelling units.
            (3)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
            (4)   For the institutional class of users.
            (5)   For service to the governmental class of users. (Ord., 10-21-
1978)
         b.   In any case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the authority. The permit applications shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the authority. For the industrial class of users,
the application shall provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
      3.   Permit And Inspection Fee: At the time of filing a building sewer
permit application, a permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the authority
in accordance with the following schedule for the respective type of building
sewer permits:
 
Type                                     Amount
Single-family residential and commercial $250.00 per building sewer
service
Multi-family residential                 $500.00 for every 5 dwelling units or
                                         fractional part thereof
Industrial                               $500.00 per building sewer
Institutional                            $400.00 per building sewer
Governmental                             $300.00 per building sewer
 
      4.   Bond: Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in
any public street, way or alley, the person applying for such permit shall have
executed unto the authority and deposited with the city clerk a corporate
surety in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned that he will
perform faithfully all work with due care and diligence, and in accordance with
the laws, rules and regulations established by the authority or any local,
state and federal laws, codes or ordinances pertaining to plumbing. This bond
shall state that the person will indemnify and save harmless the authority and
the owner of the premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and
claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or negligence on
his part in connection with plumbing or excavation for plumbing as prescribed
in this chapter. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a
period of one year; except, that on such expiration, it shall remain in force
as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior
to such expiration. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
      5.   Permit Subject To System Capacity: A building sewer permit will only
be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Location On State Or County Highway: Any building sewer or connection
located either along or across a highway under the jurisdiction of the state
department of transportation or the county highway department shall first
receive written approval from such highway authorities prior to initiation of
the work. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
   C.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the extension considered as the building sewer for the rear
building; and except, that multi-family dwelling units, including apartments
and mobile home trailer parks, may use a single common building sewer for
drainage of individual dwelling units. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
approving authority, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The building sewer shall be constructed of either: a) vitrified clay
sewer pipe and fittings meeting the current ASTM "specifications for extra
strength clay sewer pipe"; or b) extra heavy cast iron soil pipe and fittings
meeting the current ASTM "specifications for extra heavy cast iron soil pipe";
or c) ABS (acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) extra strength solid wall pipe and
fittings meeting the current ASTM "specifications for ABS extra strength solid
wall pipe"; or d) PVC (polyvinyl chloride) schedule 40 pipe. If installed in
filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe;
except, that vitrified clay pipe or ABS solid wall pipe meeting the above
specification requirements may be accepted if laid on a suitable improved bed
or cradle as approved by the authority.
      2.   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Vitrified clay sewer pipe shall be fitted with factory made resilient
compression joints meeting the current ASTM "specifications for vitrified clay
pipe joints having resilient properties".
      3.   Before joining the pipe in the trench, the bell and spigot surfaces
shall be wiped free of dirt or other foreign matter. A lubricant or sealer as
recommended by the pipe manufacturer shall be applied to the bell and spigot
mating surfaces just before they are joined together. The spigot end shall be
positioned into the bell end of the pipe previously laid and shall then be
shoved home to compress the joint and to assure a tight fit between the
interfaces. Joints for cast iron soil pipe shall be made by inserting a roll of
hemp or jute and thoroughly caulking it into place and then following with pure
molten lead well caulked, not less than one inch (1") deep. No paint, varnish
or putty will be allowed in the joints until they have been tested and
approved.
      4.   The size and slope of building sewers shall be subject to the
approval of the authority, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four
inches (4"). The slope of such four inch (4") pipe shall not be less than one-
eighth inch (1/8") per foot. A slope of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot shall
be used wherever practical.
      5.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the
installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise
approved by the authority. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with current ASTM specification designation C12; except, that no
backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the authority or
his representative.
      6.   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drains shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. No
water operated sewage ejector shall be used.
   F.   Connection To Public Sewer:
      1.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the authority, or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
"Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the approving authority
before installation.
      2.   More specifically, the connection of a building sewer into the
public sewer shall be made at a "Y" branch or "T" branch, if such a branch is
available at a suitable location. If the public sewer has no properly located
"Y" or "T" branch available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a "Y"
branch or a "Y" saddle fitting (for ABS truss pipe) at the location specified
by the authority. Under no circumstances will the sewer service protrude into
the sewer main to which the construction is made. The invert of the building
sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation
than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the
connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special
fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the authority.
Manholes shall be constructed at any junction of an eight inch (8") diameter
line or larger into a public sewer.
   G.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the authority.
   H.   Discharges Into System:
      1.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
      2.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   I.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
authority or its representative.
   J.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: The applicant for sewer service shall
pay all costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer and the maintenance thereof, from the point of connection to the
public sewer of the authority, or to the collector sewer of the authority if
located within a right of way of the authority, to the premises of the
applicant. The owner and the person installing the building sewer for said
owner shall indemnify the authority from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by said installation. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-5: EXTENSIONS OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   The authority shall be responsible for determining whether or not an
extension of a public sewer is economically feasible based on the estimated
cost of the extension and the number of existing potential users that will use
said sewer line. If the extension is economically feasible, then the authority
may install and pay the cost of the extension at the discretion of the
authority. If the authority elects not to pay the cost of extending the public
sewer, then the person or persons desiring sewer service shall install the
extension at their own personal expense upon written consent of the authority.
The authority shall not pay for any extensions to an undeveloped area, such as
a subdivision being developed, unless there are sufficient existing residents
or businesses to make the extension economically feasible.
   B.   The authority must approve all plans and specifications for any
extensions. Before any extensions are installed, the plans and specifications
must be reviewed and approved by the state environmental protection agency, the
state department of transportation, and the county highway department, as
applicable, for extensions of sewers along or across highways within their
respective jurisdictions.
   C.   Ownership, right of way and title must be conveyed to the authority for
all extensions installed by anyone other than the authority. The authority
shall maintain the extended public sewers thereafter.
   D.   No extension of the public sewer shall be permitted if, in the opinion
of the authority, the system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the
proposed extension. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
3-4-6-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Water Runoff; Storm And Combined Sewers:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, stormwater, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, unpolluted
water or unpolluted industrial process water. The authority shall require the
removal of unpolluted waters from any wastewater collection or treatment
facility if such removal is economical and in the best interests of all users
of those facilities, as determined by the authority.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
approving authority, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
         a.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
         c.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
         d.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
         e.   Wastes at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate (slugs)
which are excessive over relatively short time periods so that there is a
treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
      2.   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the authority
of any unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidently or otherwise to
the sewer system.
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the approving authority that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these waters, the
approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) (0°C) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the approving authority.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the approving authority for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the approving authority as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligram
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligram per liter at any time
except as permitted by the approving authority in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
         k.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in section
3-4-1 of this chapter.
         l.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      2.   a. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA
rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs, part 128 - pretreatment,
Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the
judgment of the approving authority, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewerage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the approving
authority may:
            (1)   Reject the wastes;
            (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
            (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
            (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of section
3-4-6-5 of this section
3-4-6.
         b.   If the approving authority permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving
authority and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances
and laws. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-2: INTERCEPTORS OR TRAPS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
and other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors or traps will not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors or
traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the authority and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
They will be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature and shall be of substantial construction, to
be gastight, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained
by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-3: PRETREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
   A.   Pretreatment Requirements:
      1.   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having
harmful or objectionable characteristics shall be subject to the review and
approval of the authority, who may prescribe limits on the strength and
character of those waters and wastes. Where necessary, in the opinion of the
authority, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to treat those wastes prior to discharge to the public sewer.
Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
authority and the Illinois environmental protection agency or Illinois
department of public health, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. Where preliminary
treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense, and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the authority to
determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance with
applicable federal, state and local laws and permits. The owner shall maintain
operating records and submit to the authority a monthly summary report of the
character of the influent and effluent to verify performance facilities against
authority monitoring records.
      2.   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major contributing industries
prior to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the
rules and regulations adopted by the U.S. environmental protection agency and
published in the federal register on November 8, 1973, (38 CFR 3-982), federal
guidelines dated October 1973, any more stringent requirements established by
the authority, and any subsequent federal guidelines and rules and regulations.
      3.   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils
or grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants,
and the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with subsection
3-4-6-1C of this section
3-4-6.
   B.   Maintenance Required: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing
facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
waste or other nonresidential wastewater may be required by the authority to
install a control manhole or other suitable structure, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building, to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurements of the wastes. Such structures, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the authority. The structures shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to
be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, ANALYSES AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The authority may require users of the treatment works, other than
residential users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flow
characteristics. Such measurements, tests and analyses shall be made at the
user's expense.
   B.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the authority or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the
authority, but no less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner
shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the
authority. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and
reporting required by the authority. At such times as deemed necessary, the
authority reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by
an outside laboratory service. Appropriate charges for sampling and analysis
may be assessed to the user at the option of the authority. The results of
routine sampling and analysis by the user may also be used for determination of
charges, after verification by the authority.
   C.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole or other suitable structure
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples).
   D.   Agents of the authority shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of
wastewater discharges and discharge facilities. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
3-4-6 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the authority and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the authority for treatment.
In all such cases, the provisions set forth in article A of this chapter will
be governing factors in any contracts entered into. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4-6-7: PENALTY:
Any persons violating the provisions of this section
3-4-6 shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each day that such violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009
Code)
3-4-7: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewerage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord., 10-21-
1978)
3-4-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Entry Powers; Limitations On Requested Information:
      1.   The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the
authority, the Illinois environmental protection agency and the U.S.
environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The approving authority or his representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
      2.   The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the
authority, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the authority holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord.,
10-21-1978)
   B.   Safety Precautions: While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the approving authority
or duly authorized employees of the authority, the Illinois environmental
protection agency and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the person, and the
person shall be held harmless for injury or death to the authority's employees,
and the authority shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its
property by authority's employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the person and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions. (Ord., 10-21-
1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4-9: USE OF MUNICIPALLY OWNED SEWER EQUIPMENT:
Equipment owned by the city and used by the city's sewer department for the
purposes of clearing lines of roots and other debris may be made available for
use by other governmental entities at the discretion of the city's public works
director, provided the entity desiring to use said equipment pays a charge
equal to a base charge of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), plus seventy
five dollars ($75.00) per hour and that said equipment must be operated by a
city employee as designated by said public works director. (Ord. 12-10, 5-14-
2012)
ARTICLE A. WASTEWATER USER CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
SECTION:
3-4A-1: Basis For Wastewater Charges
3-4A-2: Measurement Of Flow
3-4A-3: Rates Established
3-4A-4: Computation Of Rates
3-4A-5: Industrial Waste Cost Recovery
3-4A-6: Bills, Payments And Revenues
3-4A-6-1: Monthly Payments; Liability For Charges
3-4A-6-2: Bills Rendered; Due Date
3-4A-6-3: Delinquent Payments; Shut Off Of Service
3-4A-6-4: Lien Provisions
3-4A-6-5: Revenues
3-4A-6-6: Accounting
3-4A-6-7: Access To Records
3-4A-6-8: Notice Of Provisions
3-4A-6-9: Penalty
3-4A-7: Violations; Penalties
3-4A-1: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER CHARGES:
The wastewater charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater
facilities of the authority shall consist of a basic user rate for operation
and maintenance, a minimum user charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   A.   Minimum User Charge: The minimum user charge shall not be less than
that computed by dividing the annual costs of authority's administrative
expenses and budgeted fixed costs, including depreciation, by the total number
of users. Through further division (divide total by 12 months), the monthly
minimum required user charge can be computed.
   B.   Basic User Rate:
      1.   The basic user rate shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/l).
      2.   The basic user rate shall consist of operation and maintenance
costs, replacement, depreciation, bond indebtedness or improvements and shall
be not less than that computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities for all works categories.
         b.   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories
by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible.
         c.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated.
         d.   Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial and industrial
users by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
         f.   Compute surcharge costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons per
milligram per liter in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   C.   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge
will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters
for all wastes which exceed the two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and
two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively. Subsection 3-4A-4B of this section specifies the procedure to
compute a surcharge.
   D.   Review Of Charges: The adequacy of the wastewater charges shall be
reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the authority in its
annual audit report. The wastewater charges shall be revised periodically to
reflect any changes in debt service costs, in operation and maintenance costs
including replacement costs, or in administrative and reserve costs. (Ord., 10-
21-1978)
3-4A-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
   A.   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of
one hundred (100) gallons.
   B.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part or all of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system,
all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall
install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
authority for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from
these other sources.
   C.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the authority if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   D.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed unless service is canceled without
the consent of the authority. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4A-3: RATES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Minimum Charge; Basic User Rate: There shall be and there is hereby
established a minimum user charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for
service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city. A minimum user
charge and a basic user rate as set out in subsection
3-5-1B of this title shall be applied to all users. (Ord., 4-4-1982; amd. 2009
Code)
   B.   Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as
follows:
      1.   For BOD, a surcharge rate of $0.003 per milligram per liter per one
thousand (1,000) gallons shall be applied for waste strength in excess of two
hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
      2.   For SS, a surcharge rate of $0.0024 per milligram per liter per one
thousand (1,000) gallons shall be applied for waste strength in excess of two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l). (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4A-4: COMPUTATION OF RATES:
   A.   Wastewater Charge: The wastewater charge shall be computed by the
following formula:
 
W = M + (Vu x UR) UR + S
Where:   
 W    = Amount of wastewater charge ($) per billing period
 M    = Minimum user charge for budgeted fixed costs (subsection 3-4A-3A of
         this article)
 Vu   = Wastewater volume for the billing period
         Basic user rate for budgeted proportional costs, such as operation,
 UR   = maintenance, replacement and depreciation (subsection 3-4A-3A of this
         article)
 S    = Amount of surcharge (subsection 3-4A-3B of this article and subsection
         B of this section)
 
(Ord., 10-21-1978)
   B.   Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis
for surcharges. The surcharge shall be the sum computed as follows: (Ord., 10-
21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
      1.   For BOD, multiply the surcharge rate by the strength of the waste in
excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), and further multiply
this product by the total flow discharge per one thousand (1,000) gallons; plus
      2.   For SS, multiply the surcharge rate by the strength of the waste in
excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), and further
multiply this product by the total flow discharged per one thousand (1,000)
gallons. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4A-5: INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY:
No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the city
has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
   A.   Meets the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(B) of the federal water
pollution control act amendments of 1972 and applicable federal regulations;
and
   B.   Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions of
any grant made to the city by the United States environmental protection agency
or by the state for the construction of any part of the sewer system or
wastewater treatment works of the city. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4A-6: BILLS, PAYMENTS AND REVENUES:
3-4A-6-1: MONTHLY PAYMENTS; LIABILITY FOR CHARGES:
Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is
furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of
the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the city. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-2: BILLS RENDERED; DUE DATE:
   A.   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the water collector on the
fourth day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
   B.   All sewer bills are due and payable ten (10) days after being sent out.
A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the
fifteenth day of the month. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-3: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; SHUT OFF OF SERVICE:
If the charges for such services are not paid within the ten (10) days after
the rendition of the bill for such services, as mentioned in subsection 3-4A-6-
2B of this section
3-4A-6, such services shall be discontinued with notice and shall not be
reinstated until all claims are settled. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-4: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lien Claim And Notice: Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid
for twenty (20) days after it has been rendered, the city treasurer shall file
with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement
shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the authority claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. If the
user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city
treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his address be known to the treasurer, whenever such bill remains
unpaid for the period of forty five (45) days after it has been rendered. The
failure of the city treasurer to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the section
3-4A-6-3 of this section
3-4A-6. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid forty five (45) days after it has been rendered. (Ord., 10-21-
1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-5: REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the city treasurer separate and apart
from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city,
and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor
and city council. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "sewerage fund of the city". The treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the
revised cities and villages act, effective January 1942 1 . (Ord., 10-21-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS.
3-4A-6-6: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   System Of Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements,
the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses
of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged. (Ord., 10-21-1978)
3-4A-6-7: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency, or its authorized representative,
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which
are applicable to the city's system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grant. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-8: NOTICE OF PROVISIONS:
A copy of this section
3-4A-6, properly certified by the city treasurer, shall be filed in the office
of the county recorder of deeds and shall be deemed notice to all owners of
real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of the city on their
properties. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
3-4A-6-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this section
3-4A-6 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009
Code)
3-4A-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: The city may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this article.
   C.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection 3-4A-6-4A of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   D.   Liability For Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
(Ord., 10-21-1978; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Within City Limits
3-5-2: Outside City Limits
3-5-3: Delinquent Payments
3-5-4: Payment Plans For Emergency Situations
3-5-1: WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Water Rates And Charges:
      1.   User Rates: Commencing with the May, 2019 billing cycle and each
month billing cycle thereafter, the following shall be the rates for water
furnished to all water customers except as provided for by separate contract:
         a.   For the first one thousand (1,000) gallons per month or fraction
thereof, a minimum charge of thirty eight dollars ($38.00) for residential and
commercial customers.
         b.   The rate for use exceeding one thousand (1,000) gallons per month
for residential and commercial customers shall be eight dollars fifty cents
($8.50) per thousand gallons used.
         c.   Rates may be changed thereafter by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. 2019-02, 4-11-2019)
      2.   Service Charges:
         a.   Shutoff 1 :
            (1)   After written application or verbal request, or for
nonpayment of a bill, water service will be turned off at the earliest time
convenient to the City, and the customer will be billed a shutoff charge of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
            (2)   In the case of an emergency, as determined by the City Public
Works Director, there shall be no charge incurred by the customer for shutoff
of water service.
         b.   Turn On 2 : After written application or verbal request, water
service will be turned on at the earliest time convenient to the City, and the
customer will be billed a turn on fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
         c.   Additional Reconnection Requirements: In addition to the turn on
fee, any customer whose service was shut off as a result of nonpayment shall be
required to pay all outstanding charges and penalties, and any deposit required
by the City before service will be restored.
   B.   Sewer Rates: The following shall be the rates for sewer furnished to
all sewerage customers within the corporate limits: (Ord. 07-06, 6-11-2007)
      1.   For up to the first two thousand (2,000) gallons per month or
fraction thereof, a minimum charge of six dollars ($6.00) shall be charged for
residential and commercial customers.
      2.   The rate for over two thousand (2,000) gallons per month for
residential and commercial customers shall be two dollars seventy five cents
($2.75) per thousand gallons or fraction thereof. (Ord. 2015-15-04, 5-11-2015)
   C.   Water Meter Replacement Fee: Each water user shall be assessed a water
meter replacement fee of five dollars ($5.00) per month in addition to any and
all other charges provided herein. This fee shall terminate upon the City
paying the total principal and interest incurred for the replacement of all
water meters in the City of Virginia. (Ord. 2016-4, 6-13-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-3-11 of this title.
2 2. See section
  3-3-11 of this title.
3-5-2: OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Water and sewer rates for landowners whose property lies outside the
corporate limits of the City, partially or completely, shall pay water and
sewer rates as set forth in section
3-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-13, 10-12-2009, eff. 10-15-2009)
   B.   Water sold to water districts serving customers outside the corporate
limits of the City shall be in an amount fixed by written contract between the
Water District and the City and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 03-01, 11-
10-2003; amd. 2009 Code)
3-5-3: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   A.   Reconnection Charges: Where water, sewer or other services shall be
discontinued on account of the nonpayment of water, sewer and other charges,
such services shall not again be supplied unless the user pays in full all
arrears including any penalty charges, the last current month's billing and all
other charges imposed by ordinance of the City 1 . (Ord., 8-6-1979; amd. 2009
Code)
   B.   Copies Of Records: Any landlord or owner of real property within the
City who wishes to receive a copy of any water bill which is not paid within
ten (10) days of the date of issuance, shall register with the City Water
Department, giving the correct mailing address of said landlord or other owner,
and upon said registration, the City Water Department shall mail to said
landlord or other owner of real property within the City a notice of any water
bill which is in arrears in excess of ten (10) days. (Ord., 12-2-1991; amd.
2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  3-5-1A2 of this chapter.
3-5-4: PAYMENT PLANS FOR EMERGENCY SITUATIONS:
   A.   Water customers experiencing an excessive water use resulting from a
leak, verified by a City Public Works employee, may request a reduced payment
amount and extended pay period. The following requirements apply to qualify for
this payment plan:
      1.   Water use must exceed the last six (6) months average water use by
twenty percent (20%).
      2.   Leak must be verified by City Public Works employee on-site.
   B.   The water customer's bill will be divided into two (2) parts:
      1.   Normal usage: This amount will be an average of the last six (6)
months usage and will be billed at the current rates in effect and due at the
normal time for this billing cycle.
      2.   Excess usage: This amount will be the difference between the total
usage and the average of the last six (6) months usage.
         a.   The billable amount will be reduced as follows to reflect the
lower "cost to produce" amount rather than the full billable amount:
            (1)   Cost to produce X number of gallons used.
            (2)   If applicable, sewer cost will be reduced by excess usage
amount.
               (A) Customer must currently pay a sewer fee.
               (B) Excess water from leak must not have flowed into sewer.
         b.   The billable amount for excess usage is payable in equal
installments over a six (6) month period.
         c.   The first of six (6) payments is due at the normal time for the
next billing cycle.
   C.   Failure to pay normal usage or excess usage bills by the due date shall
accelerate all monies due on the customer's account, and the customer shall be
subject to the penalties provided by this Code and Illinois law. (Ord. 2015-15-
14, 9-14-2015)
CHAPTER 6
LIBRARY
SECTION:
3-6-1: Established
3-6-2: Tax Imposed
3-6-3: Use Of Library
3-6-4: Donations
3-6-5: Prohibited Acts
3-6-1: ESTABLISHED:
Under and by virtue of the provisions of an act of the general assembly of the
state entitled "an act to authorize cities, incorporated towns and townships to
establish and maintain free public libraries and reading rooms", as amended 1 ,
a public library and reading room shall be established, and it is hereby
established in the city, which shall be maintained for the free use and benefit
of the inhabitants of the city and which shall be known under the name and
style of the "Virginia Library Association". (1925 Code § 37-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 75 ILCS 5/1-0.1 et seq.
3-6-2: TAX IMPOSED:
The city council may, in each year, levy a tax not to exceed two (2) mills on
the dollar to be levied and collected in like manner with the general taxes of
the city and which shall be known as the library fund. (1925 Code § 37-2)
3-6-3: USE OF LIBRARY:
The library and reading room shall be forever free to the use of the
inhabitants of the city, always subject to such reasonable rules and
regulations as the library association may adopt, in order to render the use of
the library and reading room of the greatest benefit to the greatest number;
and the board of library trustees 1  may exclude from the use of the library
and reading room any and all persons who shall wilfully violate such rules. The
board may extend the privileges of and use of the library and reading room to
persons residing outside of the city and in the state upon such terms and
conditions as the board may from time to time, by its regulations, prescribe.
(1925 Code § 37-7; amd. 2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
3-6-4: DONATIONS:
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real
estate for the benefit of the library shall have the right to vest the title to
the money or real estate so donated in the board of trustees of the library, to
be held and controlled by such board, when accepted, according to the terms of
the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property, and as to such property,
the said board shall be held and considered to be special trustees. (1925 Code
§ 37-9; amd. 2009 Code)
3-6-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Damage To Property:
      1.   No person shall wilfully or maliciously write upon, cut, deface,
tear or destroy any book, newspaper, periodical, plate, picture or engraving
belonging to the Virginia Library Association. (1925 Code § 37-10; amd. 2009
Code)
      2.   No person shall wilfully or maliciously commit any injury to the
building, fixtures or other property of the Virginia Library Association. (1925
Code § 37-11; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Failure To Return Books: No person shall fail to return any book
belonging to the Virginia Library Association, according to the requirements of
the bylaws, rules and regulations made and adopted by the trustees of the
association for the government thereof. (1925 Code § 37-12; amd. 1981 Code;
2009 Code)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CEMETERY
SECTION:
3-7-1: Created; Description
3-7-2: Board Of Managers
3-7-3: Superintendent
3-7-4: Cemetery Deeds
3-7-1: CREATED; DESCRIPTION:
The following cemetery ground shall be known and designated as the Walnut Ridge
cemetery, and is hereby exclusively set apart for the burial of the dead:
Beginning at a point 22.86 chains South of the Northwest corner of the East
one-half of the Southeast one-quarter of Section 34, Township 18 North, Range
10, thence East 35.02 rods, thence South to Township Line (between Townships 17
and 18) thence West to Southwest corner of East one-half of the Southeast one-
quarter of Section 34, thence North to place of beginning; and the addition
described as follows: Part of the Southeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-
quarter of Section 34, Township 18 North, Range 10 West of the Third Principal
Meridian described as follows: Commencing at a point on the South line of
Section 34, said point being 44.98 rods West of the Southeast corner of said
Section, and being the Southeast corner of Walnut Ridge Cemetery, running
thence North 68.56 rods to Northeast corner of said Cemetery, thence East 4.98
rods, thence at right angles 68.56 rods to the South line of said Section 34,
thence West along said line 4.98 rods to the beginning point, being 2.133 acres
more or less, all in Cass County, Illinois.
(1925 Code § 15-1)
3-7-2: BOARD OF MANAGERS:
There is hereby created a Walnut Ridge cemetery board of managers that shall be
hereafter be known as the "board of managers, Walnut Ridge cemetery", to
supervise, manage and control the Walnut Ridge cemetery, subject to the
ordinances of the city council, consisting of eight (8) members and one ex
officio member appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city
council, to serve terms of three (3) years from the date of their appointment;
except, that the first members appointed shall determine by lot among
themselves their respective terms to serve as follows: two (2) for three (3)
years, two (2) for two (2) years, and two (2) for one year. Said board of
managers shall adopt, and from time to time amend, bylaws governing the
operation of the cemetery. (Ord. 06-07, 7-10-2006; amd. 2009 Code)
3-7-3: SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The board of managers shall appoint a
superintendent of the cemetery. The superintendent shall hold his office until
the end of the fiscal year and until his successor is appointed and qualifies.
(1925 Code § 15-2; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Bond: The superintendent shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, execute a bond to the city, with approved security, in such sum as the
board of managers shall require, which bond shall be substantially in the form
prescribed by ordinance for other officers. (1925 Code § 15-3; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Duties: The superintendent shall have the charge and control of the
cemetery grounds belonging to the city, subject however to such rules and
regulations as shall from time to time be adopted by the board of managers in
relation to cemeteries. He shall attend to the removal of grass, weeds and
brush and decayed trees from the cemetery grounds. He shall attend to the sale
and conveyance of cemetery lots and collect the money therefor, and shall have
the management of all improvements made upon said grounds. (1925 Code § 15-4;
amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Compensation And Report: The superintendent shall receive such
compensation for his services as the board of managers shall agree upon at the
time of his appointment, and he shall, at the close of his term of office and
at such other times as the board of managers may require, report to the board
his acts and doings as superintendent and the amount of money received and paid
out. (1925 Code § 15-5; amd. 2009 Code)
3-7-4: CEMETERY DEEDS:
   A.   All deeds heretofore executed by the city, by the mayor and city clerk
thereof, attested by the corporate seal, purporting to convey lots or blocks or
fractions thereof in Walnut Ridge cemetery are hereby ratified and confirmed.
The title to said real estate is hereby declared to be vested in the several
grantees in the conveyances mentioned, and their heirs and assigns forever.
(1925 Code § 15-6)
   B.   The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized, instructed and
empowered to execute any and all deeds of blocks or fractions thereof situated
in the cemetery, yet unsold, which shall be prepared for execution by the
superintendent of the cemetery; and such conveyances, executed and acknowledged
as law directs and attested by the seal of the city, shall convey to the
several grantees, their heirs and assigns, all the rights, title and interest
of the city in and to said real estate, excepting such reservations as shall be
expressed in said deeds of conveyance. (1925 Code § 15-7)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION:
3-8-1: Jennie Marr Dunaway Memorial Park
3-8-2: Camping At Virginia Waterworks Park
3-8-3: Prohibited Acts In All Parks
3-8-4: Motorboats On Virginia Reservoir
3-8-1: JENNIE MARR DUNAWAY MEMORIAL PARK:
   A.   Established: On lands now owned by the city in use for park and public
playground purposes, and on any hereafter acquired lands, there is hereby
established and created the "Jennie Marr Dunaway Memorial park", which shall be
supported and maintained from funds accruing from the gifts provided by the
Honorable William T. Gordley, deceased, in his trust and by his will to the
city. (Ord., 6-7-1971)
   B.   Park Board:
      1.   Created: A park board consisting of seven (7) members is hereby
created to exercise the general supervision, operation and control of the
"Jennie Marr Dunaway Memorial park", and the playground facilities and
activities therein. (Ord., 7-3-1989; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Appointment And Terms: The members of the park board shall be
appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, their term
of office to be for a period of three (3) years from the date of their
appointment; except, the first members appointed shall determine by lot among
themselves their respective terms to serve as follows: three (3) for three (3)
years and two (2) for two (2) years. (Ord., 7-3-1989)
   C.   Fiscal Year; Annual Budget: Commencing in the year 2006, the fiscal
year of the "Jennie Marr Dunaway Memorial park" shall coincide with that of the
city, that being May 1 through April 30 of the following year. The annual
budget setting forth expected receipts and proposed expenditures shall be filed
with the city clerk on or before the February 1 preceding each fiscal year that
said budget will be in effect. Said budget shall be subject to the approval of
the city council. (Ord. 05-04, 11-14-2005; amd. 2009 Code)
3-8-2: CAMPING AT VIRGINIA WATERWORKS PARK:
Anyone camping at the Virginia waterworks park will comply with all rules and
will leave at the end of a seven (7) day period unless prior arrangements have
been made with the mayor and public works director. (Ord., 9-8-1997)
3-8-3: PROHIBITED ACTS IN ALL PARKS:
   A.   Posting Bills: No person shall post or otherwise affix any bills,
notices or other paper upon any structure or thing within the parks or public
grounds of the city nor upon any of the gates or enclosures thereof; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not be construed so as to prevent the
corporate authorities from posting trespass and other signs along or within
said parks. (1925 Code § 32-19; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Animals: Neither cattle, horses, swine nor other animals shall be
turned into or allowed to go at large in any park or public grounds of the
city. (1925 Code § 32-18)
   C.   Firearms And Missiles: All persons are forbidden to carry firearms or
throw stones or other missiles within any of the public parks. (1925 Code § 32-
18; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Trespassing On Public Parks; Damage To Property: No person shall walk
or go upon the grass in any park or walk or go into or through such park except
upon the walks, nor sit or lie upon such park, except upon the seats provided
by the city when warning signs have been posted therein, nor injure or in any
manner interfere with or disturb any tree, flower or shrub or any other thing
in such park, nor injure, cut or deface any seat, tree, lamp or other thing in
such park under a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1925 Code § 28-31; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
3-8-4: MOTORBOATS ON VIRGINIA RESERVOIR:
It is in the best interests of the city to promote the recreational use of the
Virginia reservoir and its surrounding lands owned by the city. Motorized
boating will be allowed on the Virginia reservoir; however, such motorized
boating shall be restricted to boats with motors that do not exceed ten (10)
rated horsepower. (Ord., 4-1999)
TITLE 4
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES; GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
4-1-1-1: Amendments
4-1-2: Building Permits
4-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Codes Adopted: The following codes, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., are hereby adopted as the Building Codes of the City for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Codes
on file in the office of the City are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
International Building Code, 2006 edition.
International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition.
International Fire Code, 2006 edition.
International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition.
International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition.
International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition.
International Property Maintenance Code of 2015.
International Residential Code, 2006 edition.
Life Safety Code, 2006 edition, (NFPA 101).
National Electrical Code, 2002 edition. (2009 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-03, 8-14-
2017)
   B.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of each of the codes adopted in
subsection A of this section are on file in the Office of the City Clerk for
public use and inspection.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of the Building Codes
adopted in subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2009 Code)
4-1-1-1: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   International Property Maintenance Code:
      1.   Adoption: That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in
the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Virginia, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Virginia, in the State of Illinois for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Virginia are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Amendments: The following sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code of 2015 are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: "City of Virginia"
Section 103.4. The phrase, "member of the board of appeals" is deleted
Section 103.5. Insert: "Not Applicable"
Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows: "Violation penalties. Any person,
owner or operator who shall violate this Code or maintain any property in
violation of any provision of this Code, or fail to comply with any provision
therewith, with any of the requirements thereof, or fail to comply or abide
with any notice or order issued hereunder, shall be prosecuted by the City
Attorney in the appropriate circuit court having jurisdiction and venue. The
fines for any violation shall range from $100.00 to $750.00, plus applicable
court costs and attorneys' fees. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense for which a fine may
be imposed."
Section 107.2(5) is deleted, and in its place the following shall be inserted:
"That failure to take corrective action may result in legal action being taken
at which time the property owner will have a right to a trial pursuant to the
Illinois Supreme Court rules governing municipal ordinance violations,
including the right to present evidence, and the right to confront and cross
examine witnesses".
Section 109.6 is deleted, and in its place the following shall be inserted:
"Legal Recourse. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon filing of
proper pleadings in the appropriate Circuit Court, be afforded a hearing as
provided by law."
Section 111, Means of Appeal, be deleted in its entirety
Section 112.4. Insert: "$100"; "$750"
Section 302.4. Insert: "Eight (8) inches"
Section 304.14 Insert: "May 1 to September 30"
Section 602.3. Insert: "October 1 to April 1"
Section 602.4. Insert: "October 1 to April 1"
That any other references in the International Property Maintenance Code to an
appeal or Board of Appeals is hereby deleted and/or stricken, and the effect of
such references is hereby nullified.
(Ord. 2017-03, 8-14-2017)
4-1-2: BUILDING PERMITS 1 :
   A.   Construction Of Buildings: No building of any kind may be constructed
in the City unless the owner or builder first obtains a building permit from
the City. Applications for said permits shall be made in writing and filed with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer on forms available at City Hall. (Ord., 6-1-
1959; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Demolition Of Buildings: When any owner of property within the City
seeks to remove, demolish or destroy any building or structure located upon
such owner's property, said property owner shall first obtain a building permit
for such work. This subsection shall apply to the removal of structures which
have been damaged by fire, wind or other catastrophe. (Ord., 12-6-1982; amd.
2009 Code)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2009 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-3-2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Compliance With Provisions
4-2-2: Base Lines Established
4-2-3: Manner Of Numbering
4-2-4: Designation Of Numbers
4-2-5: Assignment Of Numbers; Specifications
4-2-6: Numbering Required
4-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
The numbering of all houses, buildings and stores of the city fronting on the
public streets shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(1925 Code § 36-1)
4-2-2: BASE LINES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   North and South Front Street shall constitute the base of all streets
or parts of streets running easterly and westerly therefrom, and East and West
Springfield Street shall constitute a base for all streets or parts of streets
running northerly and southerly therefrom. (1925 Code § 36-1; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   All streets or parts of streets extending northerly from East and West
Springfield Street shall be designated respectively by the prefix "North" to
the names of such streets or parts of streets. All streets or parts of streets
extending easterly from North and South Front Street shall be designated
respectively by the prefix "East" to the names of such streets or parts of
streets. All streets or parts of such streets extending westerly from said
North and South Front Street shall be known and designated by the prefix "West"
for such streets or parts of streets. (1925 Code § 36-2; amd. 2009 Code)
4-2-3: MANNER OF NUMBERING:
On all streets running northerly and southerly, the first building, store or
residence on either side of said East and West Springfield Street shall be
numbered one hundred (100) and increasing toward the north and south at the
rate of one hundred (100) numbers to each and every block; the even numbers to
be placed on the westerly side and the odd numbers to be placed on the easterly
side of said streets. On all streets running east and west, the first building,
store or residence on either side of said North and South Front Street shall be
numbered one hundred (100) and increasing toward the east and west at the rate
of one hundred (100) numbers to each and every block; the even numbers to be
placed on the south side and the odd numbers to be placed on the north side of
said streets. (1925 Code § 36-3; amd. 2009 Code)
4-2-4: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS:
There shall be one number for every twenty feet (20') in each block; provided,
that each residence need not have more than one number for each street on which
it abuts, and no store or other building more than one number for each main
entrance for each street on which it abuts. It shall be the duty of the
committee on streets, alleys and lights to prepare or cause to be prepared,
from time to time, maps of the several streets showing the number of lots,
buildings, stores and residences, which map shall be filed in the office of the
city clerk, and the general public shall have the right to inspect the same at
any and all convenient times. (1925 Code § 36-4)
4-2-5: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the 911 board to assign or have assigned to each
building, store or residence its proper number and, on demand, furnish each
owner or occupant of a building, store or residence, or such person that may be
employed in the numbering of buildings, stores or residences, with the
necessary information as to the number belonging to each building, store or
residence. Each of the figures of every number shall not be less than two
inches (2") in height, being so marked as to be easily and distinctly read.
(1925 Code § 36-5; amd. 2009 Code)
4-2-6: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
   A.   All owners or occupants of buildings, stores or residences now erected
or which may be hereafter erected within the city are hereby required to number
their buildings, stores or residences in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, and any owner or occupant of any building, store or residence now
erected or hereafter to be erected who shall fail to number said building,
store or residence as aforesaid, within ten (10) days after receiving notice of
the number assigned to said building, store or residence or who shall number
any building, store or residence otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (1925 Code § 36-6; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
   B.   Any person now having on a building, store or residence another number
than the one required by this chapter may, upon return of his number to the
city clerk, procure the number which properly belongs to his building, store or
residence. (1925 Code § 36-7; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Base Flood Elevation
4-3-4: Duties Of The Zoning Officer
4-3-5: Development Permit
4-3-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
4-3-7: Protecting Buildings
4-3-8: Subdivision Requirements
4-3-9: Public Health And Other Standards
4-3-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
4-3-11: Variances
4-3-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-3-13: Penalty
4-3-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-3-15: Application Fee
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city of
Virginia by the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
4-3-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT:
    A.   Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Virginia, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Virginia or that may be annexed
into the city of Virginia, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the city of Virginia are generally identified as such on
panel number(s) 170024-0204 and 170024-0225 of the countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cass County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and
dated September 29, 2010. Floodplain also includes those areas of known
flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Cass County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Virginia or that may be
annexed into the city of Virginia are generally identified as such on the flood
insurance rate map prepared for Cass County by the federal emergency management
agency and dated September 29, 2010.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodways for each of the floodplains of the city of Virginia shall
be according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   C.   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Clear Creek shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance
study of Cass County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and
dated September 29, 2010.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cass
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   C.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Cass County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city of Virginia, or that may be annexed into the city of Virginia, shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
Cass County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
September 29, 2010. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER:
The zoning officer shall be responsible for the general administration of this
chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under
the jurisdiction of the city of Virginia meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the zoning officer shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
4-3-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-3-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-3-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-3-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
4-3-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-3-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
4-3-13 of this chapter, as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall not issue
a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the zoning
officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher
than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the
date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map,
is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The zoning officer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
   D.   The zoning officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity.
   E.   The zoning officer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         a.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
         b.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         c.   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         d.   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         e.   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         f.   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3:
         a.   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         a.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         b.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         c.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         d.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         e.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         f.   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         a.   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limit established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         b.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
         c.   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         d.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         e.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         f.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         g.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         h.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         i.   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will
minimize obstruction to flow.
         j.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
         a.   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            (1)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            (2)   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
            (3)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            (4)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            (5)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            (6)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         a.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         b.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity
of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures.
         c.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         d.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         a.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the
river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         b.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         c.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act 1 , shall be provided
with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         d.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         a.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         b.   In addition to the materials listed in subsection A8a of this
section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas
provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         c.   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 2 .
         d.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         e.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         f.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         g.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
         h.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         i.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         j.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         k.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         l.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         a.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         b.   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         c.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and
         d.   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         e.   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of the bank of the stream channel.
         f.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         g.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure
shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         h.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         a.   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         b.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         c.   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         d.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         e.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         a.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure, and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         b.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         c.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         d.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         e.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         a.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         b.   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         c.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         d.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         e.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that
the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition number
3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
         f.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         g.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         h.   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as
defined by the environmental protection act 3 .
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5.
3 1. 415 ILCS 5.
4-3-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
4-3-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
4-3-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet (4') at any point.
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   E.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city of Virginia shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-3-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-
2010)
4-3-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Virginia shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals
for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council
of Virginia. The city council of Virginia may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
chapter.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   The zoning officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protections standards of section
4-3-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Virginia or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Virginia city attorney
may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists.
The Virginia city attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Virginia shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Virginia shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
   B.   The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The city attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the zoning board of appeals
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Virginia from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-
2010)
4-3-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Virginia to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 10-04, 6-14-2010)
4-3-15: APPLICATION FEE:
In addition to any and all other applicable fees which may be required by this
code or by law, all applicants for variances and zoning changes shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) at the
time of making application to help defer part of the costs incurred by the city
in considering the application. No request for variance or zoning change shall
be considered unless the foregoing fee is paid. (Ord. 14-07, 8-11-2014)
TITLE 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Created
5-1-2: Meetings; Elected Positions
5-1-3: Duties Of Fire Chief
5-1-4: Duties Of Secretary
5-1-5: Treasurer
5-1-6: Duties Of Department
5-1-7: Failure To Obey Orders
5-1-8: Use Of, Damage To Equipment
5-1-9: Traffic Regulations
5-1-10: Fire Protection Services
5-1-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a fire department consisting of a fire
chief, two (2) assistant fire chiefs, a secretary, a treasurer and such members
of the department as may from time to time be determined and appointed by the
members of the fire department. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-2: MEETINGS; ELECTED POSITIONS:
The fire department shall hold monthly meetings on the last Tuesday of each
month and shall, on the last Tuesday of each May during the last year of any
term, elect a fire chief, two (2) assistant fire chiefs, a secretary and a
treasurer, for a three (3) year period. Said officers shall qualify and take
office on the last Tuesday of the month following their election. In the event
any person so elected is unable or unwilling to serve for any reason, the fire
department shall, on the last Tuesday of any month in which said elected
officer becomes unable to serve, elect a replacement to said office for the
balance of the term for which said original officer was elected. (Ord., 3-5-
1990)
5-1-3: DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Upon taking office and at the regular meeting held on the last Tuesday
of June of each year, the fire chief shall appoint such enginemen, laddermen,
hosemen, nozzlemen, and hydrantmen, and make such other appointments and
prescribe such duties as may be necessary and proper in the organization and
effective operation of the fire department during that year.
   B.   The fire chief shall have the control and supervision, subject to the
orders and directions of the city council, of the fire department and all fire
apparatus and equipment belonging to the city. In case of fire, the fire chief
and his assistants, in their order of rank, shall take command at such fire,
and the officer highest in rank shall take command of the fire department and
direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best
manner possible; and when it may be necessary for the protection of other
property to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command may
cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner
possible. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-4: DUTIES OF SECRETARY:
The secretary shall keep a record of all meetings of the company and the
attendance of the members, a record of all fires and the attendance of the
members at such fires, and during the last week of March of each year, file
with the city clerk a full report of such record of attendance and fires, which
said report shall be made under oath. He shall also keep such other records,
make such reports and keep and furnish such statistics as may be required of
him by law. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-5: TREASURER:
   A.   Bond: Before taking office, the treasurer shall execute and file with
the city clerk a sufficient bond to the city, to be approved by the mayor and
city council, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties under this
chapter. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Duties: The treasurer shall:
      1.   Receive all monies from fundraisers and donations made to the
department, and shall pay the same, upon the order of the fire department, for
the purposes of maintenance, use and benefit of the department.
      2.   Make monthly reports to the fire department of the condition of the
funds in his hands and shall, on the second Monday of December of each year,
make a sworn report and statement to the mayor and city council of all monies
received and disbursed by him as such treasurer and the balance of monies in
his hands. The books, records and accounts of the treasurer shall be faithfully
kept and shall at all times be open to inspection and an audit of the mayor and
city council. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
      3.   At the expiration of his term of office, surrender, pay and deliver
to his successor in office all books, records, accounts and monies in his hands
as the treasurer. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-6: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   It shall be the function and duties of the fire department and every
member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires, to prevent the
occurrence or spread of fires, and to enforce all ordinances relating to the
occurrence or spread of such fires.
   B.   It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all
police officers of the city to see that the provisions of this chapter are
enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of
the provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist or refuse to obey
any such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to that end, all such
officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of police
officers. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-7: FAILURE TO OBEY ORDERS:
Any firefighter in attendance at a fire who shall neglect or refuse to obey the
orders of the officer in command at such fire shall, upon conviction, be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
5-1-8: USE OF, DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Private Use Prohibited: Whoever shall use any fire engine, hose, cart
or any other apparatus belonging to the city for any private purpose, other
than the extinguishment of fires, or whoever shall remove the same or any part
thereof from its place of deposit or, having the control thereof, shall permit
such engine, hose, cart or other apparatus to be used for any private purposes
other than aforesaid shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Tampering With, Damage To Equipment: Whoever shall wilfully or
negligently break, deface or in any manner injure any fire engine, hose
equipment or other fire apparatus belonging to the city or shall remove any
screw, bolt, nut or part of any such engine or other apparatus or in any manner
interfere with the working or use of the same when being used by the proper
person or authority shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus the cost of replacement of equipment. (10-23-1937;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
5-1-9: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Following Fire Apparatus; Parking Near Fires: The driver of any
vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet
(500') or stop such vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of any fire
apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
   B.   Driving Over Fire Hose: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to drive any automobile, truck or other vehicle over or across any line of hose
in use or lying across any street in the city, and any violator thereof shall,
upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord., 10-23-1937; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
5-1-10: FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES:
   A.   Services Established:
      1.   The city fire department is authorized to provide fire protection
services of every kind, nature and circumstance to persons who may from time to
time subscribe to said fire protection services from the city upon terms and
conditions as may be from time to time set forth by the city council.
      2.   The fire department is expressly authorized to cooperate with
neighboring communities to the city in fire protection efforts when called for
assistance by said neighboring communities. (Ord., 3-5-1984)
   B.   Fees:
      1.   There shall be a subscription fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
property annually for fire service outside the corporate limits of the city
which will be due the city on or before May 31 of each calendar year. There
shall also be a seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) fee each time the fire
department fights fire or related services on any subscriber's property outside
the corporate city limits. In addition to paying the annual subscription fee,
any subscriber must pay the seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) fee levied for
firefighting or related services within ninety (90) days of the service which
was provided in order to be eligible for such rate.
      2.   If an owner of rural property does not pay a subscription fee or if
a subscriber does not pay the fee levied for services provided within ninety
(90) days of the services being provided, there shall be levied a rural fire
fee in the amount of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for
firefighting or related services performed by the fire department outside the
corporate limits. (Ord. 07-04, 5-14-2007)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PROTECTION IN BUILDINGS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Compliance With Fire Safety Standards
5-2-2: Public Buildings
5-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
operate or control any building within the city unless said building meets such
fire safety standards as may be promulgated from time to time by the state fire
marshal.
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   The fire chief is hereby authorized to post and deny occupancy to
any building deemed by the fire chief to fail to meet such standards as
promulgated from time to time by the state fire marshal. The substance of said
notice shall be as follows:
You are hereby notified that this building is in violation of fire safety
standards pursuant to regulations of the Fire Marshal of the State of Illinois
and occupancy or use of this building is hereby prohibited.
      2.   All such notices shall be personally delivered or sent by certified
mail to the owner of record and any tenant of any such building by the fire
chief. Each owner or occupant shall be given not less than three (3) days'
notice prior to the effective date denying the right to occupy said building.
(Ord., 12-7-1992)
5-2-2: PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
   A.   Exits:
      1.   Exits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate
or control any building, room or hall as a hotel, lodge room, assembly hall or
place for public meetings within the city unless said building, room or hall
shall be provided with at least two (2) exits leading therefrom to the streets
or alleys below, and said exits shall be placed so as to provide the best
possible means of egress in case of fire. (1925 Code § 21-1)
      2.   Repair And Maintenance: Every person or persons owning, operating
and controlling any building, room or hall as a lodge room, assembly hall or
place for public meetings within the city and the directors or trustees of all
schools shall, at all times, keep stairways leading from the exits to the
buildings, rooms or halls in good repair and shall provide handrails for all
such stairways. (1925 Code § 21-2)
      3.   Supervision: All exits required to be placed and constructed by
virtue of this subsection shall be so placed under the direction of the fire
chief and the city council. (1925 Code § 21-6; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Theaters:
      1.   Exits And Railings: It shall be the duty of every person owning any
building operated and managed as a theater within the city to provide at least
two (2) exits leading from the balcony to the floor below in said building and
to provide at least two (2) exits from the main floor of said building to the
street below. It shall further be the duty of said owner to provide with
handrails all stairways leading from said exits to said buildings and all exit
doors to swing outward. (1925 Code § 21-4)
      2.   Fireproof Curtains: It shall be the duty of every person owning any
building operated and managed as a theater within the city to provide a
fireproof curtain to be hung in position at or in the proscenium opening of the
stage of said theater, and it shall be the duty of said owners to see that the
said fireproof curtain shall be kept in such good condition that it shall be at
all times available for use in case of fire. (1925 Code § 21-5; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce the
provisions of this section, and he shall make complaint before the proper court
of record in the city in all cases wherein said provisions have been violated.
(1925 Code § 21-8; amd. 1981 Code)
   D.   Penalty: Whomsoever shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (1925 Code §
21-7; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Stoves And Fireplaces
5-3-2: Use Of Combustibles
5-3-3: Hours Of Open Burning
5-3-4: Burning Trash
5-3-5: Fireworks
5-3-1: STOVES AND FIREPLACES:
   A.   Unsafe Conditions: Whenever, in the opinion of the fire chief, any
stove, fireplace or other appurtenance for the conducting of smoke or heat from
any place may be in such a state as to render the keeping of fire therein
unsafe, he is required to order the occupants of the building in which the same
may be connected to discontinue the making of fire therein, and to make all
necessary and proper repairs to render the keeping of fire therein safe in the
opinion of the fire chief or the person inspecting the same; and if any person
shall make a fire therein and neglect to make such necessary repairs, after
being ordered so to do as aforesaid, the occupant of any such building shall
forfeit and pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for every twenty four (24)
hours the same may remain without such repairs being made and used as
aforesaid. Provided, however, that any person feeling himself aggrieved by the
decision of or order of the fire chief or person making the inspection, as the
case may be, may appeal therefrom to the city council at its first meeting
after such notice as aforesaid; but in all cases, the order of the fire chief
or the person making the inspection to discontinue the making of fire therein
shall be complied with until the final decision of the city council on such
appeal. (1925 Code § 20-1; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Stovepipes Secured:
      1.   All stovepipes shall be securely put up so as not to be in danger of
falling and shall lead and be closely fitted into closed brick or stone flue or
chimney. If any stovepipe shall lead otherwise than into a chimney or flue, it
shall be separated at least three inches (3") from any wood or other
combustible material by a double circle of tin, zinc or sheet iron connected
together with like metal with air holes through the connecting metal between
the pipe and wood.
      2.   All stoves put up or used without aprons or hearths shall be placed
on a platform of brick, zinc or other incombustible material extending far
enough around the same to prevent the fire from falling upon the floor; and if
set within eighteen inches (18") of the woodwork of any wall, the walls shall
be protected with a zinc or other incombustible covering so as to effectually
prevent the taking of fire from the stove. (1925 Code § 20-4)
   C.   Required In Wood Buildings: No person shall build, make or kindle, or
cause to be built, made or kindled, any fire in any frame, plank or other
temporary shed of lumber, or house made of lumber, without having a chimney
stove or vault in which to build, make or kindle such fire. (1925 Code § 20-6)
5-3-2: USE OF COMBUSTIBLES 1 :
No person shall boil any pitch, tar, resin, turpentine or other inflammable
substance within the corporate limits of the city unless within an open space
at least twenty feet (20') from any building or other property that might be
injured thereby. (1925 Code § 20-5)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  6-16-3C2 of this code.
5-3-3: HOURS OF OPEN BURNING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep burning any fire outside of an
enclosed building after the hour of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Violations of this
section shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord., 8-
6-1990; amd. 2009 Code)
5-3-4: BURNING TRASH 1 :
   A.   Definition: Trash materials include paper, wood or any other material
that is capable of being burned and is no longer intended by the owner thereof
to be used by him in the further conduct of his business. (Ord., 11-3-1958;
amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Hours: No burning of trash materials or leaves shall be allowed after
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. within the city limits. (1981 Code; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Incinerators:
      1.   Location: No incinerator for the burning of trash materials shall be
located within ten feet (10') of any building or other property.
      2.   Inspection And Approval: No incinerator shall be put in use until it
is first inspected and approved by the fire chief. Thereafter, it will be at
all times subject to inspections as deemed necessary by the fire chief. The
operation of such incinerators shall be under the direction, supervision and
control of the fire chief. (Ord., 11-3-1958; amd. 1981 Code)
   D.   Business District: Trash materials shall not be burned at any time in
the business district within one block in all directions of the public square
except in an incinerator constructed of bricks, concrete, steel, wire or other
fireproof material and must be so built to prevent fires or sparks from
spreading in any direction in a manner that will endanger any building or
adjoining property of any kind. (Ord., 11-3-1958; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   E.   Penalty: Any violation of this section will subject the offender to a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord., 11-3-1958)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  6-16-3C2 of this code.
5-3-5: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Discharge Prohibited: No person shall fire, discharge or set off within
the limits of the city any rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib, or other fireworks
or anything containing any substance of an explosive nature, under the penalty
of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. (1925 Code §
20-8; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Sale Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to store or to
keep for sale within the corporate limits of the city any rocket, cracker,
torpedo, squib or other fireworks or anything containing any substance of an
explosive nature to be used for celebration purposes. Any person violating this
subsection shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day such explosives are so stored or kept for sale. (Ord.,
9-3-1929; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
TITLE 6
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; JURISDICTION; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
6-1-1: Title
6-1-2: Adoption Of Provisions
6-1-3: Purpose And Intent
6-1-4: Jurisdiction
6-1-5: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
6-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF VIRGINIA ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-1-2: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS:
In order to conserve the value of property in the city, and to the end that
building development may be directed to the best advantage of the entire
community, that adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers
may be lessened or avoided, and that the public health, safety, comfort, morals
and welfare may otherwise be promoted in accordance with a well considered plan
for the use and development of all property throughout the city, the city
hereby adopts the Virginia zoning ordinance. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-1-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: This title is adopted for the following purposes:
      1.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort
and general welfare of the people.
      2.   To divide the city into zones or districts restricting and
regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residential, business,
manufacturing and other specified uses.
      3.   To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business and manufacturing areas within the city, and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas.
      4.   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property.
      5.   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light
and air, and to protect the public health.
      6.   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed
for residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas.
      7.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform.
      8.   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts.
      9.   To prevent additions or alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the following imposed
restrictions and limitations:
         a.   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading of commercial vehicles.
         b.   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general
welfare.
         c.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them.
         d.   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout
the city.
         e.   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of desirable development in each district.
         f.   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
   B.   Intent: This title provides for the dividing of the city into districts
for the purpose of classifying, regulating and restricting the location of
trades, industries and commercial enterprises, and the location of buildings
arranged, intended and designed for specified uses; of regulating and limiting
the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected; of classifying, regulating
and determining the area of front, rear and side yards, courts and other open
spaces about buildings; and of regulating and limiting the intensity of the use
of land and lot areas within the city; creating a board of zoning appeals;
defining certain terms used in this title; providing penalties for its
violation; and designating the time when this title shall take effect. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-1-4: JURISDICTION:
The jurisdiction of this title shall include all lands and waters within the
corporate limits of the city and within one and one- half (11/2) miles thereof.
All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established
hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings
occurring hereafter, and all enlargements or additions to existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this title which are
applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall
be located. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-1-5: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions: Where the conditions imposed by any provision
of this title upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provision of this title, or any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   C.   Effect On Easements Or Covenants: This title is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement; provided, that
where the regulations of this title are more restrictive (or impose higher
standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants, or other private
agreements, the requirements of this title shall govern.
   D.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
title is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
6-2-2: General Definitions
6-2-3: Performance Standards Definitions
6-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular, where the context requires.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "tract";
and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed
for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   E.   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or less, the integral foot next below shall be
taken.
   F.   Any words not defined in this chapter shall be construed in their
general accepted meanings, as defined in the most recent publication of
Webster's Dictionary. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-2-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE): A residential building or portion
thereof, other than a motel, apartment hotel or hotel, containing lodging rooms
for accommodation of three (3) or more persons who are not members of the
keeper's family, and where lodging or meals or both are provided by
prearrangement and for definite periods, at a definite prearranged price.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, machinery or materials.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the
finished lot grade along the front yard face of the structure to the highest
point of flat roofs; to the mean height level between the eaves and ridges of
gable, hip and pitch roofs; or to the deck line of mansard roofs.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The extensively developed and evolving plan, also called a
"master plan", adopted by the planning commission.
CONSERVATION: Preservation of land, water, flora, fauna and cultural artifacts
in their original state.
CONSUMER SERVICE: Sale of any service to individual customers for their own
personal benefit, enjoyment or convenience. For example, "consumer services"
include the provision of personal services such as beautician and barbering
services; the provision of lodging, entertainment, specialized instruction,
financial services, transportation, laundry and dry cleaning services; and all
other similar services.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as a
residence or sleeping place, but not including boarding or lodging houses,
motels, tents or cabins.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Services provided by public and private utilities necessary
for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure.
These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam,
water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage and communication systems and
accessories thereto, such as posts, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults,
culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift
stations, hydrants, etc., but not including buildings.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related to each other by blood, marriage or
legal adoption, or other means of legal custody living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than three (3) persons, who need not
be related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, or other means of legal
custody living together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a single
dwelling unit; in either case, exclusive of usual domestic servants.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories
under roof measured from the exterior limits or faces of a building or
structure. Areas below grade and attached accessory structures are not
included.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building, or an accessory portion of a principal
building, enclosed on at least three (3) sides, which is intended for and used
to store a private passenger motor vehicle(s), and no more than one three-
fourths (3/4) ton or lesser sized truck.
GRADE: The highest level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession customarily carried on by
an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to the use
of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. The "home occupation" shall be
carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building accessory
thereto, and only by members of the family occupying the premises and one
person outside the family. No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the
premises, except such as is produced by the occupation on the premises, and no
mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than
such as is customarily incidental to domestic use. There shall be no exterior
display, no exterior sign except as allowed by the sign regulations for the
district in which such "home occupation" is located, no exterior storage of
material, no other exterior indication of the "home occupation" or variation
from the residential character of the principal building, and no offensive
odors, vibrations, noise, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be produced.
Offices, clinics, doctors' offices, hospitals, tearooms, restaurants, dress
shops, millinery shops, tourist homes, animal hospitals and kennels, among
others, shall not be deemed to be "home occupations". Moreover, no
nonresidential use which creates extraordinary traffic in the neighborhood
shall qualify as a "home occupation".
HOTEL: An establishment containing lodging rooms for occupancy by transient
guests, but not including a boarding or rooming house. Such an establishment
provides customary hotel services such as maid and bellboy services, furnishing
of and laundry of linens used in the lodging rooms and central desk with
telephone.
JUNKYARD: Any land or structure used for a salvaging operation including, among
other things, the storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal and
discarded materials, and the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
LOADING AREA: A completely off street space or berth on the same lot for the
loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to
a public street or alley.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms, each room providing sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one
"lodging room".
LOT: A single parcel of land which may be legally described as such, or two (2)
or more adjacent numbered lots or parts of such lots in a recorded subdivision
plat having principal frontage on a street which comprises a site occupied by,
or intended for occupancy by, one principal building or principal use, together
with accessory buildings and uses, yards and other open spaces required by this
title.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) streets at their juncture, when the
interior angle formed is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES AND AREA: The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land, and the
total area lying within such boundaries.
LOT, RECORDED: A lot designated on a subdivision plat or deed duly recorded
pursuant to statute in the county recorder's office. A recorded lot may not
coincide with a zoning lot.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a parcel of land measured at the rear of the specified
street yard.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land composed of one or more recorded lots occupied or
to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or principal use or uses
along with permitted accessory buildings or uses, meeting all the requirements
for the area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setback, and any other
requirements set forth in this title.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of lodging rooms, each with an
individual bathroom, and designed for use by transient guests. A "motel"
furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering of
linens used in the lodging rooms, telephone and secretarial or desk service,
and the use and upkeep of furniture.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully
existing at the effective date hereof, which was designed, erected or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of
the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date hereof, and which does not now conform with the use regulations
of the district in which it is located.
NONRETAIL COMMERCIAL: Commercial sales and services to customers who intend
resale of the products or merchandise sold or handled. For example, "nonretail
commercial" includes wholesale activities, warehousing, trucking terminals and
similar commercial enterprises.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable
persons in which three (3) or more persons, not of the immediate family, are
received, kept or provided with food and shelter and care for compensation, but
not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to
the diagnosis, treatment or care of the sick or injured.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or selling
merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. Such merchandise
includes, but is not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, monuments and trailers.
PARKING SPACE: A graded, all-weather surface area of not less than two hundred
(200) square feet in area, either enclosed or open, for the parking of a motor
vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Criteria established to control noise, odor, smoke,
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, vibration or fire and explosion
hazards generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land initially under single ownership
or control which contains two (2) or more principal buildings and one or more
principal use(s), planned and constructed as a unified development.
RETAIL SALES: Sale of any product or merchandise to customers for their own
personal consumption or use, not for resale.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering
such refuse with earth to a depth of two feet (2') or more on the top surface,
and one foot (1') or more on the sides of the bank.
SERVICE STATION, FILLING STATION, GAS STATION: Any building or premises whose
principal use is the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any
motor vehicle fuel or oils. Open storage shall be limited to no more than four
(4) vehicles stored for minor repair bearing current license plates. Such
storage shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours' duration, and shall not permit
the storage of wrecked vehicles.
SETBACK, BUILDING: The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of a
building or structure and the front lot line.
SIGNS: Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems,
devices, designs, trade names or trademarks by which information is made known
and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association,
corporation, profession, business, commodity or product, and which is visible
from any public street, highway or pedestrianway.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure such as
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any substantial
change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. A sign, billboard or other advertising device detached or projected
shall be construed to be a "structure".
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity which serves as an
intrastate, an intracounty or interstate highway, or as an arterial trafficway
between various major points of origin/destination. A "thoroughfare" affords a
primary means of access to abutting properties except from "thoroughfares"
classified as freeways or other limited access routes not containing frontage
roads.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use subordinate to the principal use and located on the same
premises serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use.
Residential accessory uses may include storage of household goods, parking
areas, gardening, servants' quarters, private swimming pools and private
emergency shelters.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in any
particular district or districts.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards, if any, of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. It may be either a permitted or conditional use.
UTILITIES: Public and private facilities such as water wells, water and sewage
pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication transmission
lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and
telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas regulation stations, but
not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, warehouses, shops
and storage yards.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this title. (See
section
6-18-1 of this title for illustration.)
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which adjoins a street or thoroughfare.
YARD, FRONT (SETBACK): A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot
line and the front yard line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to
another lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD, REAR (SETBACK): A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line
and the rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE (SETBACK): A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard
line, side yard line and side lot line. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. Ord., 10-4-1982;
2009 Code)
6-2-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS DEFINITIONS:
CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT: A lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under
prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will propagate a
flame. The tag closed cup tester shall be authoritative for liquids having a
flashpoint below one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F). The
Pensky-Martens tester shall be authoritative for liquids having flashpoints
between one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F) and three hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (300°F).
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity or loudness of sound. Sound
level meters employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in
"decibels". A "decibel" is technically defined as twenty (20) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the sound pressure in microbars
to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar.
DISPLACEMENT (EARTH): The amplitude or intensity of an earthborn vibration
measured in inches. The "displacement" or amplitude is one-half (1/2) the total
earth movement.
EARTHBORN VIBRATIONS: A cyclic movement of the earth due to the propagation of
mechanical energy.
EQUIVALENT OPACITY: The shade on the Ringelmann chart that most closely
corresponds to the density of smoke, other than black or gray.
FREE BURNING: A rate of combustion described by material which burns actively
and easily supports combustion. Examples: coal, charcoal.
FREQUENCY (VIBRATION AND SOUND): The number of oscillations per second involved
in a vibration or sound.
IMPACT NOISE: A short duration sound which is incapable of being accurately
measured on a sound level meter.
IMPULSE: Discrete vibration pulsations occurring no more often than one per
second.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: A material which will not ignite nor actively support combustion
during an exposure for five (5) minutes to a temperature of one thousand two
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F).
INTENSE BURNING: A rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a
high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples: sawdust, magnesium
(powder, flaked or strips), rocket fuels.
MODERATE BURNING: A rate of combustion described by a material which supports
combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns. Examples: wood timber and logs.
OCTAVE BAND: A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies sound
according to its pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electronic frequency analyzer designed according to
standards of the American Standards Association, and used in conjunction with a
sound level meter to take measurements of sound pressure level in specific
octave bands.
ODOR THRESHOLD: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will
produce an olfactory response in a human being. "Odor thresholds" shall be
determined in accordance with ASTM method D1391-57 "Standard Method For
Measurement Of Odor In Atmospheres (Dilution Method)".
ODOROUS MATTER: Any material that produces an olfactory response among human
beings.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form, as a liquid; or solid
at outdoor ambient conditions.
PREFERRED FREQUENCIES: A set of octave bands described by the band center
frequency and standardized by the American Standards Association in ASA
standard no. S1.6-1960, "preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements".
PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS: The frequency intervals prescribed by the American
Standards Association in ASA standard 224.10-1953, "octave band filter set".
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart described by the U.S. bureau of mines in their
information circular no. 6888, upon which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray for use in estimating the light obscuration capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density or equivalent opacity of the
emission of smoke observed.
SLOW BURNING: A rate of combustion which describes materials that do not in
themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. Examples:
wood, materials with fire retardant treatments.
SMOKE: Small gasborne particles, other than water, that form a visible plume in
the air.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument for the measurement of sound pressure levels
constructed in accordance with the standards of the American Standards
Association, and calibrated in decibels.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: The intensity of sound or noise in decibels.
THREE COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: An instrument or complement of instruments
which records earthborn vibration simultaneously in three (3) mutually
perpendicular directions.
TOXIC MATTER: Materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement of the ground, measured in inches. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-3-1: Zoning Enforcement Officer
6-3-2: Building Permit
6-3-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
6-3-4: Exemptions From Permit Or Certificate
6-3-5: Amendments
6-3-6: Violations
6-3-7: Penalty
6-3-1: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   Designated: The city council shall designate a zoning enforcement
officer or inspectors by ordinance.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The zoning enforcement officer shall have the
initial responsibility and authority for the literal interpretation and
enforcement of this title and all other applicable ordinances, regulations and
codes, and he may enter upon and inspect any premises in the performance of
these duties. The zoning enforcement officer shall refer certain matters
calling for original interpretations to the board of appeals, as directed by
various provisions of this title. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Compensation: The zoning enforcement officer's salary is one thousand
eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per annum, to be paid in monthly installments
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month for each month said individual
serves as zoning enforcement officer, effective the date hereof. (Ord. 09-05,
6-8-2009)
6-3-2: BUILDING PERMIT 1 :
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to commence construction or
alteration of any structure until the zoning enforcement officer has issued a
building permit authorizing such work.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   The applicant shall submit application to the zoning enforcement
officer including a plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of all
structures to be constructed or altered and all existing structures, the use of
all structures, yard depths and any other information necessary for determining
conformance with this title.
      2.   Applications for industrial building permits shall include
certification by an engineer or architect registered in Illinois that the
applicable performance standards will be met.
      3.   The zoning enforcement officer shall keep a permanent file of all
applications with accompanying plans and all permits issued. (Ord., 4-1-1973;
amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Fee: Fees for building permits within the corporate limits of the city
of Virginia are hereby established in accordance with the following schedule:
      RESIDENTIAL BUILDING AND
      COMMERCIAL BUILDING RATES
Value Fee
Value                    Fee
Up to $5,000.00          $ 30.00
$5,000.00 - $10,000.00   40.00
$10,001.00 - $15,000.00  50.00
$15,001.00 - $20,000.00  60.00
$20,001.00 - $25,000.00  70.00
$25,001.00 - $30,000.00  80.00
$30,001.00 - $35,000.00  90.00
$35,001.00 - $40,000.00  100.00
$40,001.00 - $45,000.00  110.00
$45,001.00 - $50,000.00  120.00
$50,001.00 - $60,000.00  150.00
$60,001.00 - $70,000.00  180.00
$70,001.00 - $80,000.00  210.00
$80,001.00 - $90,000.00  240.00
$90,001.00 - $100,000.00 270.00
Over $100,000.00         $2.00/$1,000.00 plus $270.00
 
      OTHER RATES
 Fee
                                                            Fee
Fences and awnings                                          $ 15.00
Garages (attached or unattached) (up to 720 square feet)    30.00
Garages (attached or unattached) (over 720 square feet)     40.00
Miscellaneous (not categorized)                             15.00
Open carports                                               25.00
Patio slabs                                                 25.00
Portable buildings (up to 200 square feet/under $1,500.00)  15.00
Portable buildings (over 200 square feet or over $1,500.00) 25.00
Signs (billboard)                                           100.00
Signs (commercial up to $3,000.00)                          40.00
Signs (commercial over $3,000.00)                           60.00
Signs (residential)                                         10.00
Wood decks                                                  25.00
 
      DEMOLITION PERMITS
 
                           Fee
Commercial                 $15.00
Mobile home (doublewide)   15.00
Mobile home (singlewide)   10.00
Move or remove mobile home 0.00
Residential                15.00
 
(Ord. 11-07, 6-13-2011)
   D.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: If the proposed construction or
alteration conforms with all applicable provisions of this title and all other
applicable ordinances, regulations and codes, the zoning enforcement officer
shall issue a building permit authorizing such construction or alteration. If
the proposed construction or alteration fails to conform, the zoning
enforcement officer shall refuse to issue a building permit and shall deliver
written notice to the applicant stating the reasons for the refusal. The zoning
enforcement officer shall act upon applications for building permits within one
week from the date of their submission.
   E.   Validity: The issuance of a building permit by the zoning enforcement
officer shall not waive any provision of this title.
   F.   Expiration Of Permit; Renewal: A building permit shall become void six
(6) months from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made
by that date on the construction or alteration authorized therein. A building
permit may be renewed without fee upon review by the zoning enforcement officer
before it becomes void. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   G.   Late Applications: In addition to any and all other penalties and
remedies available to the city under this code or at law, any person or entity
who fails to obtain and pay for an appropriate permit as set forth in this code
and at the rates established in subsection C of this section prior to
commencing such work to be permitted, shall submit an appropriate permit
application, together with a fee which is double the amount of the rates
established under said subsection C of this section. Nothing under this
subsection shall be construed as a waiver of any remedies available to the city
for failure of the applicant to obtain a timely permit and nothing under this
subsection shall be construed to require issuance of a permit if the same would
otherwise be prohibited by this code or existing law. (Ord. 14-08, 8-11-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-1-2 of this code.
6-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful to use any newly constructed or altered
structure or to change or expand the use of any premises, even though no
structure was constructed or altered, until the zoning enforcement officer has
issued a certificate of occupancy authorizing such use. The city council may
authorize the zoning enforcement officer to require that nonconforming uses or
all previously existing uses shall maintain valid certificates of occupancy
identifying them as nonconforming or permitted uses as applicable.
   B.   Application For Certificate:
      1.   The applicant shall notify the zoning enforcement officer in writing
of the date on which the use of any new or altered structures, or the new use
of any premises, will be ready to commence.
      2.   The zoning enforcement officer shall keep a permanent file of all
applications and all certificates issued.
   C.   Fee: The city council may establish a schedule of reasonable fees to be
charged for the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: If the newly constructed or altered
structure and the new use of premises conform with all applicable provisions of
this title and all other applicable ordinances, regulations and codes, the
zoning enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy authorizing
the use thereof. If the structure or use fails to conform, the zoning
enforcement officer shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy and shall
deliver written notice to the applicant stating the reasons for the refusal.
The zoning enforcement officer shall inspect a new structure, or the premises
for which a new use is proposed, and shall issue or refuse a certificate of
occupancy within five (5) days after the date on which the new use is ready to
commence.
   E.   Validity: The issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the zoning
enforcement officer shall not waive any provision of this title. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-3-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE:
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be required in the
following cases: (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   A.   Recurring maintenance of structures.
   B.   Installation of required improvements according to an approved
subdivision or planned development plan. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-3-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare
or the evolving comprehensive plan requires, the city council may, by
ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend, change or supplement the
regulations established by this title or amendments hereto, or approve a
planned development project. Said change or amendment shall be subject to
review by the planning commission.
   B.   Initiation: A change or amendment may be initiated by the city council,
planning commission, or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees
of property within the area proposed to be changed.
   C.   Petitions:
      1.   Petitions for any change to the district boundaries or amendments to
the regulations, other than planned development projects, shall be filed with
the city clerk, describe the premises to be rezoned or the regulations to be
amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the proposed use and
have attached the following:
         a.   Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its
dimensions, the location and classification of adjacent zoning districts and
the location and existing use of all properties within two hundred feet (200')
of the area proposed to be rezoned. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
         b.   Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within two
hundred feet (200') of the area proposed to be rezoned, and additional
information required by the planning commission or city council. (Ord., 4-1-
1973; amd. 1981 Code)
      2.   Petition for a planned development project shall be filed as a
preliminary plat, as required by the planned development procedure.
   D.   Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing upon each
request listing the time, place and change or amendments proposed and published
at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
city.
   E.   Planning Commission Recommendations: The planning commission shall
review all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate limits and
shall recommend, after holding a public hearing as prescribed in subsection D
of this section, that the petition be granted as requested.
   F.   City Council Action: After careful consideration of the planning
commission's recommendations, the city council shall vote on the passage of the
proposed change or amendment. The planning commission's recommendations may
only be overruled by three-fourths (3/4) of the full city council membership.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
   G.   Protests: In the event of a written protest against such district
change or amendment to the regulations of this title, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be
altered, is filed with the city clerk, the district change or amendment shall
not be passed except by a favorable vote of two- thirds (2/3) of the aldermen
then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be
served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed
district change or amendment and a copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any,
by certified mail at the addresses of the applicant and attorney shown in the
application for the proposed amendment. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-3-6: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land or water in
violation of any of the provisions of this title. In case of any violation, the
city council, zoning enforcement officer, planning commission or any property
owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation may institute
appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of this title. (Ord., 4-
1-1973)
6-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this
title shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation exists or
continues. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
ARTICLE A. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; APPEALS AND VARIATIONS
SECTION:
6-3A-1: Established; Purpose
6-3A-2: Membership; Appointment And Terms; Vacancies
6-3A-3: Organization
6-3A-4: Powers
6-3A-5: Appeals
6-3A-6: Variations
6-3A-7: Hearings; Notice Requirements
6-3A-1: ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby established a board of zoning appeals for the city for the
purpose of hearing appeals and applications, and granting variances and
exceptions to the provisions of this title in harmony with the purpose and
intent of this title. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-3A-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; VACANCIES:
The board of zoning appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the city council. The city council may provide for the
appointment of a board of appeals consisting of seven (7) members to serve
respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years,
one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one
for six (6) years and one for seven (7) years; the successor to each member so
appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled for
an unexpired term in the same manner as appointments for a full term. (Ord., 4-
1-1973)
6-3A-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers; Attendance Of Zoning Enforcement Officer At Meetings: A chair
shall be named at the time of appointment. A secretary shall be appointed by
the chair and shall be a member of the board. The zoning enforcement officer
shall attend all meetings for the purpose of providing technical assistance
when requested by the board. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Rules Of Procedure; Meetings: The board of zoning appeals shall
organize and adopt rules of procedure for its own government in accordance with
the provisions of this title. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair
and shall be open to the public. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Minutes And Records: Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all
actions shall be kept by the secretary showing the vote of each member upon
each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, the
reasons for the board's determination and its findings of fact. These records
shall be immediately filed in the office of the zoning enforcement officer and
shall be a public record. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Vote Required: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board
shall be necessary to correct an error; grant a variance; make an
interpretation; and permit a utility, temporary, unclassified or substituted
use. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-3A-4: POWERS:
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers:
   A.   Errors: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning
enforcement officer.
   B.   Variances: To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so
that the spirit and purpose of this title shall be observed, and the public
safety, welfare and justice secured. Use variances shall not be granted.
   C.   Interpretations: To hear and decide applications for interpretations of
this title and the boundaries of the zoning districts.
   D.   Substitutions: To hear and grant applications for substitutions of more
restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses, provided no
structural alterations are to be made. Whenever the board permits such a
substitution, the use may not thereafter be changed without application.
   E.   Unclassified Uses: To hear and grant applications for unclassified and
unspecified uses; provided, that such uses are similar in character to the
principal uses permitted in the district.
   F.   Temporary Uses: To hear and grant applications for temporary uses in
any district; provided, that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not
involve the erection of a substantial structure and are compatible with the
neighboring uses. The permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any
conditions required by the board of zoning appeals, and shall be issued for a
period not to exceed twelve (12) months. Compliance with all other provisions
of this title shall be required.
   G.   Appeals; Permits: The board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly,
modify the requirements appealed from, and may issue or direct the issuance of
a permit.
   H.   Assistance: The board may request assistance from other city officers,
departments, commissions and boards.
   I.   Oaths: The chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-3A-5: APPEALS:
Appeals from the decision of the zoning enforcement officer concerning the
literal enforcement of this title may be made by any person aggrieved, or by
any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such appeals shall be
filed with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the secretary
within forty five (45) days after the date of written notice of the decision or
order of the zoning enforcement officer. Applications may be made by the owner
or lessee of the structure, land or water to be affected at any time and shall
be filed with the secretary. Such appeals and applications shall include the
following: (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   A.   Names and addresses of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and
opposite property owners of record. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   B.   Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing all of
the information required under section
6-3-2 of this title for a building permit. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Additional information required by the board of zoning appeals.
   D.   Fee receipt from the city treasurer showing the amount received. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-3A-6: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Standards For Variations:
      1.   A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in the judgment
of the zoning board, sustains each of the following:
         a.   That the plight of the owner was not created by the owner and is
due to unique circumstances.
         b.   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   For the purpose of implementing the above standards, the zoning
board, in making its decision whenever there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which
the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the
evidence that:
         a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the regulations
were strictly enforced.
         b.   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification.
         c.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property, or any person through whom
the applicant claims title.
         d.   The granting of the variation will not be substantially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
         e.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
   B.   Conditions Of Variations: The zoning board may require such conditions
and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary
to comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize
the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood,
and to implement the general purpose and intent of this title. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-3A-7: HEARINGS; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing, give public notice thereof, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior, and shall give due notice to the parties in interest
and the zoning enforcement officer. The appellant, applicant or his agent shall
give notice to all adjoining property owners within one hundred fifty feet
(150') by certified mail at least ten (10) days prior to hearing. At the
hearing, the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: General Development Procedure
6-4-2: Use Restrictions
6-4-3: Site Restrictions
6-4-4: Group Living Facilities
6-4-1: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE:
The planning commission and the city shall continuously develop the
comprehensive plan, including the planning policies to guide future decisions.
All adopted comprehensive plan elements, in whatever degree of detail they may
embody, shall provide the basis for approval of all development under this
title, and no development shall be approved under this title which is in
conflict with any comprehensive plan elements that have been formally adopted.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-4-2: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Principal Uses: Only those principal uses specified for a district or
on a planned development plat, their essential services and the uses in this
section shall be permitted in that district.
   B.   Accessory Uses And Structures: Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in any district, but not until their principal structure is present
or under construction.
   C.   Conditional Uses And Their Accessory Uses: Conditional uses and their
accessory uses are permitted in districts as specified, but only according to
the conditional use procedure in section
6-15-3 of this title. Also, any development within five hundred feet (500') of
the existing or proposed rights of way of freeways, expressways, interstate and
controlled access trafficways, and within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights of
way shall be deemed to be conditional uses. Such development shall be
specifically reviewed by the city planning commission, as provided in section
6-15-3 of this title.
   D.   Unclassified Or Unspecified Uses: In case of uncertainty where the
zoning enforcement officer is unable to determine literally whether a use is
permitted as a principal or accessory use, he shall consult the board of zoning
appeals for an original interpretation.
   E.   Temporary Uses: Temporary uses such as real estate sales field offices
or shelters for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a
permanent structure are permitted while sales or construction is in progress.
   F.   Performance Standards: Performance standards listed in chapter 16 of
this title shall apply to all uses in all districts.
   G.   Temporary Dwellings: No structure shall be used for dwelling purposes
that does not comply with the requirements of this title or any applicable
building standards. No garage or other accessory building, trailer coach,
basement, partial or temporary structure, whether of a fixed or portable
construction, shall be erected or moved onto a lot and used for any dwelling
purposes unless authorized by the issuance of a temporary permit by the zoning
enforcement officer and satisfying all of the conditions thereof. However,
temporary usage of lots of record, either with or without dwellings, may be
permitted for wheeled vehicles designed for sleeping or camping by obtaining a
temporary permit from the zoning enforcement officer. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   H.   Mobile Homes As Dwellings: No mobile home shall be occupied as a
dwelling except when such mobile home is located in a licensed and approved
mobile home park or as otherwise herein provided. If a mobile home designed and
built for human habitation essentially complies with minimum requirements for a
dwelling, it shall be so treated if it is permanently placed on an adequate
foundation and connected to approved water and sanitary facilities. In
addition, all mobile home units shall be installed with approved skirting.
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-4-3: SITE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Soil Conditions: No land shall be used or structure erected where the
land is held unsuitable for such use or structure by the city planning
commission by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage,
adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or
bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of
the city. The planning commission, in applying the provisions of this section,
shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion
that the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an
opportunity to present evidence contesting such unsuitability, if he so
desires. Thereafter, the planning commission may affirm, modify or withdraw its
determination of unsuitability. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Drainage: The finished surface of ground areas outside the walls of any
building or structure hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be so designed
that surface water shall flow away from the building walls in such a direction
and with such a method of collection that inconvenience or damage to adjacent
properties will not result. When property is developed adjacent to existing
properties previously developed, existing grades shall have priority.
   C.   Lot Frontage And Access:
      1.   All lots shall abut upon a public thoroughfare with at least thirty
feet (30') of frontage.
      2.   Any lot of record created prior to the effective date hereof without
any frontage on a public street or way shall not be occupied unless access to a
street be provided by an easement or other right of way no less than twenty
feet (20') in width. No more than one lot shall be served by such access route.
Access to commercial, industrial or recreational uses shall not be permitted
through residential areas. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   D.   Lots To Abut Dedicated Public Ways: No building permit shall be issued
for a lot that abuts a public street dedicated to only a portion of its
proposed width and located on that side thereof from which the required
dedication has not been secured. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   E.   One Principal Structure Per Lot: Only one principal structure shall be
located, erected or moved onto any lot or parcel of land.
   F.   Private Sewer And Water: In a district where public sewerage service is
not available, the width and area of all lots shall be sufficient to permit the
use of an on site sewage disposal system designed in accordance with the local
or state board of health standards. In any district where neither a public
water service or public sewerage service is available, the width and area for
single-family lots shall be no less than one hundred feet (100') and no less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, respectively 1 . In no event shall
an open well be permitted for a source of water, nor shall privies or cesspools
be permitted as a means of sewerage disposal.
   G.   Reduction Of Joint Use: No lot, yard, parking area, building area or
other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the
provisions of this title. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space
required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use.
   H.   Substandard Lots: Any lot in a single ownership, which ownership was of
record at the effective date hereof, that does not meet the requirements of
this title for yards, courts or other area of open space may be utilized for
single-family residence purposes, provided the requirements for such yard or
court area, width, depth or open space is within seventy five percent (75%) of
that required by the terms of this title. The purpose of this subsection is to
permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long
as reasonable living standards can be provided.
   I.   Unsafe Conditions: Nothing within this title shall be construed to
prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct,
improve, strengthen or restore to a safe or healthy condition any part of a
building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  3-4-3C of this code.
6-4-4: GROUP LIVING FACILITIES:
The public policy of the city is hereby expressed to specifically provide for
and permit the establishment of group living facilities within the city,
subject to the terms and provisions of this code, as the same exist and as the
same may be from time to time amended. (Ord., 10-1-1990)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
6-5-1: Districts Established
6-5-2: Zoning Map
6-5-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
6-5-4: Zoning Of Vacated Public Ways
6-5-5: Zoning Of Annexed Land
6-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designated for specified uses; to
regulate and limit the height and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas;
and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces
within and surrounding such buildings, the city is hereby divided into ten (10)
classes or districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each
district, and said districts shall be known as:
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 Single-family residential district
R-3 Two-family and multi-family residential district
CD  Conservancy district
B-1 Business district
B-2 Business district
M-1 Industrial district
M-2 Industrial district
M-3 Extraction district
PD  Planned development district
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-5-2: ZONING MAP:
A certified copy of the zoning map shall be adopted and approved with the text
as part of this title, and shall bear upon its face the attestation of the
mayor and city clerk and shall be available to the public in the office of the
city clerk. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-5-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled "Zoning Map, City Of Virginia, Illinois", which map is a part of this
title. Such boundaries shall be construed to follow: corporate limits, U.S.
public land survey lines; lot or property lines; centerlines of streets,
highways, alleys, easements and railroad rights of way, or such lines extended;
and soil mapping unit lines, unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-5-4: ZONING OF VACATED PUBLIC WAYS:
Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be
automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the
vacated land reverts. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-5-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Annexations to or consolidations with the city subsequent to the effective date
hereof shall be placed in the most restrictive zoning district unless the
annexation ordinance places the land in another district. Within one year, the
city planning commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent district
classification to the city government. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Home Occupations
6-6-2: R-1 And R-2 Single-Family Residential Districts
6-6-3: R-3 Two-Family And Multi-Family Residential District
6-6-1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations of any kind shall not be permitted within either the R-1, R-
2 or R-3 District except upon application for a license therefor to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer of the City, and licenses shall not be issued therefor
except upon compliance with the definitions of home occupation found in section
6-2-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-4-1982)
6-6-2: R-1 AND R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Single-family dwellings; licensed home occupations; and accessory uses thereto.
(Ord., 10-4-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Conditional Uses:
In R-1 Districts only, banquet halls, provided that the minimum lot size is one
square acre, and that no building erected thereon is within five hundred feet
(500') of the residence of an adjacent lot.
Public or private community facilities such as schools, churches, cemeteries,
libraries, parks, recreational facilities, hospitals, and institutions, etc.
See also chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 2018-18-5, 6-11-2018)
   C.   Bulk Requirements:
      1.   R-1 Single-Family Residential District:
         a.   Lot:
            (1)   Minimum area: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
            (2)   Minimum width at building line: Sixty feet (60').
         b.   Minimum Yards:
            (1)   Front: Twenty five feet (25').
            (2)   Rear: Thirty feet (30').
            (3)   Side: Ten percent (10%) of lot width.
         c.   Building:
            (1)   Maximum ground coverage: Thirty percent (30%) of lot area.
            (2)   Minimum total floor area: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
            (3)   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   R-2 Single-Family Residential District:
         a.   Lot:
            (1)   Minimum area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
            (2)   Minimum width at building line: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Minimum Yards:
            (1)   Front: Twenty five feet (25').
            (2)   Rear: Thirty feet (30').
            (3)   Side: Ten percent (10%) of lot width.
         c.   Building:
            (1)   Maximum ground coverage: Thirty percent (30%) of lot area.
            (2)   Minimum total floor area: Seven hundred twenty (720) square
feet.
            (3)   Maximum height: Thirty five feet (35').
   D.   Special Regulations:
      1.   Parking Stalls: All parking stalls required by chapter 11 of this
title shall be located in the side or rear yard at least five feet (5') from
all lot lines or attached to the home and conforming with required yards. Each
parking stall shall be twelve feet (12') wide. Garages shall cover no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the total area of side and rear yards combined.
      2.   Swimming Pools: Swimming pools must conform to State Board of Health
Regulations and are required to be enclosed by a security fence. Swimming pools
are permitted only on lots with a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-6-3: R-3 TWO-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Two-family and multi-family dwellings; licensed home occupations; and accessory
uses thereto. (Ord., 10-4-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Public or private community facilities such as schools, churches, cemeteries,
libraries, parks, recreational facilities, hospitals, institutions, etc. (See
also chapter 15 of this title.)
   C.   Bulk Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Area For Two-Family Dwellings: Fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet.
      2.   Maximum Density For Multi-Family Dwellings: Fifteen (15) dwelling
units per acre; thirty (30) bedrooms per acre; maximum density shall be
interpolated proportionally where development less than an acre is proposed.
      3.   Minimum Yards:
         a.   Principal buildings: Twenty feet (20') from project boundaries.
         b.   Accessory buildings: Five feet (5') from project boundaries.
      4.   Buildings:
         a.   Minimum total floor area:
 
Efficiency               500 square feet
One-bedroom apartment    650 square feet
Two-bedroom apartment    850 square feet
Each additional bedroom  200 square feet
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
         b.   Maximum height: Forty five feet (45'). (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009
Code)
   D.   Special Regulations:
      1.   Parking: One and one-half (11/2) parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit, as required by chapter 11 of this title. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
      2.   Plat Requirements: All development proposed in the R-3 District
containing more than two (2) dwelling units shall be subject to design review
by the City Planning Commission and City Council. Portions of the planned
development procedure shall be used as follows: (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009
Code)
         a.   The amendment required by the planned development procedure shall
be waived since this district has already been established exclusively for
multi-family dwellings according to the standards cited.
         b.   Preliminary and final plats shall be required according to the
planned development procedure; except, that the Planning Commission may waive
the preliminary plat in areas already subdivided and served with streets and
all required improvements. In this case, the approved final plat shall replace
the final plat recorded earlier at the time of subdivision.
         c.   Site design flexibility and originality shall be encouraged
within the limitations of the use and dimensional standards cited for this
district. Preliminary and final plats shall conform to the standards for this
district and any applicable comprehensive plan elements.
         d.   The recorded final plat shall provide continuing control over the
completed development, as specified in the planned development procedure.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 7
CD CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-7-1: Permitted Uses
6-7-2: Conditional Uses
6-7-3: Special Regulations
6-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
Agriculture (excluding the raising of animals), horticulture, silviculture and
similar uses.
Conservation.
Sale of agriculture products produced on the premises. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-7-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory uses for adjacent districts.
Landfilling, removal of topsoil, or relocation of any watercourse.
Public or private recreational facilities and parks. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-7-3: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   No principal buildings for any use may be built in the conservancy
district.
   B.   Land under single ownership in the conservancy district may be included
in computation of residential lots, yards or other open spaces in adjacent
districts. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 8
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-8-1: B-1 Business District
6-8-2: B-2 Business District
6-8-1: B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Community facilities such as churches, libraries, art galleries, parks,
hospitals, institutions.
Consumer services. Processing is permitted only if all such processing is
performed as a consumer service for customers served on the premises.
Professional, business and government offices.
Retail sales. Processing of products is permitted only if all products are sold
at retail on the premises.
   B.   Conditional Uses: See chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Outdoor Operations Prohibited: All sales, services, processing and
displays shall take place within completely enclosed buildings. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-8-2: B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Same as B-1 district (subsection
6-8-1A of this chapter).
   B.   Conditional Uses: See chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Outdoor Operations; Junkyards Prohibited: Sales, services, processing
and displays may take place outdoors. However, junkyards are not permitted.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
6-9-1: M-1 Industrial District
6-9-2: M-2 Industrial District
6-9-3: M-3 Extraction District
6-9-4: Special Regulations In All Industrial Districts
6-9-1: M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Industry, nonretail commercial, laboratories, offices.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Service facilities clearly for the convenience of persons and firms in the
industrial district including, for example, restaurants, service stations,
banks, recreational facilities, industrial service businesses and similar
service facilities. (See also chapter 15 of this title.)
   C.   Minimum Yards:
      1.   Front: Fifty feet (50') from right of way of any thoroughfare.
      2.   All others: Twenty feet (20') from all lot lines.
   D.   Special Regulations: (See chapter 16 of this title for applicable
performance standards.)
      1.   All processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
      2.   Storage of materials, products and goods is permitted within
completely enclosed buildings or outdoors, if screened completely from public
view.
      3.   Outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials is prohibited. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-9-2: M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Same as M-1 district (subsection
6-9-1A of this chapter).
   B.   Conditional Uses: Same as M-1 district (subsection
6-9-1B of this chapter).
   C.   Minimum Yards:
      1.   Front: Fifty feet (50') from right of way of any thoroughfare.
      2.   All others: Twenty feet (20') from all lot lines.
   D.   Special Regulations: (See chapter 16 of this title for applicable
performance standards.)
      1.   Processing and storage of materials, products and goods is permitted
within completely enclosed buildings or outdoors, if screened properly from
public view.
      2.   Outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials is prohibited within
twenty feet (20') of property lines.
      3.   Junkyards are not permitted. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-9-3: M-3 EXTRACTION DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Sand, gravel, clay, coal, limestone, salt, gypsum and other mineral extraction
and/or crushing processes.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Extension of legally existing mineral extraction operations, or the creation of
new such mineral extraction or manufacturing operations.
   C.   Conditional Use Procedure:
      1.   The application for the conditional use approval shall include:
         a.   An adequate description of the operation.
         b.   A list of equipment, machinery and structures to be used.
         c.   The source, quantity and disposition of water to be used.
         d.   A topographic map of the site showing existing contours, with
minimum vertical contour interval of five feet (5'), and existing access roads,
the depth of all existing and proposed excavations and restored topsoil, type
of fill, planting or reforestation, restoration commencement and completion
dates.
      2.   The applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to provide for the
city's inspection and administrative costs and the necessary sureties which
will enable the city to perform the planned restoration of the site in the
event of default by the applicant. The amount of such sureties shall be based
upon cost estimates prepared by an authorized engineer and the city attorney.
      3.   Conditional use approval shall be in effect for a period not to
exceed two (2) years, and may be renewed upon application for a period not to
exceed two (2) years.
      4.   Modification or additional conditions may be imposed upon
application for renewal.
      5.   The city planning commission shall particularly consider the effect
of the proposed operation upon existing streets, neighboring development,
proposed land use, drainage, water supply, soil erosion, natural beauty,
character, and land value of the locality and shall also consider the
practicality of the proposed restoration of the site. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-9-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS IN ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in all industrial
districts whether or not they meet the applicable performance standards:
Crematories.
Dumping, reduction or other processing of garbage, dead animals, offal or
refuse, except as customarily incidental to a permitted principal use.
Fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage.
Junk shops.
Junkyards or automobile wrecking yards.
Stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowl.
Tanning, curing or storage of rawhides or skins.
   B.   Certain Materials Restricted:
      1.   No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose at detonation shall be permitted; except,
that these activities customarily incidental to the operation of a permitted
principal use may be permitted by a variation by the board of appeals. Such
materials shall be stored, utilized and manufactured in accordance with the
applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state.
      2.   Such materials shall include, but shall not be confined to, all
primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracens; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid;
propellants and components thereof such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder,
boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such
as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such
as acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid
oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates and hydrogen peroxide in
concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and
plutonium-239. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Compliance With Performance Standards: Any use established in an
industrial district shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with the
applicable performance standards as set forth in chapter 16 of this title
governing noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, odors and fire and explosive
hazards. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so
altered or modified as to conflict with or further conflict with the applicable
performance standards for the district in which such use is located. (Ord., 4-
1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 10
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-10-1: Regulations
6-10-1: REGULATIONS:
Areas may be designated on the zoning map as planned development districts even
though no specific plan has been submitted under the planned development
procedure. Such districts shall be keyed to the comprehensive plan elements
which comprise the statement of intent establishing the design and use criteria
for evaluation of specific proposals submitted under the planned development
procedure. Proposals for development of these districts shall be reviewed only
under the planned development procedure set forth in section
6-15-2 of this title. The intent of these special regulations is to enable the
city planning commission and city council to designate those areas subject to
potential development of such intensiveness and importance that plan review and
design commitment are necessary as the basis for approval of development.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 11
PARKING, LOADING, TRAFFIC AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
6-11-1: Traffic Visibility
6-11-2: Parking And Loading Regulations
6-11-3: Additional Parking Regulations
6-11-4: Additional Loading Regulations
6-11-5: Schedule Of Parking And Loading Requirements
6-11-6: Parking Of Junk Vehicles Or Equipment In Residential Districts
6-11-7: Driveways
6-11-8: Highway Access
6-11-1: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
   A.   No obstruction such as structures, parking or vegetation shall be
permitted in any district between the heights of two and one- half feet (21/2')
and ten feet (10') above the plane through the mean curb grades within the
triangular space formed by any two (2) existing or proposed intersecting street
or alley right of way lines and a line joining points on such lines located a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from their intersection.
   B.   In the case of arterial streets intersecting with other arterial
streets or railways, the corner cutoff distance establishing the triangular
vision clearance space shall be increased to fifty feet (50'). (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-11-2: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS:
The off street parking and loading provisions of this title shall apply as
follows:
   A.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall
be increased through additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking
or loading facilities, as required herein, shall be provided for such increases
in intensity of use.
   B.   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be
changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading
facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this title.
   C.   Accessory off street parking or loading facilities which were in
existence on the effective date hereof, or were provided voluntarily after such
effective date, shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than,
shall not be further reduced below, the requirements of this title for a
similar new building or use.
   D.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary
establishment of contiguous off street parking or loading facilities to serve
any existing use of land or buildings; provided, that all regulations herein
governing the location, design, improvement and operation of such facilities
are adhered to. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   E.   When required parking facilities are provided on land other than the
zoning lot on which the building or use served by such facilities is located,
they shall be and shall remain in the same possession or ownership as the
zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are
accessory. No such off street parking facilities shall be authorized and no
building permit shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities
other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the board of zoning appeals
has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made findings that the
common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and site of the parking
facilities are reasonably certain to continue, and that the off site parking
facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use
or building. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-11-3: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Facilities Restricted: Except as otherwise indicated, required
accessory off street parking facilities provided for uses listed hereinafter
shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants
(or their guests), or employees of such uses.
   B.   Collective Use Of Facilities: Off street parking facilities for
separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so
provided collectively is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for
each use; and provided, that all regulations governing location of accessory
parking spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no
parking space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than
one use unless otherwise authorized by the board of zoning appeals.
   C.   Mixed Uses: When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning
lot or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of
the separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space
or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the board of zoning appeals.
   D.   Other Uses: For uses not listed in the schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the board of zoning
appeals.
   E.   Location Of Accessory Off Street Facilities: The location of off street
parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be at the following walking
distances:
      1.   Single-family: On the same zoning lot, within three hundred feet
(300').
      2.   Multi-family: Within five hundred feet (500').
      3.   Business and manufacturing: Within one thousand feet (1,000').
   F.   Size: Size of each parking space shall not be less than two hundred
(200) square feet, exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
   G.   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
No driveway across public property or requiring a curb shall exceed a width of
twenty four feet (24'). Driveways shall be at least ten feet (10') wide for
one- and two-family dwellings. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   H.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Surfacing And Bumper Guards: All open off street parking areas,
except parking spaces accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be improved
with an asphaltic concrete surface, concrete or some comparable all-weather,
dustless material, and shall have appropriate bumper guards where needed.
      2.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-11-4: ADDITIONAL LOADING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) tons'
capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residential
district unless completely enclosed by a building wall, or uniformly painted
solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet (6') in
height.
   B.   Loading Area: (See definition in section
6-2-2 of this title.)
   C.   Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements and subject to approval of the
zoning enforcement officer.
   D.   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete, or some comparable all-
weather, dustless material.
   E.   Space To Fulfill Loading Requirements Only: Space allocated to any off
street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the
space requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   F.   Other Conditional Uses: For conditional uses other than prescribed for
hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such use, as
determined by the board of zoning appeals, shall be provided. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-11-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off street parking and off street loading and unloading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Use Required Number Of Parking Spaces Required Number Of Loading Spaces
Use                       Required Number Of Parking Required Number Of Loading
                          Spaces                     Spaces
                                                     1 for each shop over
Commercial (except as                                10,000 square feet of
specifically provided     1 per 200 square feet of   gross floor area, plus 1
below)                    gross floor area           for each additional
                                                     100,000 square feet of
                                                     gross floor area
Furniture, appliance                                 1, plus 1 additional for
stores, motor vehicle and 1 per 400 square feet of   each 25,000 square feet of
machinery sales,          gross area                 gross floor area
wholesale
Hospitals, rest homes,    1 per 3 employees, plus 1  1 for each 100,000 square
nursing homes, etc.       per 3 beds                 feet of gross floor area
                          1 for each employee on the 1 for each structure, plus
Manufacturing,            maximum shift, plus 1 for  1 for each 60,000 square
warehousing               each vehicle used in the   feet of gross floor area
                          conduct of the enterprise  over 50,000 square feet
                          1 per lodging unit, plus 1 1 for each structure of
Motels, hotels, lodging   for each 100 square feet   20,000 square feet of
houses                    of retail sales or dining  gross floor area
                          area
Multi-family              11/2 per dwelling unit      
                                                     1 for each structure over
                                                     40,000 square feet of
Offices, banks or public  1 per 400 square feet of   gross area, plus 1 for
administration            gross floor area           each additional 100,000
                                                     square feet of gross floor
                                                     area
Places of worship,                                   1 for each structure over
theaters, auditoriums and 1 per 5 seating spaces     100,000 square feet of
other places of assembly                             gross floor area
Single-family             2 per dwelling unit        None required
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-11-6: PARKING OF JUNK VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
All contractor's equipment or tools or junk motor vehicles shall be parked or
stored in a completely enclosed structure on any residential premises except
when making a delivery or rendering a service at such premises. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-11-7: DRIVEWAYS:
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after the
effective date hereof shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed twenty four
feet (24') at the street line and thirty feet (30') at the roadway. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
   B.   Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, banks and
restaurants; motels; funeral homes; vehicular sales, service, washing and
repair stations; garages or public parking lots shall not be less than two
hundred feet (200') from any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college,
university, place of worship, hospital, park, playground, library, public
emergency shelter or other place of public assembly. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009
Code)
6-11-8: HIGHWAY ACCESS:
   A.   No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed
rights of way of expressways nor to any controlled access arterial street
without permission of the highway agency that has control jurisdiction and of
the planning commission and the city council.
   B.   No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing
or proposed rights of way of the following:
      1.   Freeways, interstate highways, and their interchanges or turning
lanes, nor to intersecting or interchanging streets, within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes.
      2.   Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street, within one
hundred feet (100') of the intersection of the right of way lines.
      3.   Streets intersecting an arterial street, within fifty feet (50') of
the intersection of the right of way lines.
   C.   Access barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or
other topographic barriers shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular
ingress or egress to the above specified streets or highways.
   D.   Temporary access to the above rights of way may be granted by the city
planning commission after review and recommendation by the highway agencies
having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable and
subject to any condition required, and shall be issued for a period not to
exceed twelve (12) months. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 12
SIGNS
SECTION:
6-12-1: Purpose; Exemptions
6-12-2: Residential Districts
6-12-3: Business Districts
6-12-4: Industrial Districts
6-12-5: Integrated Development Signs
6-12-6: Billboards
6-12-1: PURPOSE; EXEMPTIONS:
It is the general intent of this title to prohibit signs of a commercial nature
from districts in which commercial activities are barred and to control the
number, type and area of all signs in business areas and certain other
districts. Signs erected by governmental agencies shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 09-02, 3-9-2009)
6-12-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Signs shall be permitted in residential districts only as follows:
   A.   One nonilluminated nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area,
for each dwelling unit, indicating only name, address and occupation.
   B.   One nonilluminated identification sign for multi-family dwellings and
offices, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area, indicating only name,
address, management name and management address.
   C.   One nonilluminated identification sign at each entrance to a
subdivision, not exceeding five (5) square feet.
   D.   One nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" sign per lot, not exceeding
twelve (12) square feet in area, not closer than ten feet (10') to adjacent
zoning lots.
   E.   One nonilluminated sign designating each entrance to or exit from a
parking area, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area and indicating
conditions of use. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   F.   One nonflashing bulletin board sign for places of worship, not
exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   G.   If an owner or occupant of property within a residential district has
qualified a nonresidential use as a home occupation as provided by this title,
said owner may place upon any garage or other building on the premises not
primarily used as a residence a nonflashing sign indicating the nature of the
owner's or occupant's home occupation, not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area. Said sign may be illuminated between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord., 10-4-1982)
   H.   The preceding signs shall be permitted, provided they do not project
into the public right of way, and the top of the sign shall not be higher than
eight feet (8') above curb level; and provided, that on a corner lot, two (2)
signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted for subsections B, D and F of
this section. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-12-3: BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
   A.   Signs visible from the public way shall be permitted only when subject
to the following conditions: (Ord., 4-1-1973)
      1.   B-1 Business District:
         a.   The gross area in square feet of all signs of a business in a B-
1 business district shall not exceed two (2) times the lot frontage in linear
feet nor exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area of the front wall of the
building. (Ord. 09-02, 3-9-2009; amd. 2009 Code)
         b.   The tops of the signs shall not be higher than twenty feet (20')
above curb level.
         c.   Such signs shall be nonflashing.
         d.   There shall be no more than two (2) signs on the business
premises. (Ord. 09-02, 3-9-2009)
      2.   B-2 Business District:
         a.   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a business in the
B-2 business district shall not exceed ten (10) times the lot frontage in
linear feet.
         b.   Such signs shall be nonflashing.
         c.   No business shall have more than three (3) signs.
   B.   Provided all illuminated signs shall be shielded from park areas and
residential districts, and provided no sign shall be within fifty feet (50') of
a residential district or park area. Roof signs are not permitted. (Ord., 4-1-
1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-12-4: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Signs visible from the public way shall be permitted only when subject
to the following conditions:
      1.   M-1 Industrial District:
         a.   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot in the M-
1 industrial district shall not exceed two (2) times the lot frontage in linear
feet.
         b.   No firm shall have more than two (2) signs.
      2.   M-2 Industrial District:
         a.   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a lot in the M-
2 industrial district shall not exceed ten (10) times the lot frontage in
linear feet.
         b.   No firm shall have more than two (2) signs.
   B.   Provided all flashing signs and illuminated signs shall be shielded
from park areas and residential districts, and provided no sign shall be within
fifty feet (50') of a park area or residential district. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd.
2009 Code)
6-12-5: INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT SIGNS:
   A.   For integrated developments under single ownership or under unified
control, including shopping centers, industrial districts, and apartment
developments, two (2) additional illuminated signs may be erected, provided
they do not exceed one hundred twenty five (125) square feet in gross surface
area, and they contain only the name and location of the development, and the
name or type of business of the occupants of the development. (Ord., 4-1-1973;
amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Signs in a residential area shall not be illuminated.
   C.   Signs shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from each
street right of way, and the bottom edge of such sign shall be at least eight
feet (8') above ground level, and the overall height of the sign shall not
exceed twenty feet (20') above ground level. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-12-6: BILLBOARDS:
Billboards may be permitted only where allowed as a permitted use in the zoning
district in which it is located. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 13
MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
6-13-1: Height Limits
6-13-2: Yards
6-13-3: Noise
6-13-4: Agricultural Uses Permitted
6-13-1: HEIGHT LIMITS:
The district height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this title may be
exceeded, but such modification shall be in accord with the following:
   A.   Architectural projections such as spires, belfries, parapet walls,
cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of
this title.
   B.   Special structures such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain
elevators, scenery lofts, radio and television receiving antennas,
manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers,
fire towers, substations and smoke stacks are exempt from the height
limitations of this title.
   C.   Essential services, utilities, water towers and electric power and
communication transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this
title.
   D.   Communication structures such as radio and television transmission and
relay towers, aerials and observation towers shall not exceed in height one-
third (1/3) their distance from the nearest lot line.
   E.   Agricultural structures such as barns, silos and windmills shall not
exceed in height one-half (1/2) their distance from the nearest lot line.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
   F.   Public or semipublic facilities such as schools, places of worship,
hospitals, monuments, sanitariums, libraries, governmental offices and stations
may be erected to a height of sixty feet (60'), provided all required yards are
increased not less than one foot (1') for each foot the structure exceeds the
district's maximum height requirement. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-13-2: YARDS:
   A.   Generally: The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this title may
be modified as follows:
      1.   Uncovered stairs, landings and fire escapes may project into any
yard, but not to exceed six feet (6'), and not closer than three feet (3') to
any lot line.
      2.   Architectural projections such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves,
belt courses and ornaments may project into any required yard, but such
projection shall not exceed two feet (2').
      3.   Residential fences are permitted only on the side and rear property
lines in residential districts and shall not be closer than two feet (2') to
any public right of way.
      4.   Security fences are permitted on the property lines in all districts
but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be of an open type
similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing.
      5.   Accessory uses and detached accessory structures are permitted in
the rear and side yards only. They shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to
the principal structure, shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, shall
not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear and side yard areas, and
shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any lot line.
      6.   Essential services, utilities and electric power and communication
transmission lines are exempt from the yard and distance requirements of this
title.
      7.   Landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the yard requirements of
this title.
   B.   Front Yard Additions: Additions in the front yard of existing
structures shall not project beyond the average of the existing front yards on
the abutting lots or parcels.
   C.   Average Front Yards: The required front yards may be decreased in any
residential or business district to the average of the existing front yards of
the abutting structures on each side, but in no case less than fifteen feet
(15') in any residential district and five feet (5') in any business district.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-13-3: NOISE:
Sirens, whistles and bells which are maintained and utilized solely to serve a
public purpose are exempt from the sound level standards of this title. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-13-4: AGRICULTURAL USES PERMITTED:
Agriculture, excluding the raising of animals, is permitted in all districts
until replaced by permitted uses. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 14
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
SECTION:
6-14-1: Nonconforming Structures
6-14-2: Nonconforming Uses
6-14-3: Nonconforming Variations
6-14-4: Amortization Of Nonconforming Uses Or Buildings
6-14-5: Substandard Lots
6-14-6: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
6-14-1: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Maintenance: A nonconforming structure lawfully existing upon the
effective date hereof may be maintained, except as otherwise provided in this
section.
   B.   Repairs: A nonconforming structure may be repaired or altered, provided
no structural change shall be made.
   C.   Additions, Enlargement Or Moving:
      1.   A structure nonconforming as to use, height, yard requirements or
lot area shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such structure,
including such addition or enlargement, is made to conform to the use, height,
yard and area requirements of the district in which it is located.
      2.   No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other location on the lot on which it is located unless every portion of such
structure is made to conform to all the requirements of the district in which
it is located.
      3.   In the case of mobile home dwellings where more than one unit
occupies a single residential lot, if a unit is removed, replacement is not
permitted. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-14-2: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Continuation And Change Of Use: Except as otherwise provided in this
title:
      1.   A nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof
may be continued.
      2.   A nonconforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more
restricted classification.
   B.   Expansion Of Use:
      1.   A nonconforming use in a structure designed for a conforming use
shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming
structure nor changed except to a conforming use.
      2.   A nonconforming use on a part of a lot shall not be expanded or
extended into any other portion of such lot. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-14-3: NONCONFORMING VARIATIONS:
The board of zoning appeals may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such
variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done;
provided, however, that no action shall be taken or decision made except after
public hearing. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-14-4: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING USES OR BUILDINGS:
   A.   Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of
twelve (12) months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and use
thereafter shall conform to the provisions of this title.
   B.   No building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent that its
restoration will cost more than sixty percent (60%) of its fair cash value
shall be repaired or rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this title.
   C.   Any nonconforming billboard or advertising structure not attached to a
building lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof shall be discontinued
on or before ten (10) years after the effective date hereof unless a
discontinuance date has been established by a prior zoning ordinance, in which
case, such prior date of discontinuance shall apply. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-14-5: SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
   A.   In any residential district, a one-family detached dwelling and its
accessory structures may be erected on any legal lot or parcel of record which
was recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds before the effective
date hereof or amendment hereto.
   B.   Such lot or parcel must have been in separate ownership from abutting
lands on the date hereof or amendment hereto. If abutting lands and the
substandard lot are owned on that date by the same owner, the substandard lot
shall not be sold or used without full compliance with the provisions of this
title. If in separate ownership, all the district requirements shall be
complied with insofar as practical. The board of zoning appeals shall interpret
the requirements to be followed in such cases upon request of the zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-14-6: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses
of land and buildings created by the adoption of this title in order to require
that nonconforming uses maintain valid certificates of occupancy identifying
them as nonconforming uses, as applicable for the zoning enforcement officer's
records. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 15
CONDITIONAL USES; PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
6-15-1: Categories Of Conditional Uses
6-15-2: Planned Development Procedure
6-15-3: Conditional Uses
6-15-1: CATEGORIES OF CONDITIONAL USES:
"Conditional uses", as defined in section
6-2-2 of this title, are those which cannot be adequately controlled by simple
preregulation through rigid dimensional and use standards. Conditional uses are
those which require individual review by the planning commission to ensure
conformance with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements. Conditional
uses include two (2) basic categories:
   A.   Planned Development Projects: Complex projects designed to take maximum
advantage of unique site characteristics and potentials along with original
design and use concepts and submitted for review under the planned development
procedure.
   B.   Single Uses: Single uses or single aspects of permitted uses
specifically identified in this title as requiring individual review under the
conditional use procedure. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-15-2: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Intent: The planned development procedure is intended to provide a
single uniform procedure for total review of a proposed development, both
design and use. The procedure combines the design review procedure of
subdivision approval and the use review procedure of zoning amendments, and
enables the planning commission and the city council to review all aspects of a
proposed development simultaneously to permit greater flexibility and
originality in concept according to the intent of comprehensive plan elements
and still to exercise greater final control over the approved development than
is possible through a preregulation zoning district. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Design Standards: Because the design standards for use, dimensions,
density and qualitative attributes are subject to evolution through continuous
plan review, they are not included as an integral part of the unchanging
planned development procedure. This title refers to the officially adopted
policies, detailed area plans, and all other elements of the evolving
comprehensive plan for the standards to guide the approval of planned
development projects. However, a planned development project shall conform with
all applicable elements of an officially adopted comprehensive plan. (Ord., 4-
1-1973; amd. 1981 Code)
      2.   Required Improvements: Planned development projects shall be subject
to the regulations governing required improvements found in the subdivision
regulations ordinance.
      3.   Parking, Loading, Traffic And Access: Planned development projects
shall be subject to the regulations for parking, loading, traffic and access of
this title.
      4.   Special Conditions: The planning commission and city council may
attach special conditions to approve of the final plats to ensure conformance
with the intent of all official plan elements.
   C.   Procedure:
      1.   Zoning Map Amendment Required: A planned development project may be
permitted only by amendment to the zoning map according to the amendment
procedure found in section
6-3-5 of this title. For procedural purposes, a planned development project
shall be treated as a subdivision and the procedure for subdivision approval,
as set forth in the subdivision regulations ordinance, shall be followed in its
entirety whether the development shall be in a single or divided ownership.
      2.   Preliminary Plat: A preliminary plat of the planned development
project shall be submitted as required by the subdivision regulations
ordinance. It is recommended that this submission be preceded by preapplication
conferences to determine whether the developer's intent agrees with the intent
expressed by all comprehensive plan elements. Additional supporting material
beyond that required by the subdivision regulations ordinance for the
preliminary plat shall include:
         a.   Explanation of the character of the planned development and the
manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of
these regulations.
         b.   Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within
the project.
         c.   Development schedule indicating:
            (1)   Stages in which the project will be built with emphasis on
area, density, use and public facilities such as open space to be developed
with each stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plat and
through supporting graphic material.
            (2)   Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
         d.   Agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the planned development and any of its
common open space.
      3.   Amendment Procedure: The amendment procedure established in section
6-3-5 of this title shall be initiated after conditional approval of the
preliminary plat by the planning commission. Under this procedure, the zoning
district map may be amended to designate the location proposed in the
preliminary plat as a planned development district superseding the original or
existing zoning district. This amendment shall be in conformance with all
comprehensive plan elements. The planned development district shall be valid
only for that preliminary plat and supporting material upon which the amendment
was based. All supporting material shall remain on file with the preliminary
plat.
      4.   Final Plats: If the amendment is approved, final plats shall be
prepared for each stage according to the development schedule. The final plat
and supporting material shall show in detail the design and use of all
buildings and overall land development plans, as well as such other information
the planning commission may require for the complete consideration of the
project in addition to information required by the subdivision regulations
ordinance. The final plats shall conform to the preliminary plat and supporting
material; except, that the planning commission and city council may approve
minor changes without public hearing at this time which do not change the
concept or intent of the development. Major changes (changes in density, height
of buildings, reduction of proposed open space, changes in the financing,
development schedule or final governing agreements, provisions or covenants, or
resubdivision) may be approved only by submission of a new preliminary plat or
applicable supporting material followed by the amendment procedure.
      5.   Continuing Control: The planned development project shall be
developed only according to the approved and recorded final plat and all
supporting material. The recorded final plat and supporting material, together
with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors and assigns and shall limit and control the uses of premises and
location of structures in the planned development project. Major changes in the
final submission of a new preliminary plat during or after construction shall
be accomplished by submission of a new preliminary plat followed by the
amendment procedure. The city council shall consider the planned development
amendment subject to revocation if construction falls more than one year behind
schedule. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
      6.   Fees And Permits: The city council may establish a schedule of
reasonable fees to be charged for plat review. Building permits shall be
required for each structure according to chapter 3 of this title. The zoning
enforcement officer shall base issuance upon conformance with the final plat
and supporting material. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-15-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Conditional Uses In All Districts: The following are designated as
conditional uses which may be approved in all zoning districts:
Public utility and service uses such as electric substations, gas regulator
stations, telephone transmission structures, radio, TV and microwave relay
towers, water reservoirs, pumping stations, sanitary landfills, government
buildings, transportation facilities, planned developments and similar uses.
   B.   Conditional Uses In Specified Districts: Other conditional uses may be
approved in only those zoning districts where they are designated as
conditional uses under the zoning district regulations. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Procedure:
      1.   In applying for a conditional use, the applicant shall follow all
procedures set forth for building permits. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   The zoning enforcement officer shall refer the application to the
planning commission.
      3.   The planning commission shall, after careful review of the
application for conditional use, make a recommendation on each application to
the city council. The planning commission, after holding a public hearing in
accordance with state statutes, shall make a recommendation after the concluded
public hearing, forwarding such recommendation directly to the city council.
      4.   The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the application.
In the case of approval or approval with modification, the city council shall
issue written authorization to the zoning enforcement officer to issue a
conditional use permit in full conformance with this chapter. This
authorization shall remain on permanent file with the application.
      5.   The city council may attach special conditions to ensure conformance
with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements.
      6.   The city council may establish a schedule of reasonable fees to be
charged for a conditional use permit.
      7.   The conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may be modified by other provisions of this title, or by the city
council.
   D.   Standards Granting Conditional Use:
      1.   No conditional use permit shall be recommended by the city council
or the planning commission unless there is a concurring vote of the majority of
all members present which must, at minimum, comprise a quorum.
      2.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare.
      3.   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted,
nor substantially diminish property values within the neighborhood.
      4.   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      5.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage or necessary facilities
have been or will be provided.
      6.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 16
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
6-16-1: Noise
6-16-2: Earthborn Vibrations
6-16-3: Smoke And Particulate Matter
6-16-4: Toxic Matter
6-16-5: Odors
6-16-6: Fire And Explosion Hazards
6-16-7: Compliance With Performance Standards; Enforcement
6-16-1: NOISE:
   A.   Scope: In industrial districts, any use established after the effective
date hereof shall meet the performance standards for noise, as described in
this section.
   B.   Measuring Noise:
      1.   For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound,
the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer and the impact noise analyzer
shall be employed.
      2.   The flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level
meter shall be used. Sounds of short duration, as from forge hammers, punch
presses and metal shears, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound
level meter, shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer.
      3.   Octave band analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies
(American Standards Association S1.6-1960, "preferred frequencies for
acoustical measurements") shall be used with tables marked "Preferred
Frequencies". Octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave bands
(American Standards Association Z24, 10-1953, "octave band filter set") shall
use tables marked "Pre-1960 Octave Bands".
   C.   Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the
noise level regulations:
      1.   Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
      2.   Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
      3.   The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves.
      4.   Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks,
airplanes and railroads. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   D.   M-1 District Standards:
      1.   At no point beyond a lot line of any lot in the M-1 industrial
district shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use on that lot
exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave bands, as
follows:
      M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PREFERRED FREQUENCIES
Center Frequency    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
Center Frequency    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
31.5                76
63                  71
125                 65
250                 57
500                 50
1,000               45
2,000               39
4,000               34
8,000               32
 
      M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS
Octave Band         Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
Octave Band         Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
20 -    75          72
76 -    150         67
151 -   300         59
301 -   600         52
601 -   1,200       46
1,201 - 2,400       40
2,401 - 4,800       34
4,801 - 10 KC       32
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Impact noises, as measured on the impact noise analyzer, shall not
exceed eighty (80) decibels at any point beyond a lot line of any lot in the M-
1 district.
      3.   Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M., the decibel values tabulated above shall be reduced by six (6)
decibels when measured in a residence district. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   E.   M-2 District Standards:
      1.   At no point beyond a lot line of any lot in the M-2 industrial
district shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use on that lot
exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave bands, as
follows:
      M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PREFERRED FREQUENCIES
Center Frequency    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
Center Frequency    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
31.5                83
63                  78
125                 72
250                 64
500                 57
1,000               51
2,000               46
4,000               41
8,000               38
 
      M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS
Octave Band         Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
Octave Band         Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles Per Second) (Decibels)
20 -    75          79
76 -    150         74
151 -   300         66
301 -   600         59
601 -   1,200       53
1,201 - 2,400       47
2,401 - 4,800       41
4,801 - 10 KC       39
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Impact noises, as measured on the impact noise analyzer, shall not
exceed eighty six (86) decibels at any point beyond a lot line of any lot in
the M-2 district.
      3.   Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M., the decibel values tabulated above shall be reduced by twelve (12)
decibels when measured in a residence district. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-16-2: EARTHBORN VIBRATIONS:
   A.   In any district, no use shall cause or create earthborn vibrations in
excess of the recommended displacement values that will reach the level of
damage potential. Based upon U.S. bureau of mines data, damage potential can be
determined by measurement of "peak particle velocity". Particle velocity is the
speed at which the individual earth particles are moving (or vibrating) as the
earth wave passes a particular location.
   B.   Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent line or the
nearest residence district boundary line. Vibration displacements shall be
measured with an instrument or complement of instruments capable of
simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions.
   C.   The maximum permitted displacements shall be the particle velocity of
two inches (2") per second. The peak (maximum) particle velocity can be
determined from displacement and frequency by the mathematical expression two
(2) pi times frequency times displacement. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-16-3: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such
manner or quantity as to endanger or be detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
not be permitted in any industrial district.
   B.   Measurement Of Smoke And Particulate Matter: For the purpose of grading
the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann chart described in
the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888 shall be employed. The
emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density or equivalent opacity
greater than no. 1 on the Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times except as
otherwise provided hereinafter.
   C.   General Requirements:
      1.   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like, within lot boundaries,
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing,
wetting or other acceptable means.
      2.   The open burning of refuse, paint, oil, debris and any other
combustible material is prohibited in all industrial districts.
      3.   No operation shall result in the emission into the open air from any
process or control equipment, or in the measurement at any convenient measuring
point in a breeching or stack of particulate matter in the gases that exceeds
0.60 pound per thousand pounds of gases during any one hour.
      4.   Particulate matter loadings in pounds per acre described below shall
be determined by selecting a continuous four (4) hour period which will result
in the highest average emission rate.
   D.   M-1 District Standards:
      1.   The emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in
excess of Ringelmann no. 1 is prohibited. However, for two (2) minutes in any
four (4) hour period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann no. 2 shall be
permitted.
      2.   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and vents
within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed 0.2 pound per acre of lot
area during any one hour.
   E.   M-2 District Standards:
      1.   The emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in
excess of Ringelmann no. 2 is prohibited. However, for two (2) minutes in any
four (4) hour period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann no. 3 shall be
permitted.
      2.   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and vents
within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot
area during any one hour. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-16-4: TOXIC MATTER:
The following apply to the M-1 and M-2 districts:
   A.   The release of airborne toxic matter (including radioactive matter)
shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the maximum permissible concentration
allowed an industrial district when measured at any point beyond the lot line,
either at ground level or habitable elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
Concentrations shall be measured and calculated at the highest average that
will occur over a continuous twenty four (24) hour period.
   B.   If a toxic substance is not contained in the most recent listing of
threshold limit values published by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists, the applicant shall satisfy the environmental protection
agency that the proposed levels will be safe to the general population. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-16-5: ODORS:
   A.   General Requirements: The release of materials capable of becoming
odorous, either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, shall meet the
standards of the district in which the odor is created. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   B.   M-1 District Standards: When odorous matter is released from any
operation, activity or use in the M-1 industrial district, the concentration of
such odorous materials shall not exceed the odor threshold when measured beyond
the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation. (Ord., 4-1-1973;
amd. 2009 Code)
6-16-6: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
   A.   All Industrial Districts:
      1.   In all industrial districts, the storage, utilization or manufacture
of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning
is permitted.
      2.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided either of the following conditions is met:
         a.   Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior
walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system.
         b.   Said materials, if stored outdoors, will be no less than fifty
feet (50') to the nearest lot line.
   B.   M-1 District:
      1.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids shall
be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of
finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted.
Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks shall not be less than fifty feet (50')
from all lot lines.
      TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED
      (IN GALLONS)
 
                                                      Aboveground Underground
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187°F, 20,000      100,000
but less than 300°F
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint from and     10,000      100,000
including 105°F, to and including 187°F
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 3,000       100,000
105°F
 
      2.   When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and
measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and
pressure shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed in subsection
B1 of this section.
   C.   M-2 District:
      1.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids shall
be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of
finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted.
Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks shall not be less than fifty feet (50')
from all lot lines.
      TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED
      (IN GALLONS)
 
                                                      Aboveground Underground
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187°F, 200,000     Unrestricted
but less than 300°F
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint from and     100,000     Unrestricted
including 105°F, to and including 187°F
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 50,000      Unrestricted
105°F
 
      2.   When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and
measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and
pressure shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed in subsection
C1 of this section.
Source: Polytechnic Inc., Chicago, Illinois.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-16-7: COMPLIANCE WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any use established in an industrial district shall be operated in such
a manner as to comply with the applicable performance standards as set forth
governing noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, odors and fire and explosive
hazards. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so
altered or modified as to conflict with or further conflict with the applicable
performance standards for the district in which such use is located.
   B.   The application for a building permit for a use subject to performance
requirements shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed construction or
development; description of the proposed machinery, processes and products; and
specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in meeting the
performance requirements. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   The planning commission may refer the application to one or more expert
consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use will conform to
the performance requirements. The costs of such services shall be borne by the
applicant, and a copies of any reports shall be furnished the applicant.
   D.   Established uses found to be in noncompliance will be liable for
inspection fees and costs. In the event no due cause is found, the challenger
will be liable for the fees and costs. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
CHAPTER 17
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
6-17-1: Definitions
6-17-2: Application And Interpretation Of Provisions
6-17-3: Compliance With Minimum Health And Safety Regulations
6-17-4: Permit Requirements
6-17-5: License Requirements
6-17-6: Records Kept
6-17-7: Site Design; Environmental And Access Requirements
6-17-8: Water Supply
6-17-9: Sewage Disposal
6-17-10: Refuse Disposal
6-17-11: Insect And Rodent Control
6-17-12: Electrical Distribution System
6-17-13: Fuel Supply And Storage
6-17-14: Fire Protection
6-17-15: Alterations, Additions, Anchorage And Occupancy
6-17-16: Enforcement; Annual Inspection
6-17-17: Appeals
6-17-18: Penalty
6-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal
building or mobile home that contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile home.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The city zoning board of appeals.
CITY ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The legally designated city enforcing officer
(or his authorized representative).
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home which does not have a toilet and bath or
shower facilities. The use of a "dependent mobile home" is prohibited in any
mobile home park.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: Any enclosure or vehicle used for living, sleeping,
business or storage purposes on a foundation or wheels which is, has been, or
reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting it
from place to place, whether by motive power or other means, suitable for year
round occupancy, and containing self-contained toilet and bath or shower
facilities. This definition is not intended to include travel trailers or
camper buses.
MAY: Is permissible.
MOBILE HOME: Any manufactured home built as a dwelling unit of at least three
hundred twenty (320) square feet in size with a permanent chassis to assure the
initial and continued transportability of the home and, if manufactured after
June 15, 1976, having a red tag affixed thereon certifying that the home was
built in accordance with the construction and safety standards promulgated by
the U.S. department of housing and urban development.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land designated for the exclusive use of the
occupants of a single mobile home; also termed "mobile home space".
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile
homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall
include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended
for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for
the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
PERMIT: A written permission issued by the city zoning enforcement officer
permitting the owner to construct or alter a mobile home park under this title
and regulations promulgated hereunder.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or association.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing the manager's office, laundry facilities,
maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for employees and emergency sanitary
accommodations.
SHALL: Is imperative and mandatory. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. Ord. 06-04, 5-8-2006;
2009 Code)
6-17-2: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include the state parks of
Illinois, and the term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include
buildings, tents or other structures maintained by any individual or company on
their own premises and used exclusively to house their own farm labor, or any
military establishment of the United States or of the state wherein a mobile
home(s) may be located or harbored, or any park on state or county fairgrounds
for a period during, immediately prior to and immediately subsequent to the
holding of the fair, not to exceed a total of two (2) weeks in all, or the area
or premises on any farm upon which are harbored mobile homes occupied by
persons employed upon such farm, for not more than ninety (90) days in any
calendar year, in the production, harvesting or processing of agricultural or
horticultural products produced on such farm. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-3: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS:
Each park to be constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall adhere
to the minimum regulations as are required by the Illinois state department of
public health regulating mobile home park sanitation. The department of public
health regulations establish health, sanitation and safety standards for all
parks in Illinois. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall construct a
mobile home park without first obtaining a permit to do so. Each permit to
construct and each permit to make alterations therein shall be prominently
displayed in the office of the mobile home park for which the same was issued.
(Ord. 03-02, 4-14-2003; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit: In order to obtain a permit to construct a new
mobile home park or an addition to an existing mobile home park, the applicant
shall file with the zoning enforcement officer a written application setting
forth: (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      1.   The full name and address of the applicant, or names and addresses
of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and addresses
of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last
occupation of the applicant at the time of filing of the application.
      2.   Location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on a
plat of a survey by an Illinois registered land surveyor, drawn to a scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger.
      3.   The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply,
sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and for a sanitary
community building which will include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks,
wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the proposed
alterations therein and the maintenance thereof.
      4.   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the park is to be located.
      5.   All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or
wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches (18") in
length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe
or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground.
      6.   The plans of the park, drawn on a scale of fifty feet to an inch (1"
= 50'), building plans and specifications for existing buildings and
facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities
or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all showing compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. The plot plans shall be drawn on a scale of
fifty feet to an inch (1" = 50') and shall contain, among other things, the
following:
         a.   The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
         b.   An arrow indicating north.
         c.   A mobile home site shall be properly numbered on the plot plans.
         d.   Complete information regarding storm sewers.
         e.   Stormwater runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
         f.   Contour lines with intervals of not more than five feet (5')
where the slope is greater than ten percent (10%), and not more than two feet
(2') where the slope is less than ten percent (10%) shall be shown on a
separate plat, and the United States geological survey data shall be used for
the preparation of such a plat.
      7.   A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which
are available to the mobile home park. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
      8.   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached thereto. Each application for a
permit to construct shall be accompanied by an application fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00). The application fee shall be paid to the city clerk by
certified check or United States money order in the amount of the application
fee only, and said application fee, once paid to the city clerk, shall not be
refunded.
   C.   Review Of Application; Approval Or Denial: Upon receipt of an
application for a permit to construct a park, the zoning enforcement officer
shall, if the park or the proposed park will be in conformity with this
chapter, issue a permit to construct. If the application for a permit to
construct is declined, the zoning enforcement officer shall give the reasons
therefor in writing to the applicant, and if the objections can be corrected,
the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it for approval.
   D.   Inspections; Issuance Of Permit: If a permit to construct a park is
issued, the applicant shall, upon completion thereof, notify the zoning
enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall then inspect the
park, and if completed in accordance with the accepted application, the zoning
enforcement officer shall issue a permit of compliance. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd.
2009 Code)
   E.   State Approval Of Plans Required: No person, firm or corporation shall
provide or install a mobile home park or make a change or addition to a mobile
home park until the plans therefor have been submitted to and approved by the
state department of public health. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   F.   Changes To Plans: No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of
water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the
plot plan shall be made without first making a written application to the
zoning enforcement officer and receiving a permit therefrom. Such application
shall be made in the way and manner herein set forth; except, that a fee
amounting to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each ten (10) acres or fraction thereof
used to harbor mobile homes therein shall accompany each application for a
permit to alter such mobile home park. No application fee shall be required to
accompany an application for a permit to alter a park where such alteration
involves only a reduction in the number of mobile home spaces to a number less
than such park is currently permitted. Such change or changes shall comply with
such safety and sanitary code, building code, rules and regulations as are
applicable thereto. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   G.   Other Required Documents: Such a permit does not relieve the applicant
from securing any other permit or certificate, or from complying with any other
ordinances of the city. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-5: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Fee:
      1.   Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, as amended, the
annual fee to operate a mobile home park within the city shall be fifty dollars
($50.00), the license year being the period from May 1 through April 30.
      2.   Any applicant for an original license to operate a new mobile home
park constructed under a permit issued by the zoning enforcement officer shall
only be required to pay one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee if such park begins
operation after January 31 and before May 1 of such licensing year; or one-half
(1/2) of the annual fee if such mobile home park begins operation after October
31 and before February 1 of such licensing year; or three-fourths (3/4) of the
annual fee if the mobile home park begins operation after July 31 and before
November 1, but shall be required to pay the entire annual fee if such mobile
home park begins operation after April 30 and before August 1 of such licensing
year. (Ord. 03-02, 4-14-2003; amd. 2009 Code)
      3.   Each license fee shall be paid to the city clerk by a separate
certified check or United States money order in the amount of the license fee
only, and any license fee or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by the
zoning enforcement officer, shall not be refunded if the license is granted.
(Ord. 03-02, 4-14-2003)
   B.   Transfer Of License: Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the
premises described in the application and in the license issued thereon, and
only one location shall be so described in each license. A license which has
been issued to a person, firm or corporation may not be transferred to any
other person, firm or corporation without the written consent of the zoning
enforcement officer. However, the zoning enforcement officer may not withhold
such consent where the provisions of this chapter have been met.
   C.   Revocation Or Suspension Of License: Any license granted hereunder
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the zoning enforcement officer.
However, the zoning enforcement officer shall first serve or cause to be served
upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way or ways
in which such licensee has failed to comply with this chapter. Said notice
shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary or
objectionable condition specified in the notice within a reasonable time. If
the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within
a reasonable time, the zoning enforcement officer may revoke or suspend such
license.
   D.   Restrictions On Issuance Of License: No license shall be issued for the
licensing year commencing May 1, or for any licensing year thereafter,
regardless of whether a license is issued for such mobile home park for any
prior licensing year, for any mobile home park which does not fully comply with
the minimum site improvement requirements of this chapter for interior streets,
concrete runways and sidewalks and street lighting. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-6: RECORDS KEPT:
   A.   Permits And Licenses: When the zoning enforcement officer has approved
an application for a permit to construct or make alterations upon a mobile home
park or the appurtenances thereto or a license to operate and maintain the
same, he shall retain the original and keep a file thereof, and one copy shall
be returned to the applicant or his agent, and one copy shall be delivered to
the clerk. The zoning enforcement officer shall draft and supply all forms and
blanks and specify the number and detail necessary to obtain permits to
construct, operate and maintain such a park according to this chapter.
   B.   Mobile Home Parks: The zoning enforcement officer shall keep a record
of all mobile home parks; said records to show the names and addresses of all
mobile home parks, names and address of the licensees, number of mobile home
lots in each park, source of water supply, system of sewage and garbage
disposal, and any other information deemed essential by the zoning enforcement
officer. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-7: SITE DESIGN; ENVIRONMENTAL AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: Every park to be constructed under the provisions
of this chapter shall provide for the following, in the manner specified:
      1.   No park shall be so located that the drainage of the park area will
endanger any water supply. All such parks shall be well drained and shall be
located in areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes
may breed. No wastewater from mobile homes shall be deposited on the surface of
the ground, except state approved systems may be used.
      2.   All land proposed for mobile home parks shall be adequately
protected against flooding.
      3.   No park shall be subject to any hazard or nuisance such as excessive
noises, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat or glare.
      4.   No park shall be subject to any source of pollution such as drainage
from garbage disposal areas.
      5.   No park shall be subject to any adverse influence from adjoining
streets and areas.
      6.   The tract of land involved shall be an area of not less than ten
(10) acres.
   B.   Site Drainage:
      1.   The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
      2.   Adequate provisions shall be made for approved sanitary sewage
treatment.
   C.   Soil And Ground Cover:
      1.   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a
grass or sod growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the
emanation of dust during dry weather.
      2.   Where the topography has a slope of twenty five percent (25%) or
more, a rip wall, cribbing or other approved system of soil and slope
stabilization shall be installed and maintained.
   D.   Nuisances: All parks shall be maintained free of nuisances such as
excessive heat, glare, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation and fire or
explosive hazards.
   E.   Physical Hazards:
      1.   Adequate protective barriers shall be provided and maintained where
there is a slope in excess of forty five degrees (45°) and a change in
elevation of six feet (6'). Such barriers may include, but are not limited to,
continuous shrubs or fences.
      2.   Swimming pools shall be screened, fenced or secured when not in
active use to prevent injury. Fencing or other artificial enclosures shall
completely enclose the pool area.
      3.   Swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the state department of public health.
   F.   Nonresidential Uses: No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes except such uses that are required for direct servicing
and the well being of park residents, and for the management and maintenance of
the park.
   G.   Mobile Home Density And Separations Between Mobile Homes:
      1.   No park shall contain more than seven (7) mobile home spaces per
gross acre. In calculating the number of mobile home spaces that could be
provided, the number of acres contained in the mobile home park, including land
devoted to interior streets and recreational open space, is multiplied by seven
(7).
      2.   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by at least twenty feet (20').
      3.   An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding twenty
five (25) square feet attached to a mobile home and has an opaque top or roof
that is higher than adjacent windowsills of such mobile home and shall, for
purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of the mobile
home. Roofed over patios, carports and individual storage facilities shall be
included as part of the mobile home in determining yard widths between mobile
homes. Accessory structures shall not be permitted closer than ten feet (10')
to any property line of any mobile home lot.
   H.   Setbacks, Buffer Strips And Screening:
      1.   All mobile homes shall be located as follows from any park boundary
line abutting upon a public street or highway, and they shall be at least ten
feet (10') from other park property boundary lines:
 
100 foot setback on federal highways
50  foot setback on state highways
35  foot setback on all county, township or municipal roads
 
      2.   All mobile home sites shall provide a front yard of not less than
fifteen feet (15') measured from the edge of the pavement. No off street
parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
      3.   Street trees shall be encouraged to be planted within five feet (5')
of the pavement. The following trees are acceptable to the city for such
planting:
American ash
Columnar maple or hackberry
Downy hawthorn
European American beech
Ginkgo
Hard maple
Ironwood
Little leaf linden
Norway crimson maple
Red or pin oak
Sugar maple
Sweet gum
Thornless honey locust
Tulip
Washington thorn
   I.   Recreation Areas: In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate
ten (10) or more mobile homes, there may be one or more recreation areas which
shall be easily accessible to all park residents. No outdoor recreation area
should contain less than one acre. Recreation areas shall be so located as to
be free of traffic hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally
located. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   J.   Street System:
      1.   General Requirements: All parks shall provide safe, continuous and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home space. For purposes of this code, all streets shall hereinafter be
referred to as "park street system" and shall be maintained by the owner(s).
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Primary Entrance Road: The primary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement
width of thirty six feet (36') where guest parking is permitted on both sides,
or a minimum road pavement width of thirty feet (30') where parking is limited
to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one hundred feet
(100') long and does not provide access to abutting property within such
distance, the minimum road width may be twenty five feet (25'), provided
parking is prohibited at both sides.
      3.   Secondary Entrance Road: In addition to the required primary
entrance road, all parks containing twenty five (25) or more acres in total
area and/or providing for the accommodation of two hundred (200) or more mobile
homes shall have at least one secondary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road. Such a secondary road or roads
shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty five feet (25'). Where primary
and secondary entrance roads connect to the same public street or road, there
shall be a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') between such
access points. Where this is not feasible or possible, clearly marked, one-way
entrance and exit lanes with at least a fifteen foot (15') wide median strip
are acceptable, provided the pavement width of each one-way road is at least
twenty five feet (25').
      4.   Interior Streets: All interior streets in the park street system
shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty five feet (25') on a twenty seven
foot (27') right of way with parking prohibited on both sides. Dead end streets
shall be limited in length to five hundred feet (500') and shall be provided at
the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least
one hundred twenty feet (120'). One-way minor streets shall be acceptable only
if less than five hundred feet (500') long and serving less than twenty five
(25) mobile homes.
   K.   Street Construction And Design Standards:
      1.   Pavement Materials: All streets shall be provided with a surface
material equivalent to current city street paving requirements.
      2.   Pavement Design: Primary and secondary entrance roads, as well as
all interior streets, shall have a standard cross section with rolled curbs and
gutters.
      3.   Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage, but shall not be more than eight percent (8%) nor less than
five-tenths percent (0.5%). Short runs with a maximum grade of twelve percent
(12%) may be permitted, provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate
paving, adequate level areas and avoidance of lateral curves.
      4.   Intersections: Within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') shall be maintained between centerlines of offset
intersection streets. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point
shall be avoided.
   L.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in all parks
for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the
rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home. Parking bays shall be
so located as to provide convenient access to mobile home spaces. A minimum of
one hard surface off street parking space per mobile home shall be provided on
each mobile home site.
   M.   Illumination Of Street Systems: All parking shall be furnished with
sufficient electrical systems and lighting units, including gas lights at the
owner's expense, so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting
heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination
for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
      1.   All parts of the park street systems: 0.4 foot-candle with a minimum
of 0.3 foot-candle. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
      2.   Potentially hazardous locations such as street intersections and
steps or stepped ramps individually illuminated with a minimum of 0.4 foot-
candle. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   N.   Existing Mobile Home Parks: Any mobile home park which existed upon the
effective date hereof shall be regarded as a nonconforming use and may be
continued; except, that any change in layout, expansion or extension shall be
subject to all provisions of this chapter and the state board of health. (Ord.,
4-1-1973)
6-17-8: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Water Supply Required: Every park shall have a water supply system
capable of providing a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate
pressure to facilities for mobile homes, service buildings, fire hydrants,
drinking fountains, and other accessory facilities as required by this chapter
for the well being of park residents and for park maintenance. Such system
shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the state
standards of the Illinois department of public health and/or standards
currently enforced by local agencies.
   B.   Source:
      1.   Where a public water supply system is available, the park water
supply system shall be connected thereto. A public water supply system shall be
deemed available when such system is within five hundred feet (500') of the
park, measured along a street or other public easement, and a connection may be
made lawfully thereto. No private water supply system shall be cross connected
with any public water supply system.
      2.   Where a public water supply source is available, the park's source
of water supply, including the construction, equipment and distribution system
for withdrawing and/or processing and distribution of water, shall be approved
by the board of health and other authorities having jurisdiction. The chemical
and bacteriological quality of the potable water distributed in any park,
including water treatment processes employed, shall conform to the standards
established by the health authority having jurisdiction.
      3.   The water sources shall be capable of producing an adequate volume
of water to supply all mobile home spaces in any park, but in no case shall
such capacity be less than one hundred fifty (150) gallons per space per day in
any mobile home park.
      4.   Where an independent or nonpublic water system is used to serve the
mobile home park with water obtained from wells, the well shall be located and
constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface contamination
will reach the water supply from any source. A minimum distance of one hundred
feet (100') shall be maintained between the water supply and any other possible
source of contamination; except, that sewers or pipes through which sewage may
back up shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from any well or water
suction pipeline.
      5.   No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be
located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room
or space aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such
rooms, whether aboveground or belowground, have free drainage by gravity to the
surface of the ground. The floor or rooms aboveground shall be at least six
inches (6") above the ground's surface. All floors shall be watertight and
sloped from the well casing to the drain. Said well casing shall be not less
than twelve inches (12') from the floor.
   C.   Storage Facilities: All water storage reservoirs shall be watertight
and constructed of impervious material; all overflows and vents of such
reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited.
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated material, and so designed that they may be locked. All
of the overflow pipes from a reservoir shall be connected with back siphonage
protection to any pipe in which polluted water may back up.
   D.   Distribution System:
      1.   The water distribution system shall be constructed of piping,
fixtures and other equipment of approved materials and shall be so designed and
maintained to provide a pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square
inch, under normal operating conditions at each mobile home, service building,
and other locations requiring potable water supply. Such piping shall not be
interconnected or cross connected with any drainage, venting or other system
conveying nonpotable water. Nor shall such piping be subject to hazards of
backflow or any back siphonage.
      2.   The public water supply shall extend only to the mobile home park.
Single mobile home lots will not be metered. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   E.   Individual Water Connections:
      1.   Individual water service connections shall be provided at each
mobile home lot in the mobile home park. All water service connections shall be
watertight and located at a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from sanitary
sewer connections belowground. The minimum pipe size of connections shall be
three-fourths inch (3/4") or one inch (1"). Outlets shall be so constructed as
to be free of possible contamination from surface drainage and possible damage
during installation of a mobile home, and shall be four inches (4") above
grade. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      2.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from the heaving and thawing
actions of the ground during freezing weather.
      3.   Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any
connection.
   F.   Fire Protection: Where a public water supply system with a water main
of four inches (4") or larger is available, all parks accommodating or designed
to accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes shall provide the following water
supply facilities:
      1.   The system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two (2) 11/2-
inch hose streams on a fire in any mobile home, service building or other
accessory structure in the park.
      2.   Hydrants shall be located within six hundred feet (600') of such
structures and shall be of a type prescribed by the city.
      3.   Water supply and associated facilities shall be sufficient to
provide a delivery of at least seventy five (75) gallons per minute at each of
the two (2) nozzles held four feet (4') above the ground and at a flowing
pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per square inch when measured at the
highest elevation in the park. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-9: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be disposed of into a
common sewerage system.
   B.   All provided sewerage systems shall be constructed in conformity with
all laws of the state, the regulations of any department, division or board of
the state and any ordinance of the city relative thereto. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Each mobile home site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the
combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the
duty of the owner or operator of said mobile home park to provide an approved
type of watertight and odortight connection from the mobile home water drainage
to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of the owner or operator to
make such connection and keep all occupied mobile homes connected to said sewer
while located in a mobile home park. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Sewer connections in unoccupied mobile home sites shall be so closed
that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or
waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile home. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-17-10: REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Containers Required: A sufficient number of adequate flyproof and
watertight containers shall be supplied for the storage of garbage.
   B.   Pick Up And Disposal:
      1.   Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once each week and
shall not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling or a
breeding place for flies.
      2.   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which creates
neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the zoning
enforcement officer. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-11: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All buildings
shall be flyproof and rodentproof, and rodent harborages shall not be permitted
to exist in the park. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-12: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of approved
wiring, fixtures and equipment, and appurtenances shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. All parts of the park electrical distribution system shall conform
with approved standards for safety to life and property and with accepted
engineering practices. All electric wires shall be underground. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-17-13: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE:
   A.   Natural Gas System: Natural gas piping systems in all parks shall be
installed and maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices and
the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction.
   B.   Fuel Oil Supply System: All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile
homes, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained
in conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having
jurisdiction. Fuel oil systems underground shall be located a minimum of ten
feet (10') horizontally from water lines and, at necessary crossings, shall be
placed in substantial pipe sleeves extending ten feet (10') from each side of
the water pipe. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-14: FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   General Requirements: The mobile home park area shall be subject to the
rules and regulations of the city fire department. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009
Code)
   B.   Location Of Hydrants: Where a public water system with a water main of
six inches (6") or larger is available to the mobile home park, standard fire
hydrants shall be located within six hundred feet (600') of each mobile home or
building. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   C.   Fire Extinguishers: Fire extinguishers in working order, one on each
end of the mobile home, are required. Fire extinguishers of a type approved by
the state fire marshal for use at mobile home parks shall be placed at
locations within two hundred feet (200') of each individual mobile home site.
Each fire extinguisher shall be periodically examined and kept at all times in
a condition for use. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-17-15: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS, ANCHORAGE AND OCCUPANCY:
   A.   General Requirements: All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical alterations or repairs in mobile home parks and individual
mobile homes shall be made in accordance with applicable local regulations.
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
   B.   Permanent Additions: No permanent additions shall be built onto or
become a part of any mobile home until first securing a permit and unless they
are in accordance with requirements established by the zoning enforcement
officer and shall have all interior and exterior surfaces finished with fire
resistant sheeting or roofing. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Foundation Runway: Each mobile home site shall have two (2) concrete
runways for the mobile home to set upon. Each of said runways shall be two feet
(2') in width, and the distance between the centerlines of the two (2) runways
situated on each mobile home site shall be at least four and one-half feet (41/
2'):
   D.   Anchoring Mobile Home Units: All mobile homes shall be anchored in an
approved manner at each corner of the structure to gain maximum protection
against high velocity winds. In addition, all mobile home units shall be
installed with approved skirting. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   E.   Separate Storage Structures: Small storage structures are permissible
within ten feet (10') of mobile homes, provided they are:
      1.   Not larger than approximately eight feet by ten feet (8' x 10') in
floor plan by six feet (6') in height;
      2.   Constructed entirely of fireproof materials such as sheet metal;
      3.   Capable of being completely and easily disassembled and are readily
portable;
      4.   Used only for storage purposes;
      5.   Not attached to a mobile home or used as an auxiliary room, or
otherwise used for dwelling or living purposes; and
      6.   So constructed and maintained that a rat harborage is not created.
   F.   Small Storage Cupboards: Small storage cupboards, if neatly and
substantially constructed, shall also be considered permissible within ten feet
(10') of mobile homes, even when constructed of nonfireproof materials,
provided they are: (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
      1.   Serviced without walking into the structure;
      2.   Equipped with shelves so arranged as to prevent a person stepping or
walking into the structure;
      3.   Horizontal depth of structure not greater than approximately thirty
inches (30") (average adult arm length) in order that the rear portion of
shelves can be serviced from a position outside the structure;
      4.   Do not create a rat harborage; and
      5.   Placed no closer than fifty feet (50') from any street.
   G.   Occupancy Of Mobile Homes: Occupancy of the mobile home shall be
limited to the design capacity of the mobile home. This is established by the
number of sleeping spaces provided in the mobile home. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
6-17-16: ENFORCEMENT; ANNUAL INSPECTION:
The zoning enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
shall inspect, at least once a year, each mobile home park and all the
accommodations and facilities therewith. The zoning enforcement officer is
hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of such
mobile home parks at any time for the purposes herein set forth. (Ord., 4-1-
1973)
6-17-17: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person refused a license or a permit to construct or alter a mobile
home park, or whose license is suspended or revoked, shall have the right to a
hearing before the zoning board of appeals which shall have full power to
conduct such hearing, issue subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations and
all other powers necessary to such hearing.
   B.   All hearings before the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the
public.
   C.   The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of the proceedings
showing its determination and shall also keep records of its other official
actions. (Ord., 4-1-1973)
   D.   No hearing shall be held before the zoning board of appeals until
notice of the time and place of the hearing have been published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days but not more than
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, said notice to contain the
particular location of the mobile home park and a brief statement as to the
reason the hearing is being held. (Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
6-17-18: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord., 4-1-1973; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 18
APPENDICES
SECTION:
6-18-1: Appendix A, Yards
6-18-1: APPENDIX A, YARDS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2153247668d20a7f5aff9ca148d3250b20a4df97/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1053.gif]
 
(Ord., 4-1-1973)
TITLE 7
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLATS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Surveys Required
7-1-2: Plats Certified And Filed
7-1-3: Deed Executed By Owner
7-1-1: SURVEYS REQUIRED:
Hereafter, when any proprietor or owner shall desire to lay out an addition or
make a subdivision of any block or outlot in the city, he shall cause the same
to be surveyed and platted so that the same shall conform to the established
streets and blocks which such addition or subdivision may adjoin, such streets
to be contiguous and straight and of the same width; provided, that any change
in these particulars may be made by the consent of the city council to whom all
such plats or additions and subdivisions shall first be submitted at a regular
meeting thereof for their approval. (1925 Code § 2-1)
7-1-2: PLATS CERTIFIED AND FILED:
   A.   After the completion of the plat as herein indicated, the surveyor
making the plat shall certify to the accuracy of the same, and the same shall
be duly acknowledged by the owner or owners, and after the same has been
approved by the city council, shall be recorded in the county recorder's
office. (1925 Code § 2-2)
   B.   The surveyor, or persons making plat of any addition or subdivision to
the city, shall make and leave with the city clerk a full and perfect copy
thereof. (1925 Code § 2-3)
7-1-3: DEED EXECUTED BY OWNER:
The owner or owners shall, before such plat is approved by the city council,
execute and file with the city clerk a deed, properly acknowledged, conveying
to the city in fee simple the parts of the plat dedicated to streets and
alleys. In case the city council shall not approve of such plat, said deed
shall be returned to the grantor; in case they shall approve of the same, the
city clerk shall file such deed for record in the county recorder's office.
(1925 Code § 2-4)
TITLE 8
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
8-1-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
8-1-3: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax And A Municipal Grocery
Service Occupation Tax
8-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Exemptions: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the
city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made
in the course of such business, as authorized by the Illinois non-home rule
municipal retailers' occupation tax act 1 . This tax shall not be imposed on
the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that
has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics. (Ord., 9-8-1969,
eff. 10-1-1969; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Report Required; Payment Of Tax: Every such person engaged in such
business in the city shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar
month, the report to the state department of revenue required by section three
of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June
28, 1933, as amended 2 . At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month. (Ord., 9-8-1969, eff. 10-1-1969)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3.
2 2. 35 ILCS 120/3.
8-1-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Exemptions: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the city in the business of making sales of service at the rate of
one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property
transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property
or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, as
authorized by the Illinois non-home rule municipal service occupation tax act 1
. This tax shall not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by
diabetics. (Ord., 9-8-1969, eff. 10-1-1969; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Report Required; Payment Of Tax: Every supplier or serviceman required
to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the city
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation
tax act", approved July 10, 1961, as amended 1 . At the time such report is
filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax
hereby imposed.
(Ord., 9-8-1969, eff. 10-1-1969)
8-1-3: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND A MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   B.   The City of Virginia is a non-home rule Illinois municipality pursuant
to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   C.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   D.   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   E.   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   F.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries" as "an
incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax")
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   G.   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   H.   The City Council of the City of Virginia believe that it is
appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the City and its residents,
that the City levy a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted
by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   I.   The City Council of the City of Virginia believe that it is
appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the City and its residents,
that the City levy a Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and
   J.   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with A.11.d. subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   K.   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in Section J., above. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   L.   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   M.   Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section with
the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
   N.   Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this section shall take effect on
the later of:
      1.   January 1, 2026;
      2.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
      3.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of
this chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the
preceding October 1.
(Ord. 2025-7, 8-11-2025)
 
Notes
1 3. 63 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4.
1 1. 35 ILCS 115/9.
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Purpose
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
8-2-4: License Required
8-2-5: Ineligibility For License
8-2-6: Application For License
8-2-7: Bond Required
8-2-8: License Classifications, Fees And Number
8-2-9: Beer Gardens
8-2-10: Renewal Of License
8-2-11: Nontransferability Of License; Change Of Location
8-2-12: Posting License
8-2-13: Days And Hours Of Operation
8-2-14: Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited
8-2-15: Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age
8-2-16: Packages Properly Marked
8-2-17: Location Restricted
8-2-18: Consumption, Possession On Public Ways
8-2-19: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
8-2-20: Examination Of Applicants And Licensees; Subpoenas
8-2-21: Appeals
8-2-22: Penalty
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be construed to the end that the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the city shall be protected and temperance in the consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are
used in this chapter in the sense given them in the following definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. The term does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes the three (3) varieties of liquor defined in this
section ("alcohol", "wine" or "beer") and every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or less of
alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among others, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and through owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that the affairs and management of such "club" are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting.
LICENSED PREMISES: The premises described in the license.
MANUFACTURER: Every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, wine maker,
blender, possessor, bottler or person who fills or refills any original package
and others engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying or bottling
"alcoholic liquors" as defined in this section.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor, but it shall in no instance contain less than one pint by
volume, except in respect to beer.
OWNERS OR PROPRIETORS: Includes all persons who are owners of or are in control
of any place where the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor is carried on,
whether they be individuals, partners, corporations, joint stock companies,
fiduciaries or officers, directors, or stockholders of corporations or
otherwise.
PACKAGE SALES: The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in
the original package and not to be consumed on the premises where sold.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, maintained, advertised and held out to the
public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person
whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined in this
section. (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner and is charged with
the administration of this chapter relating to the sale of alcoholic liquors
within the limits of the city. The mayor may appoint any suitable person or
persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the
duties provided by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city for the
control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors, and he shall have the
following powers:
   A.   To grant and revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for
premises within his jurisdiction.
   B.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time
upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions
of this chapter, or of an act entitled an act relating to alcoholic liquors,
approved January 31, 1934 1 , have been or are being violated, and at such
time, to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
   C.   To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any
provision of state law or of this chapter has been or is being violated, and to
act upon such complaints in the manner provided by the liquor control act of
Illinois.
   D.   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the city
treasurer. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
8-2-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, either at retail or wholesale, or
to have in his possession and offer for sale alcoholic liquor within the
corporate limits of the city without having first obtained a license or permit
so to do, as provided in this chapter. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The local liquor control commissioner shall not issue any license to: (Ord., 2-
21-1934)
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the city in which the premises
covered by the license is located, except in case of a railroad or boat
license, and who has not been an actual resident of the city for a continuous
period of ninety (90) days prior to the issuance of the license; provided, that
following the issuance of a license, the person holding said license may reside
outside of the city for short periods of time, not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) days. (Ord., 1-4-1982)
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   H.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   I.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   J.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reasons other than citizenship and residence within the city.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the passage of the state liquor control act of 1934, or shall
have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   M.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, alderman or member of the
city council or commission or any president or member of a county board, and no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for licenses shall be made in writing, signed and verified,
under oath, by the applicant, and shall state in substance the following:
(Ord., 2-21-1934)
   A.   That the owner is a resident of the city. (Ord., 7-6-1992)
   B.   Name, age and address if an individual; in the case of a copartnership,
the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a
corporation or club, the time of incorporation and the names and addresses of
the officers or directors.
   C.   The character of the business of the applicant.
   D.   The length of time the applicant has been in business of that
character.
   E.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   F.   Location and description of the premises or place of business to be
operated under such license.
   G.   A statement whether applicant has made similar applications for a
similar license on premises other than those described in the application, and
the disposition of such application.
   H.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license.
   I.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reason therefor.
   J.   That he will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United
States in the conduct of his place of business. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
   K.   That applicant has not received or borrowed money or anything else of
value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value,
other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days, as expressly provided under the Illinois liquor
control act, directly or indirectly, from any manufacturer, distributor, or
importing distributor or any person directly or indirectly connected with the
family of a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor, pursuant to
said act. (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-7: BOND REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided herein, each person desiring a license shall
execute a penal bond in form and with security satisfactory to the liquor
control commissioner, conditioned upon the faithful observance of the
provisions of the state and of the provisions of this chapter, or any
amendments hereto. Such bond shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, FEES AND NUMBER:
   A.   Classes Of Licenses; Fees: Licenses to sell alcoholic liquors shall be
of the following classes and rates. All license fees shall be payable in
advance of the due date, July 1, of each year.
      1.   Class A License: A class A license shall entitle the licensee to
sell alcoholic liquors at retail for consumption on or off the premises. The
license fee for class A licenses shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
per annum.
      2.   Class B License: A class B license shall entitle the licensee to
sell wine and beer in their original packages for consumption off of the
licensee's premises. The license fee for a class B license shall be seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per annum.
      3.   Class C License: A class C license shall entitle the licensee to
sell wine and beer at retail for consumption on the premises in conjunction
with food prepared and served on the premises, excluding the serving of snacks.
The license fee for class C licenses shall be seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per annum. Should the license be granted between fiscal years, the
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be prorated to the end of the
fiscal year.
      4.   Class S Off Site, Special Event License: Educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious and not for profit organizations shall be entitled
to make application to the local liquor control commissioner for a class S
license which shall entitle the licensee to sell and offer for sale, at retail,
beer and wine for use and consumption, but not for resale in any form and only
at the location and on the specific dates designated for the special event in
the license. Said license shall be good for no more than an aggregate time of
twenty four (24) hours regardless of the number of days of the event and shall
be subject to the hours of operation as set forth in section
8-2-13 of this chapter. In the application, the applicant shall describe the
event for which the license is requested including the location, date, and
proposed hours of operation. Furthermore, applicant shall also submit with the
application such evidence satisfactory to the local liquor commissioner that
such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance in the maximum
limits issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do
business in Illinois insuring such applicant against liability which such
applicant may incur under the liquor control act, and where the event is held
on city owned property, the city of Virginia shall be listed as an additional
insured on the licensee's dramshop insurance policy at licensee's sole expense.
Each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable two hundred dollar ($200.00) fee at
the time of making application for a class S liquor license to defray the cost
of investigation of the applicant as provided for by this chapter and shall pay
a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for such license issued, with said
fee payable in advance.
      5.   Class D License: A Class D license shall entitle the licensee to
sell alcoholic liquor at retail in original packages only, not for consumption
on the premises where sold. All transactions involving the retail sales of
alcoholic beverages must be made within the licensee's building and no sales
shall be made to any person who is outside of the licensee's building. The
license fee for Class D licenses shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
annum. Should the license be granted between fiscal years, the one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) shall be prorated to the end of the fiscal year.
      6.   Class Z License: A Class Z license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor in connection with the operation of a catering business within
the City to the general public for consumption at a private event when the food
for said event is catered by the licensee. In addition, this license shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at the licensed premises. For purposes
of this subsection, the licensee must derive more than twenty five percent
(25%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food.
The license shall only be issued to existing license holders who can
demonstrate that they are operating a bona fide catering business at the time
of making application. All beverage sales made by the licensee shall be
considered to have been made at the licensed premises and such sales shall be
reported by the licensee for Sales Tax purposes as being made in the City of
Virginia. The annual fee for such license shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and shall be prorated at the time of issuance if it will be in effect
for less than one year.
   B.   Number Of Licenses: The following licenses shall be limited in number
at any time as follows:
 
Class Of License Number Of Licenses
A                5
B                4
C                1
S                2 per calendar year
D                2
Z                1
 
(Ord., 7-6-1992; amd. Ord., 6-6-1994; Ord. 03-08, 8-11-2003; Ord. 04-09, 7-12-
2004; Ord. 09-15, 10-12-2009; Ord. 10-1, 3-8-2010; Ord. 11-15, 12-12-2011; Ord.
2015-15-01, 5-11-2015; Ord. 2018-18-7, 7-13-2018; Ord. 2019-19-01, 2-11-2019;
Ord. 2021-04, 9-13-2021)
8-2-9: BEER GARDENS:
A permit may be issued to holders of class A liquor licenses for an outdoor
area commonly known as a "beer garden", provided the following restrictions and
conditions are met:
   A.   Application For Permit; Fee And Term: The licensee submits a completed
application for the permit, together with a nonrefundable fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). If approved by the local liquor commissioner, the permit
shall have a term of one year commencing on July 1 and expiring on June 30 of
each year. If granted subsequent to July 1 in any given year, the permit shall
expire on June 30 after issuance.
   B.   Fencing: The outdoor area is enclosed by a permanent fence or wall no
less than six feet (6') in height which obstructs viewing into and out of the
outdoor area; provided, however, that said fence shall not obstruct any public
or private accessways.
   C.   Access And Exits: No access to the outdoor area of the licensed
premises shall be permitted except through the permanent structure of the
licensed premises. Emergency exits, as required, shall be provided.
   D.   Size: The outdoor area shall not be greater than fifty percent (50%) of
the gross floor area of the adjoining licensed premises.
   E.   Sound Amplification Prohibited: Amplified sound or music is not allowed
in a outdoor area.
   F.   Compliance With Laws; Revocation Of Permit: The licensee shall comply
with any laws or restrictions related to or affecting the construction,
maintenance and use of the outdoor area as set forth in this code and under
Illinois law. Violation of such laws or restrictions as determined by the local
liquor commissioner shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the
licensee's permit. (Ord. 07-08, 8-13-2007)
8-2-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Applications for renewal of licenses shall be filed with the local liquor
control commissioner on or before July 1 of each year. (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd.
1981 Code)
8-2-11: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license to any individual shall not be construed as creating any vested
interest. It shall not be subject to execution or to transfer or assignment
from the licensee to any other person. The license shall be restricted to use
on the premises described in the application therefor; provided, that licensee
may change his place of business after approval by the local liquor control
commissioner and upon the payment of a transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00).
(Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-12: POSTING LICENSE:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
immediately post and keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises, the license so issued. Whenever such license shall be lost
or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the
fee of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-13: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquors under this chapter shall
sell, offer for sale or permit such alcoholic liquors to be consumed on his
premises during the hours from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday through
Thursday until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the following day, and during the
hours from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturday
and Sunday. Licensed establishments may further remain open subject to the
terms and conditions of their license from the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday. (Ord., 2-6-1984; Ord., 7-
6-1992; amd. Ord., 8-3-1992; 2009 Code)
   B.   No person shall be in or on the premises of any licensed premises
operating within the city at any time during the hours when said licensed
premises are required to be closed, except the owner or owners or their
employees. (Ord., 2-6-1984; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-14: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or
employee of such licensee, shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person.
(Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-15: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE:
   A.   A licensee who is a holder of a liquor license issued by the city may
sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to persons at least twenty one (21)
years or age. (Ord., 10-1-1973; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   If a licensee, or his agents or employees, believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale
or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
   C.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card,
use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by false information. No
person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor
in violation of this subsection. (Ord., 10-1-1973)
   D.   If the local liquor control commissioner determines a licensee, or
agents or employees of the licensee, have violated the provisions of this
section, the local liquor control commissioner may impose any or all penalties
against the licensee in accordance with and as authorized by 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7-5, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord., 8-2-1999; amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-16: PACKAGES PROPERLY MARKED:
No licensee under this chapter shall sell or deliver any package containing
alcoholic liquors to any other person or shall sell the contents of any such
package for consumption on the premises, unless such package shall have affixed
thereto all canceled revenue stamps which may be required by federal or state
law, and unless same shall also bear thereon a clear and legible label
containing the name of the manufacturer, the kind of alcoholic liquor contained
therein, the date when manufactured, and the alcoholic liquor content thereof.
No licensee under this chapter shall sell or have in his possession or use any
package or container of alcoholic liquor which does not comply with the above
requirements, or which did not comply therewith at the time same was delivered
to him. (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 10-5-1981)
8-2-17: LOCATION RESTRICTED:
No license to sell alcoholic liquor shall be issued for any premises located
within three hundred feet (300') of any school or church. (1981 Code)
8-2-18: CONSUMPTION, POSSESSION ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Consumption:
      1.   No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor on any public
sidewalk, street, alley, road, park or any other public premises within the
city; except, that upon specific application to the city council, drinking
alcoholic beverages in public may be permitted. The city council may, before
granting permission, require the following:
         a.   Signed consent from the record owner of the premises upon which
such alcoholic beverage is to be served;
         b.   Certificate of dramshop insurance; (Ord., 8-4-1975; amd. Ord., 5-
3-1982)
         c.   Fencing of not less than six feet (6') in height surrounding the
area; and
         d.   Provision of adequate lighting.
      2.   This exception shall not include compliance with all other
requirements of this code concerning liquor licensees or traffic regulations.
(Ord., 8-4-1975; amd. Ord., 5-3-1982; 2009 Code)
   B.   Possession: No person shall possess or have in his possession or
control any alcoholic liquor on any public sidewalk, street, alley, road, park
or any other public premises within the city except in the original package and
in the same condition as it was when the original package left the
manufacturer. (Ord., 8-4-1975)
   C.   Penalty: Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and
every violation of this section and may be prosecuted as such. (Ord., 8-4-1975;
amd. 2009 Code)
8-2-19: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Complaint Filed: In the event any person or entity holding a liquor
license issued by the city shall violate any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter, then and in that event, the liquor control commissioner may, in
his or her discretion, file a complaint against such license holder to either
suspend or revoke said liquor license. (Ord., 11-7-1988; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Notice Of Complaint: Upon the filing of a complaint for the suspension
or revocation of a liquor license by the liquor control commissioner, notice of
the complaint shall be sent to the licensee by certified or registered mail
directed to the licensed premises.
   C.   Hearing: The liquor control commissioner shall thereafter hold a
hearing on the allegations made in his complaint in accordance with state law.
Notice of that hearing must be given to the licensee by certified or registered
mail directed to the licensed premises at least five (5) days prior to the date
of that hearing.
   D.   Decision: Following the hearing, the liquor control commissioner shall
determine whether to revoke or suspend the affected license or whether to
impose any fines against the licensee, and shall, within five (5) days of the
hearing, give written notice to the licensee of his or her decision and serve a
copy thereof upon the licensee by certified or registered mail directed to the
licensed premises. (Ord., 11-7-1988)
8-2-20: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS AND LICENSEES; SUBPOENAS:
The liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant for a license or for a renewal thereof, or
any licensee upon whom notice of revocation has been served, in the manner
provided by law, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records
of any such applicant or licensee, to take testimony and take proof for his
information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose, he shall
have the power to issue subpoenas. (Ord., 2-21-1934)
8-2-21: APPEALS:
In the event any order or action of the liquor control commissioner levying a
fine or refusing to levy a fine on a licensee, granting or refusing to grant a
license, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license, or
refusing for more than thirty (30) days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to
revoke or suspend a license is appealed by any person or licensee to the state
liquor control commission, said appeal shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the proceedings of the liquor control commissioner. (Ord.,
8-14-2000)
8-2-22: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense and may be prosecuted as such. (Ord., 2-21-1934; amd. 2009
Code)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definition; Application Of Provisions
8-3-2: License Required; Application And Fee
8-3-3: Term Of License; Advance Payment Of Fee; Issuance
8-3-4: License To Be Carried And Exhibited
8-3-5: Exemptions
8-3-6: Revocation Of License; Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITION; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Every person who shall go about from place to place on, along or upon the
streets of the city selling or offering for sale, bartering or exchanging any
goods, wares or merchandise, or who shall go about from place to place on,
along or upon the streets of the city selling and delivering from any wagon,
pushcart or other vehicle any goods, wares or merchandise, or who shall go
about from place to place on, along or upon the streets of the city selling and
delivering goods, wares or merchandise shall be deemed a "peddler". This
chapter shall also apply to persons who sell, offer for sale, barter or
exchange any goods, wares or merchandise from any motor vehicle located within
the corporate limits of the city. (1925 Code § 23-1; amd. 1981 Code; Ord., 8-1-
1983)
8-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE:
No person shall engage in or conduct the business of a "peddler", as defined in
section
8-3-1 of this chapter, without obtaining a license before so engaging or
conducting such business. Solicitors, peddlers or salespersons engaging in
soliciting from door to door shall apply for such license from the city clerk
and shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) therefor. (1925 Code §§ 23-2, 23-3;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
8-3-3: TERM OF LICENSE; ADVANCE PAYMENT OF FEE; ISSUANCE:
Except as hereinafter provided, peddlers' licenses shall be issued for daily
periods, and the license fee shall be payable in advance. The city clerk shall
issue peddlers' licenses upon application therefor and the payment of the
premium provided. (1925 Code § 23-4; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
8-3-4: LICENSE TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED:
Every peddler licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall carry with
him his license and shall exhibit the same whenever required to do so by any
officer or any citizen of the city. (1925 Code § 23-5)
8-3-5: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to grant, without the
payment of the license fee, licenses to all persons entitled to peddlers'
licenses by any law of the state or the United States. (1925 Code § 23-6; amd.
2009 Code)
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all peddlers engaged in
peddling goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, the same shall not
apply to anyone offering for sale products of farms or orchards, except meats,
and also except products of farms and orchards shipped into the city in carload
lots. (1925 Code § 23-7)
8-3-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PENALTY:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter by a person licensed hereunder
shall be grounds for the revocation of the license of such person. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation, and each violation during any day or
part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (1925 Code § 23-8; amd. 2009
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: License Required
8-4-3: Application For License
8-4-4: License Fee
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the
following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale, whether described by such name or by any
other name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale", "liquidation
sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale") held in such manner as
to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business shall cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is
conducted.
GOODS: All goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property, except choses
in action and money.
PERSON: A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or two (2) or
more persons having a joint or common interest.
REMOVAL SALE: Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon
disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted and, thereafter, will
be moved to and occupy another location. (Ord., 6-7-1982)
8-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A license issued by the city clerk shall be required for any going out of
business sale conducted within the city. (Ord., 6-7-1982)
8-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Any applicant for a license under this chapter shall file an
application in writing and under oath with the city clerk, setting out the
following facts and information regarding such a proposed sale:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant for the license, who must be
the owner of the goods to be sold, and in addition, if the applicant is a
partnership, corporation, firm or association, the name and position of the
individual filing such application.
      2.   The name and style in which such sale is to be conducted, and the
address where such sale is to be conducted.
      3.   The dates and period of time during which the sale is to be
conducted.
      4.   The name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge
of and responsible for the conduct of such sale.
      5.   A full explanation with regard to the condition or necessity which
is the occasion for such sale, including a statement of the descriptive name of
the sale and the reasons why such name is truthfully descriptive of the sale.
If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business sale, it
shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the
premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale. If the
application is for a license to conduct a removal sale, it shall also contain a
statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale
is to be conducted upon termination of the sale, in addition to the location of
the premises to which the business is to be moved. If the application is for a
license to conduct a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise,
it shall also contain a statement as to the time, location and cause of such
damage.
      6.   A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods that are to be
sold, which inventory shall:
         a.   Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information
concerning each item, including make and brand name, if any, to clearly
identify it;
         b.   List separately any goods which were purchased during a sixty
(60) day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the
license; and
         c.   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory, together with
the name and address of the seller of the item to the applicant, the date of
the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to the applicant and the
total value of the inventory at cost.
      7.   A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the
application is made or during the sale, and that the inventory contains no
goods received on consignment.
      8.   A statement that the applicant has in the past maintained a place of
business within the jurisdiction of the licensing authority where the goods so
listed in his inventory have been sold or offered for sale for not less than
four (4) months prior to the time of making application for such license.
However, this subsection A8 shall not apply to any applicant who has acquired a
right, title or interest in the goods as:
         a.   An heir, devisee, legatee or surviving joint tenant; or
         b.   An executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or conservator; or
         c.   Pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   The application for license shall be subscribed and sworn to under oath
by the applicant and shall, directly above the space reserved for the signature
of the applicant, contain the following legend in at least ten (10) point, bold
type:
Warning to applicant. This application must be fully and accurately completed.
False or misleading statements may subject applicant to the penalties of
perjury in addition to other penalties provided by law.
(Ord., 6-7-1982)
8-4-4: LICENSE FEE:
A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for each application for
a license issued hereunder. (Ord., 6-7-1982)
CHAPTER 5
GARBAGE COLLECTORS
SECTION:
8-5-1: License Requirements
8-5-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
There are created three (3) licenses for the private enterprise of trash
collection within the city. Said licenses shall be subject to the following
terms and conditions:
   A.   Application Criteria: Licenses shall be awarded by the city council
upon application by the candidates therefor upon the following criteria:
      1.   Financial responsibility;
      2.   Cost of service;
      3.   Frequency of service;
      4.   Prior experience; and
      5.   Residence. (Ord., 10-6-1981)
   B.   License Fee: The fee for such licenses as may be awarded shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. (Ord., 10-6-1981; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Term Of License: Said licenses shall be for a period of one year,
beginning on May 1 of each calendar year. (Ord., 10-6-1981)
CHAPTER 6
GAMES OF CHANCE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Title
8-6-2: Purpose
8-6-3: Definitions
8-6-4: License Requirements
8-6-5: Application
8-6-6: Licensee Qualifications
8-6-7: License Issuance
8-6-8: Conduct Of Raffles
8-6-9: Fee
8-6-10: Penalties
8-6-11: Appeals
8-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the CITY OF VIRGINIA
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING LICENSURE OF GAMES OF CHANCE. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles,
bingo, tip boards, and other types of games of chance within the corporate
limits of the municipality. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases listed hereunder have
the meanings designated herein, except when a particular context clearly
requires a different meaning:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution, individual or group of
individuals organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the
public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer
some benefit upon the public.
CITY: The city of Virginia.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Virginia, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Virginia, Illinois.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens
of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LICENSEE: An organization, individual or group of individuals which has/have
been issued a license to operate a raffle.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less sums
expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: Organized, operated, and conducted on a not for profit basis with no
personal profit incurring to anyone as a result of said operation.
PERSON: An individual, firm, organization, public or private organization,
government, partnership, or unincorporated association.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code
of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a member or by a combination of members or by
some other means, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts of the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
The term "raffle" hereinafter shall also be used interchangeably with the terms
"bingo" and "tip board" and "trivia contest", unless contextually inconsistent.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, society, or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a raffle or to sell, offer for sale,
convey, issue, or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a raffle unless said
raffle has been licensed in accordance herewith. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-5: APPLICATION:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application
therefor with the city clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. Said
applications shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address, and type of organization;
   B.   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   C.   The name, address, telephone number, social security number, and date
of birth of the organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager,
and any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
   D.   Estimated annual aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded;
   E.   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded;
   F.   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
   G.   The area or areas in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   H.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   I.   The time and location at which winning chances will be determined;
   J.   A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
applicant organization, signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
   K.   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-6: LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide charitable, educational,
fraternal, labor, religious, and veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members. Licenses may also be issued to individuals or groups
of individuals who are organized to fulfill a charitable purpose and will not
profit from said license. The following are ineligible for any raffle license:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   D.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
person is active or employed;
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
and
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a "raffle" as
defined herein. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-7: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The city clerk shall review all raffle license applications within ten (10)
days from the date of application and shall, within thirty (30) days from the
date of application, approve or deny a raffle license application. If an
application is approved, the city clerk shall forthwith issue a raffle license
to the applicant. A raffle license shall be valid for a period ending on
December 31 of the year issued. A new license must be obtained at the beginning
of each calendar year. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-8: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purpose of the licensee;
   B.   No person except a bona fide member of the licensee or the licensee may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle;
   C.   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle;
   D.   Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or
otherwise transferred for value only within the area specified on the license;
and the winning chances may be determined only at the location specified on the
license;
   E.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
operation or conduct of raffles;
   F.   No chance shall be sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or
otherwise transferred for value to any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years; however, any person may make a gift of a chance to any person of any
age. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-9: FEE:
The city clerk may impose a fee for the costs associated with the issuance of
any license to cover the costs of administration. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-2012)
8-6-10: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute
a violation; and any person, upon conviction hereof, shall be fined not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 12-26, 12-10-
2012)
8-6-11: APPEALS:
Any person whose application is denied may appeal the denial to the city
council. Such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk
within ten (10) days of the date of the written notice of denial. The mayor
shall appoint a committee of said council members to hear the appeal. Said
committee chairman shall preside over such appeal and the majority vote of the
committee members present shall prevail. The decision of the committee may be
appealed to the full city council which shall hear no new evidence but may
review the proceedings had before the committee. The majority vote of the city
council present in favor of issuance or denial shall prevail. (Ord. 12-26, 12-
10-2012)
TITLE 9
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Offensive Deposits And Conditions
9-1-2: Accumulation Of Trash And Debris
9-1-3: Dead Animals
9-1-4: Obstructing Public Ways
9-1-5: Posting Advertisements And Signs
9-1-6: Unsafe Scaffolds
9-1-7: Complaints; Abatement Required; Costs
9-1-8: Violation; Penalty
9-1-1: OFFENSIVE DEPOSITS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Deposit Of Offal And Garbage:
      1.   No person shall deposit offal, garbage, night soil, ashes or other
refuse matter of any description upon any street, alley, vacant lot, public
grounds or premises within the limits of the city. (1925 Code § 26-1; amd. 1981
Code; 2009 Code)
      2.   It shall be unlawful to dump or otherwise dispose of trash or
garbage on or about any property owned or leased by the city. The dumping or
disposal of brush, leaves and grass clippings is specifically excepted from the
provisions of this subsection A2. (Ord., 11-7-1988; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Accumulation Of Offensive Substances: No person shall suffer any offal,
filth or nauseous substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place in such a manner as to emit noxious, disagreeable or offensive odors to
the annoyance or prejudice of any person, or to throw or deposit any offal or
any other offensive matter in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer. (1925 Code § 26-2; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Stables, Pens: No person shall keep within the city any stable, pen or
premises in which any horses, cattle or other animals may be confined or kept
in such a manner as to be foul or offensive or cause annoyance to the city.
(1925 Code § 26-3; amd. Ord., 11-6-1982; 2009 Code)
9-1-2: ACCUMULATION OF TRASH AND DEBRIS:
   A.   Purpose: It is in the best interest of the public health and safety of
the citizens of the city that trash and debris not be allowed to accumulate
upon any property within the corporate limits of the city as such accumulations
can and may provide a breeding ground for rats and insects.
   B.   Definitions:
    DEBRIS: Any material present upon any property within the city and which is
not reasonably necessary and proper for the use and enjoyment of the premises
and, further, which is not contained within any building or structure affixed
to said premises.
   TRASH: Any material that is capable of being burned which is present upon
any property within the city and which is not reasonably necessary and proper
for the use and enjoyment of the premises and, further, which is not contained
within any building or structure affixed to said premises.
No personal property which is affixed to any premises or real property shall be
defined as being either "trash" or "debris". (Ord., 10-5-1982)
   C.   Accumulation Prohibited: No property owner or lessee of property shall
allow the accumulation of trash or debris upon property owned or leased
thereby. (Ord., 10-5-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Failure To Remove; Removal By City: Upon ten (10) days' written notice
of violation of this section by the chief of police to said property owner or
lessee, or both, the city may accomplish removal of the trash or debris
specified in said notice and be entitled to a lien upon the premises in an
amount reasonably necessary to effectuate said removal. For these purposes, a
charge by the city of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour for labor and
equipment, plus disposal costs, if any, shall be deemed reasonable. (Ord. 04-
07, 4-12-2004)
   E.   Penalty: Failure to remove trash or debris following the expiration of
thirty (30) days from receipt of the written notice of violation provided for
in subsection D of this section shall subject the property owner or lessee, or
both, to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day said violation continues following the expiration
of the thirty (30) days' notice period shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord., 10-5-1982; amd. 2009 Code)
9-1-3: DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   Depositing In City: Whoever shall place, deposit or cause to be placed
or deposited in any place in the city the carcass of any animal or shall suffer
the same to remain within the city shall be deemed guilty of creating a
nuisance and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for every offense, and expenses of removing or burying the
same shall be taxed and collected as costs against such person. (1925 Code §
26-6; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Removal From City: When any dead animal shall be found in the city, it
shall be the duty of the chief of police or other person to notify the person
owning such animal, or the person having the management or control of the same
at the time of its death, or the person who deposited the animal or caused it
to be deposited where found, to remove said animal forthwith beyond the limits
of the city and bury the same, and if such person, after a reasonable time,
shall refuse or neglect to bury the same as required herein, he shall forfeit
and pay a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for every offense and shall also pay the expenses of
removing and burying the same, which shall be taxed and collected by suit, if
necessary, as costs against such person. (1925 Code § 26-7; amd. 2009 Code)
9-1-4: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS 1 :
   A.   All obstructions to streets, alley crossings or sidewalks of the city
and all excavations in or under the same which are by ordinance prohibited, or
which may be made without lawful permission, are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and the person erecting, maintaining or keeping any such obstruction
shall, in addition to any penalties specifically denounced against the same, be
subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1925 Code § 26-9; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   No person shall erect, suspend, keep or maintain any sign, awning,
structure or thing over or across any street or sidewalk of the city or any
tree, shrub or branches overhanging the same so as to obstruct any sidewalk or
street, or render any travel thereon inconvenient or unsafe; or shall suffer
any awning, sign or structure over any sidewalk to remain out of repair or in
any insecure or unsafe condition. (1925 Code § 26-11; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also sections
  3-1-5 and 3-1-6 of this code.
9-1-5: POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS AND SIGNS:
   A.   The posting or sticking of any advertisement, handbill, placard or any
printed picture or written matter or thing whatever upon any house, wall,
building, fence, residence or other property, without the permission of the
owner or person in charge thereof, is hereby declared a nuisance. (1925 Code §
26-12; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   No bill, sign, placard or other written or painted advertisement or
matter shall be written or painted on or attached to any sidewalk, curbing,
pavement, tree, telegraph, telephone or electric light pole or other object or
structure located in any public street, alleyway, park, school ground, or any
other public ground; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed as
prohibiting any person or company owning such pole or structure from posting
notices therein pertaining to the business of such person or company nor to
prevent the posting of legal notices in any public place. (1925 Code § 26-13)
9-1-6: UNSAFE SCAFFOLDS:
No scaffold shall be erected in such a manner as to be insecure and unsafe for
persons working thereon or passing thereunder. (1925 Code § 26-10; amd. 1981
Code; 2009 Code)
9-1-7: COMPLAINTS; ABATEMENT REQUIRED; COSTS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon complaint of any person made
in writing and signed by the person making the same, to examine any of the
matters or things specified in this chapter, and when, in his opinion, the same
is offensive or injurious to any person, he shall notify the owner or the
person occupying the premises or author thereof, in writing, to cleanse, abate
or remove the nuisance, and if such person permits said nuisance to remain
forty eight (48) hours after receiving said notice, he shall forfeit and pay to
the city, for each forty eight (48) hours he allows the same to remain after
having received said notice, in addition to the penalties specifically
denounced in the foregoing provisions against the same, the reasonable expense
incurred in abating, cleansing or removing said nuisance, which costs shall be
taxed as costs against such person. For these purposes, a charge by the city of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour for labor and equipment, plus disposal
costs, if any, shall be deemed reasonable. (1925 Code § 26-15; amd. 1981 Code;
2009 Code)
9-1-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance and, upon conviction,
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 2
WEEDS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Nuisance Weeds; Failure To Abate; Penalty
9-2-2: Duties Of Public Works Director
9-2-3: Notice To Abate; Abatement Costs
9-2-1: NUISANCE WEEDS; FAILURE TO ABATE; PENALTY:
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person who is the owner of any ground
or premises within the corporate limits of the city to allow or permit any
thistles, burdock, horseweeds or other noxious weeds to grow thereon, and such
owner, after receiving notice from the chief of police, public works director
or a member of the city council to abate or destroy such nuisance, who shall
neglect or refuse so to do shall be charged with the expense incurred in
abating the same and, in addition, shall forfeit and pay a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense; provided, that this section shall apply to
agents having control of such grounds and premises when residents of the city
and/or the owners are away from the city. (Ord., 9-6-1927; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
9-2-2: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
It shall be the duty of the public works director to destroy all weeds found
growing in the streets and alleys of the city. It shall be his further duty to
make general examinations at proper seasons of the year and notify all parties
or their agents on whose grounds or premises said weeds are found growing, to
destroy the same without delay. (Ord. 04-08, 4-12-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
9-2-3: NOTICE TO ABATE; ABATEMENT COSTS:
In all cases, when any nuisance shall be found in any building or upon any
ground or other premises within the city, forty eight (48) hours' notice may be
given in writing by the chief of police to the owner, agent or occupant of such
building or other premises, when he is known and can be found, to remove such
nuisance. In case of his neglect or refusal to abate the same in accordance
with such notice, he shall be chargeable with the reasonable expense incurred
in the removal thereof, in addition to the fine and penalty hereinbefore
specified, to be collected as other fines and penalties. For these purposes, a
charge by the city of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour for labor and
equipment, plus disposal costs, if any, shall be deemed reasonable. (Ord. 04-
08, 4-12-2004; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition
9-3-2: Nuisance Declared
9-3-3: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited
9-3-4: Abatement Procedures
9-3-5: Additional Enforcement Powers
9-3-6: Abatement Costs
9-3-7: Penalty
9-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to
mean and include:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous
to the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may
cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the
occupants of said building or of neighboring structures;
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any
part of such a structure; and
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure. (2009 Code)
9-3-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any "dangerous building", as defined in section
9-3-1 of this chapter, in the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(2009 Code)
9-3-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody or possession of any dangerous building to permit the same to
remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be
occupied while such building is or remains in a dangerous condition. (2009
Code)
9-3-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever the any officer or employee of the city shall
be of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous
building, such person shall file a written statement to this effect with the
city clerk. The city clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served
upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered or
certified mail, or by personal service. Such notice shall state that the
building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, that such dangerous
condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or
by demolishing it and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice
may be in the following form:
TO                           (owner-occupant of the premises) of the premises
known and described as                       .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above
described has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                          .
The causes for this decision are (insert facts as to the dangerous condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
city will proceed to do so at your expense. B. Failure To Abate; Abatement By
City: If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith within
fifteen (15) days from the time when the notice is served upon such person by
personal service or by registered or certified mail, the city may proceed to
remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building after applying to the
circuit court for an appropriate order under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-31-1 et seq., as amended. (See also subsection
9-3-5B of this chapter.)C. Unknown Owner: If the owner of the premises
concerned is unknown, or if his address is unknown, service of any notice
provided for in this chapter may be made by posting a copy thereof on the
premises and by publishing a copy thereof one time in a newspaper published or
circulated within the city.D. Appeals: The owner or other person interested in
such building or premises, within fifteen (15) days after such notice, may
appeal from receiving the order or orders of officers or employees of the city
to the city council. The city council shall thereupon make an investigation and
shall either sustain or revoke the order. If the order is sustained, or if no
appeal is made to the city council, it shall be the duty of the owner or
occupant to comply with such order within fifteen (15) days. (2009 Code)
9-3-5: ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
   A.   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this
chapter, the fire chief, the mayor or any other city official whose duty it is
to investigate fires, may make the investigation authorized by law. If such
officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied or situated as
to endanger persons or property, or by reason of faulty construction, age, lack
of repair or for any other cause is especially liable to fire, or is liable to
cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall order the dangerous condition
removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant of the premises.
Service of such notice may be in person or by registered or certified mail, and
any person so notified may appeal from the decision of such officer in the
manner provided by law.B. In addition to the actions authorized by other
sections of this chapter, the city officials may proceed under the provisions
of the Illinois municipal code by applying to the circuit court for an order to
demolish or repair unsafe and dangerous buildings, or uncompleted and abandoned
buildings, which said statute authorizes a lien when the city is compelled to
take such action. The city officials may also proceed under the provisions of
the Illinois municipal code which authorizes an injunction to require
compliance with building, fire, health and safety standards. (2009 Code)
9-3-6: ABATEMENT COSTS:
In the event any authorized officer or employee remedies any conditions under
this chapter, or demolishes any building or structure under this chapter, the
reasonable costs and expenses of remedying said defect or demolishing said
building or structure shall be paid by the owner of said premises, and shall
become a lien on said real estate until paid. (2009 Code)
9-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2009 Code)
CHAPTER 4
VACANT BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definitions
9-4-2: Determination Of Vacant Building; Notice Requirements
9-4-3: Registration Required; Fee
9-4-4: Vacant Building Plan
9-4-5: Additional Enforcement
9-4-6: Penalties; Condemnation
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The zoning enforcement officer as provided in this code 1
.
VACANT BUILDING:
   A.   A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of
human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises. In determining
whether or not a building is "vacant", the following factors shall be
determined to be conclusive evidence by the enforcement officer that the
building is vacant:
      1.   A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business
activity has ceased and is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building.
      2.   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or
natural gas, for a period of more than three (3) months.
      3.   The real estate taxes for the property have been unpaid for a period
of two (2) years or more.
      4.   There is the presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
   B.   The term does not include unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation, and which are in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion. (Ord. 08-02, 2-11-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-3-1 of this code.
9-4-2: DETERMINATION OF VACANT BUILDING; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Within six (6) months after the effective date hereof, the enforcement
officer shall evaluate all commercial buildings in the city which he or she
believes to be unoccupied on the effective date hereof and shall make a
determination for each as to whether or not the building is a "vacant building"
within the meaning of this chapter.
   B.   For buildings the enforcement officer determines to be vacant
buildings, he or she shall, within seven (7) days of making that determination,
send notice of his/her written determination, with the factual findings, to the
last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent county tax roll. Said notice
of determination shall be sent first class United States mail, with proper
postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying
with this chapter. The enforcement officer may personally serve or cause
personal service of the notice of determination. The enforcement officer shall
also provide, with the notice, the necessary forms for the owner to register
the vacant building as hereafter provided. (Ord. 08-02, 2-11-2008)
9-4-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE:
The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances
should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building"
within the meaning of this chapter, after the effective date hereof, or the
owner of a building who has been provided with a notice of determination in the
manner prescribed herein, shall register the building with the city on the form
provided by the enforcement officer and shall pay a five hundred dollar
($500.00) annual, nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall
include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the
owner; the case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or
affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the names, street
addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons with any legal interest in the
building or the premises. (Ord. 08-02, 2-11-2008)
9-4-4: VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
At the time a building is registered, as required herein, the owner shall
submit a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain the following as a
minimum:
   A.   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which
are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or
similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being secured by
conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction of similar type with boards removed.
   B.   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date
of completion of each repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance.
   C.   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, the owner
shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
   D.   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all
actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for compliance
with this chapter or which will not, as determined by the enforcement officer,
achieve such compliance within six (6) months in the case of a vacant, boarded
building, and two (2) years in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code
compliant building, will be approved. (Ord. 08-02, 2-11-2008)
9-4-5: ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the city to
demolish or to take other action against the building owner pursuant to other
provisions of this chapter, this code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord.
08-02, 2-11-2008)
9-4-6: PENALTIES; CONDEMNATION:
   A.   Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a minimum fine of one dollar ($1.00) per day per violation to a
maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day per violation, in
addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the city. Such
other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application
to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or
condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or
foreclosure of any lien the city may have thereon.
   B.   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from immediately
condemning, as provided in this code, a building or taking other immediate
action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an
imminent danger to the occupants of the building or the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 08-02, 2-11-2008)
CHAPTER 5
MAINTENANCE OF YARDS OR OTHER REAL PROPERTY CONTAINING VEGETATIVE GROWTH
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Cutting Required
9-5-3: Removal
9-5-4: Lien For Removal
9-5-5: Validity Of Lien
9-5-6: Discharge And Maintenance Of Yard Waste
9-5-7: Public Rights Of Way
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
GRASS: Shall include, but not be limited to, narrow leaf green herbage commonly
grown as lawns, used as pasture, or cut and dried for various uses.
WEEDS: Shall include, but not be limited to, burdock, ragweed (common), ragweed
(giant), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milkweed, wild
carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lamb's quarters, wild lettuce,
curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, and wild hemp.
YARD WASTE: Vegetative matter resulting from gardening, the accumulation of
lawn, grass, shrubbery cuttings, dry leaf rakings, and tree branches, limbs,
weeds, seeds, and/or any other organic materials which are customarily found
growing in yards or lawns. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-2: CUTTING REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for an owner, occupant, or lessee of real property to
refuse or neglect to cut weeds and/or grass on property owned, occupied, or
leased by him when said grass and/or weeds have reached a height in excess of
eight inches (8"). Each day the excess growth of weeds or grass exists shall be
deemed a separate violation. In addition to the penalties set forth in this
chapter or found elsewhere in this code, such violations shall be punishable as
set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. No prior notice of violation shall be required for purposes
of the enforcement of this section. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-3: REMOVAL:
Any owner, occupant, or lessee of real property shall have forty eight (48)
hours after notice is delivered to any adult person residing at the property or
posted at the property that the growth in violation of this chapter exists on
said real property to correct the condition of said property which is in
violation of this chapter. The certification under oath of the city official
delivering or posting said notice shall constitute prima facie evidence that
the notice requirements contained in this chapter have been complied with.
Thereafter, the city may, without further notice, provide for removal and
disposal of said excess growth and shall collect from the owner, occupant, and/
or lessee the reasonable cost thereof. For these purposes, a charge by the city
of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per hour for labor and equipment, plus
disposal costs, if any, shall be deemed reasonable. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-4: LIEN FOR REMOVAL:
If, within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense of removal of growth in
violation of this chapter is incurred, the city or the person performing the
service by the city's authority, in his or its own name files a notice of lien
in the office of the county recorder of deeds or in the office of registrar of
titles if the county is under the torrens system, then such cost and expense
shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent
liens, except tax liens. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
   A.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
   B.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
   C.   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-5: VALIDITY OF LIEN:
The lien provided for by this chapter shall not be valid as to any purchaser
whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed
cutting and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid
as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to
such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice as evidenced by a
properly recorded instrument evidencing such interest, unless said mortgagee,
judgment creditor or other lienor had notice of the unlawful condition as
prohibited in this chapter at any time prior to the remediation of said
unlawful condition. Upon payment of all costs of recording and charges incurred
by the city for the remediation, the city shall release any lien recorded
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-6: DISCHARGE AND MAINTENANCE OF YARD WASTE:
No yard waste shall be kept in such a manner as to violate any provision of
this code and shall not be placed so as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic and shall not obstruct any storm drain. No yard waste may be discharged
onto any public street, sidewalk, or other public right of way, unless such
waste so discharged occurs as the result of the immediate care and maintenance
of property immediately adjacent to the location of such yard waste so
discharged and such yard waste is removed within two (2) hours of being
discharged or prior to any interruption in the maintenance operation so
undertaken, whichever is sooner. Any violation of this section shall be
punishable as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day such violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
9-5-7: PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
It shall be the policy of the city that owners, lessees or occupants of real
property which abuts a public right of way, including ditches, boulevards, or
other similar areas, shall be responsible for mowing said right of way areas
which lie immediately adjacent to the property owned, leased or occupied by
such persons and keeping such areas free from the accumulation of yard waste,
litter and debris. (Ord. 13-08, 10-14-2013)
TITLE 10
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
10-1-1: Established
10-1-2: Chief Of Police
10-1-3: Police Officers
10-1-4: Temporary Police
10-1-5: Performance Of Duty
10-1-6: Report Violations To Superior Officer
10-1-7: Powers And Duties
10-1-8: Duties Regarding Gaming Houses
10-1-9: Neglect And Violation Of Duty
10-1-10: Compensation; Uniform
10-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the city which shall be known as
the police department, which shall embrace one chief of police and such other
number of police officers as may from time to time be fixed by the city
council. (1925 Code § 30-1; amd. 1981 Code)
10-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The chief of police shall be appointed by the
mayor, by and with the approval of the city council, at the regular meeting in
the month of May, or as soon thereafter as may be, and monthly thereafter. He
shall hold his office for the term of one year and until his successor shall be
appointed and qualified. (1925 Code § 30-2; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Duties: The chief of police shall:
      1.   Management Of Department: Have the management and control of the
police department of the city, subject to the mayor and the rules and
regulations prescribed by the city council. He shall oversee and direct all
police officers under him, assigning to each beats and districts and their
respective hours for service and prescribe such duties as he shall see fit. He
shall, in no case, absent himself from the city without notifying the mayor of
his intended absence when the same is practicable. (1925 Code § 30-3; amd. 1981
Code)
      2.   Preserve Peace: Devote his whole time to the municipal affairs of
the city, to preserve peace, order and safety and the cleanliness thereof, and
to this end, shall execute and enforce all rules and ordinances of the city
council and the orders of the mayor. (1925 Code § 30-4; amd. 1981 Code)
      3.   Attend Fires; Abate Nuisances: Be charged with the duty of
protecting the rights of persons and property and providing proper police
protection at every fire. He shall also take notice of all nuisances and take
proper steps to abate the same. He shall cause to be removed all impediments
and obstructions in the streets, alleys and public places of the city. (1925
Code § 30-5)
      4.   Attend Council Meetings; Issue Processes: Attend all meetings of the
city council and execute all warrants or other legal processes and all orders
required to be executed by him under any ordinance of the city. (1925 Code §
30-6; amd. 2009 Code)
      5.   Report Derelict Members; Suspension: Report to the mayor any member
of the police force who may be guilty of drunkenness, neglect of duty,
disobedience of orders or violation of the standing rules and regulations of
the police department, and during the pendency of any formal charges against
any police officer, the police chief may, with the consent of the mayor,
suspend such officer from duty until such charges may be investigated. (1925
Code § 30-7; amd. 1981 Code)
      6.   Notify City Attorney Of Suits: Notify or cause to be notified the
city attorney of any suits instituted by him or through his department, wherein
the interest of the city may require the presence of the city attorney at the
trial thereof. (1925 Code § 30-8; amd. 1981 Code)
      7.   Keep Records: Keep or cause to be kept books of record of the police
department of all persons arrested or committed by the police officers, showing
the time and place of each arrest, the offense for which the same was made, the
court of record before which said proceeding was tried and the disposition of
such case. (1925 Code § 30-9; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Salary: The chief of police shall receive a monthly salary, to be paid
in monthly installments, as decided upon by the city council for a full time
police chief. (1925 Code § 30-10; amd. 1981 Code)
10-1-3: POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of
the chief of police and by and with the consent of the city council, shall
appoint such number of police officers as the city council, by resolution, may
determine to be necessary, who shall hold their offices until their successors
are appointed and qualified, unless sooner discharged as hereinafter provided.
(1925 Code § 30-11; amd. 1981 Code)
   B.   Oath Of Office: Each police officer shall, before he enters upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for such
officers. (1925 Code § 30-12; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Part Time Police:
      1.   Employment: The city of Virginia may employ part time police
officers from time to time as they deem necessary.
      2.   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in the general orders of the Virginia police department, but the
number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is
restricted. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or
direct full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in
accordance with the Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and
requirements of the ILETSB.
      3.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
         a.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
         b.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
         c.   Pass a medical examination.
         d.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
         e.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
         f.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
         g.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
      4.   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the
discretion of the city authorities, shall not have any property rights in said
employment, and may be removed by the city authorities at any time. Part time
police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders
issued by the police department. (Ord. 12-07, 4-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
10-1-4: TEMPORARY POLICE:
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary to establish temporary night
watchmen or police officers, he may, in writing under the corporate seal,
appoint a suitable number of reputable and discrete citizens of the city as
temporary watchmen or police officers, whose powers, duties and liabilities
shall be the same as other watchmen and police officers, and who shall take and
subscribe the same oath. The mayor shall report all such temporary appointments
to the city council at its next regular meeting, and the city council may
continue or discontinue the same in its discretion, and the person so appointed
shall receive such compensation as may be agreed upon by the mayor or as may be
provided by the city council. (1925 Code § 30-13; amd. 2009 Code)
10-1-5: PERFORMANCE OF DUTY:
   A.   The several members of the police force, when on active duty, shall
devote their entire time to the proper discharge of the duties of their office
according to the rules and ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations
of the police department and shall be subject to call at any time. They shall
be regular and prompt in the discharge of their duties and shall obey all
orders of their superiors, and it shall be their special duty to preserve
order, peace and quiet and to enforce the ordinances of the city. (1925 Code §
30-14)
   B.   The police officers of the city shall be civil and respectful to the
public and, upon all occasions, perform their duties with good temper and
discretion and shall not at any time, while upon duty, make use of violent,
threatening or abusive language, and no member shall communicate to any person
any information which may lead to the escape from arrest or punishment of any
person accused of a crime or the violation of any ordinance of the city. (1925
Code § 30-22)
10-1-6: REPORT VIOLATIONS TO SUPERIOR OFFICER:
Every police officer shall report to his superior officer all persons known to
be gamblers, receivers of stolen property, thieves, burglars or disorderly
persons, and also all unlawful or disorderly houses or places in the city
coming to his knowledge, as well as all violators of the laws of the state or
ordinances of the city reported to him, or of which he may be cognizant, and
when it shall come to the knowledge of any member of the police force that any
ordinance has been violated, such member shall forthwith cause a complaint to
be made before a court of record and the proper witnesses to be subpoenaed and
evidence to be produced for the successful prosecution of the defendant. It
shall be the duty of the chief of police and the police officers to serve
promptly all warrants or other processes issued in any case pending under any
law or ordinance of the city before any proper court thereof. (1925 Code § 30-
15; amd. 1981 Code)
10-1-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Arrests: Police officers shall have power to arrest all persons in the
city found in the act of violating any ordinance or aiding or abetting in any
such violation, and shall take all such persons so arrested to the place
designated by such ordinance, and while serving or executing or assisting in
the serving or execution of any warrant or process, they shall be vested with
and have all the power conferred on constables by common law and the laws of
the state. (1925 Code § 30-16)
   B.   Serve Processes: Police officers shall have the power and authority to
execute warrants or other legal processes within the corporate limits of the
city and within such distance therefrom as is authorized by law, in all cases
when any ordinance of the city made pursuant to law shall prescribe a penalty
for the violation of any of its provisions by persons residing, acting or doing
business without the limits of the city. (1925 Code § 30-17; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Call On Bystanders: Any police officer of the city may, at any time,
call upon any able bodied person of the age eighteen (18) years or over to aid
him in arresting, retaking or holding in custody any persons guilty of having
committed any unlawful act, or charged therewith, or to aid such officer to
prevent the commission of any unlawful act; and whoever shall refuse to so aid
shall incur a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (1925 Code § 30-18; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
10-1-8: DUTIES REGARDING GAMING HOUSES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to obtain
information and provide said information to the city regarding each house or
other place within the city where games, devices or tables, roulette wheels,
slot machines or other instruments or things for the purpose of gaming are or
may be set up, kept or maintained; and said police officers shall take all
lawful means to suppress and prevent the playing at the tables, games or
devices aforesaid, and for this purpose, when and as often as any one of them
shall have reasonable cause to suspect that any such table, game or device is
set up, kept or maintained as aforesaid, shall forthwith make complaint thereof
before the proper court and obtain a warrant authorizing him to enter any such
house or place or any room within the same, and said police officer shall
thereupon have authority to demand entrance thereto. If such officer is refused
entry, any person so refusing or neglecting to open the door or entrance to
such house or any room within the same, upon application of any police officer
having such warrant, shall forfeit and pay a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1925 Code § 30-19; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   It is hereby made the duty of all police officers to seize any table,
roulette wheel, slot machine, instrument, device or thing used for the purpose
of gaming, and all such tables, instruments, devices or things shall be
destroyed. Any person obstructing or resisting any member of the police force
in the performance of any act of this subsection shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (1925 Code § 30-20; amd. 2009 Code)
10-1-9: NEGLECT AND VIOLATION OF DUTY:
Any member of the police force who shall neglect or refuse to perform any
duties required of him by the ordinances of the city or the rules and
regulations of the department, or who shall, in the discharge of his official
duties, be guilty of fraud, favoritism, extortion, oppression or injustice,
shall, in each case, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and shall be subject to suspension and removal from office.
(1925 Code § 30-21; amd. 2009 Code)
10-1-10: COMPENSATION; UNIFORM:
Each police officer, temporary police officer or special police officer shall
receive such reasonable compensation as shall be determined by the city council
at the time of his appointment, and each shall wear such uniform as shall be
prescribed by the city council. (1925 Code § 30-24)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Curfew
10-2-2: Trick Or Treating Restricted
10-2-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any boy or girl
under the age of seventeen (17) years to be abroad upon the streets, alleys or
public grounds of the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless accompanied by some person of lawful age
having said minor in his charge or unless on some errand by permission or
direction of his parent, guardian or employer. Said minor shall not loiter on
the way or make any undue noise by shouting or yelling, or otherwise disturb
the peace and quiet of the city.
   B.   Arrests; Penalty: Any boy or girl who violates any of the provisions of
subsection A of this section shall be subject to arrest without process. Upon
such arrest, said minor shall be taken and delivered to the parent, guardian or
employer of such minor. On a subsequent arrest, such offender shall be taken by
such officer before any court of record in the city for trial and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord., 12-6-1927; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-2-2: TRICK OR TREATING RESTRICTED:
Trick or treating shall be allowed only on October 31 of each year and only
between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
(Ord., 10-6-1981; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
10-3-1: Running At Large
10-3-2: Prohibited Acts
10-3-3: Pet Waste Removal
10-3-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any animal of the species of horse, mule, cow,
sheep, goat, swine, goose or chicken, or any dangerous animal, to run or to be
at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city, and whoever,
being the owner or having the control of such animal or animals, shall suffer
or permit the same to be or to run at large in the city in violation of this
subsection shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, together
with the fees for impounding and the expense of keeping such animal or animals
when impounded. (Ord., 7-2-1990; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   The permitting of any animal to be upon the streets, unfastened and
unattended, whether hitched to a vehicle or not, or the herding of the same
upon the streets shall be deemed running at large under this chapter. (1925
Code § 14-2)
10-3-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Driving Animals Through Streets: It shall be unlawful for any horse,
cattle or other domestic animal to be driven loose through the city without
sufficient attendants to keep said animal from trespassing upon lawns or
adjoining lots; and the owner or any person having in charge any such animals
who shall drive the same along and through the streets or alleys of the city
and shall, on so doing, permit or suffer any such animals to go upon such lawns
or lots, shall, for each and every offense, upon conviction, be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (1925 Code § 14-3; amd. Ord., 11-6-1982; 2009 Code)
   B.   Cruelty To Animals:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any draft animal of
the species of horse or mule to remain hitched or tied on any of the public
streets or alleys or on any private property for an unreasonable length of time
without providing such animal with proper food and water. (1925 Code § 14-18;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
      2.   Whoever shall be guilty of cruelty to animals in any of the ways
hereinafter mentioned shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense: (1925 Code § 28-36; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
         a.   By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating,
torturing, tormenting, mutilating, or cruelly killing any animal or causing or
knowingly allowing the same to be done;
         b.   By unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or
custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink and shelter; (1925 Code
§ 28-36; amd. 1981 Code)
         c.   By abandoning any animal; or (1925 Code § 28-36; amd. 1981 Code;
2009 Code)
         d.   By carrying or driving, or causing to be carried or driven or
kept, any animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner. (1925 Code § 28-36; amd.
1981 Code)
   C.   Noisy Animals: No person shall keep or harbor any dog, whelp, bitch,
cow, calf, horse, ass, or other animal shut up or tied up in any yard, house or
other place in the city which, by barking, howling, braying, bawling or other
noises, shall disturb the peace and quiet of any family, citizen or
neighborhood. Every person violating the provisions of this subsection shall,
upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for every offense. (Ord., 10-2-1989; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Animal Fights: Any person who shall, within the city, keep or use or be
in any way connected with the management of any place kept or used for the
fighting or baiting of any dog, cock or other animal, or who shall permit such
place to be kept or used on premises owned, rented or controlled by him, or who
shall frequent or be found therein for the purpose of witnessing such fighting
or baiting shall, in each case, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(1925 Code § 28-10; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-3-3: PET WASTE REMOVAL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper, or other adult person who
maintains possession or control of a domestic animal to allow said animal to
deposit feces on any public property or any privately owned property unless
owned by said owner, keeper or other adult person.
   B.   Any person who violates this section and does not immediately and
completely remove the feces deposited shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provisions set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code or any future amendment thereto. (Ord. 2015-15-07, 7-13-
2015)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Running At Large Prohibited
10-3A-2: Dogs To Be Leashed
10-3A-3: Muzzles Required
10-3A-4: Females During Estrus
10-3A-5: Dangerous Dogs
10-3A-6: Abandoning Dogs And Cats Prohibited
10-3A-7: Penalty
10-3A-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Dogs: Any dog found running or being at large in any of the streets,
public ways or upon the private premises of any person, other than the premises
of the owner or keeper thereof, is a public nuisance. No person shall cause or
permit any dog owned or kept by him to be so at large within the city. (Ord.,
5-11-1970)
   B.   Cats: The owner or keeper of any cat shall not permit, cause or suffer
such cat to run at large. The keeping, housing, maintaining, feeding or caring
for any cat shall be deemed prima facie evidence of ownership of such cat.
(Ord., 5-11-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
10-3A-2: DOGS TO BE LEASHED:
All dogs, while on any street, public way or private premises, other than the
premises of the owner, agent or keeper thereof, shall be led by a chain or
leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length in such a manner as to prevent such
dog from biting or otherwise injuring any person or animal. Nothing in this
section shall be interpreted to require the leashing of any dog while on the
private premises of the owner, agent of the owner or keeper thereof, except as
provided in section
10-3A-5 of this article. (Ord., 5-11-1970)
10-3A-3: MUZZLES REQUIRED:
   A.   Proclamation To Muzzle: The mayor shall, when directed so to do by the
county board of health, issue a proclamation prohibiting for a certain time all
dogs on any of the streets, alleys or other public places in the city unless
such dogs be securely muzzled with a wire muzzle so as to effectually prevent
such dogs from biting any person or animal. Said proclamation shall be
published weekly in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city
during the space of time mentioned in the proclamation. (1925 Code § 14-20;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Unauthorized Removal Of Muzzle: No person shall, without the consent of
the owner or keeper, remove from any dog any muzzle or loosen the same so that
it shall come off. (1925 Code § 14-24; amd. 2009 Code)
10-3A-4: FEMALES DURING ESTRUS:
No owner or keeper of any female dog shall knowingly permit or allow the same
to be upon the public ways of the city while in heat, whether registered or
licensed or not. (1925 Code § 14-23; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-3A-5: DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the term "dangerous dog" is as
defined in the Illinois animal control act as it now exists or is hereafter
amended 1 . (Ord. 08-07, 9-11-2008)
   B.   Safety Requirements: If a confined dog is so declared to be dangerous,
the owner or keeper of such dog shall immediately provide extraordinary
precautions, such as a muzzle, chain, cage and warning signs, as may be
required by the police department. (Ord., 5-11-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
   C.   Impoundment Costs; Conditions Of Redemption:
      1.   The cost to reclaim a dog that has been deemed a "dangerous dog", as
defined in subsection A of this section, shall be six hundred dollars
($600.00). Additionally, the owner shall be required to deposit the sum of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) with the city, and upon providing evidence to the
police chief that the dog has been spayed or neutered and microchipped within
fourteen (14) days of reclaiming the dog, said deposit shall be refunded to the
owner. If the owner fails to provide said evidence to the police chief within
said time period, the deposit shall be forfeited. Furthermore, a boarding fee
of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day will be assessed, together with a two
hundred dollar ($200.00) pick up fee.
      2.   In the event the dog is impounded for a second incident, the owner
of the dog, or other responsible person, shall be fined one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). A one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) fine shall be
imposed for a third incident. Upon a fourth incident, the dog will be humanely
euthanized.
      3.   Nothing in this subsection is intended to abrogate any of the powers
granted to the police department in the treatment of dogs within the city.
(Ord. 08-07, 9-11-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
10-3A-6: ABANDONING DOGS AND CATS PROHIBITED:
No person may bring into the city any dog or cat and thereafter leave, abandon
and place said dog or cat within the city on any public property or private
property not owned or in the legal possession of the person so bringing the dog
or cat into the city. (Ord., 5-11-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
10-3A-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence.
   B.   If while running at large the animal attacks, bites, injures or
attempts to attack, bite or injure any person or another animal, such action
shall be considered a separate offense and a fine of no less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall
be imposed. The penalty provided under this section shall be in addition to any
other remedy available to the city under this code and/or as provided by state
law. (Ord. 13-05, 5-13-2013)
ARTICLE B. KEEPING OF DOMESTIC FOWL
SECTION:
10-3B-1: Definitions
10-3B-2: Limit To Number Of Hens Permitted
10-3B-3: Confinement
10-3B-4: Structures - Location Restrictions
10-3B-5: Structures - Requirements
10-3B-6: Maintenance Of Sanitary Conditions
10-3B-7: Miscellaneous Regulations
10-3B-8: License And Permit Required
10-3B-9: License Permit Process
10-3B-10: Suspension Or Revocation
10-3B-11: Removal Of Structures
10-3B-12: Conflict With Private Covenants
10-3B-13: Penalty For Violation
10-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or phrases are used, they shall, for the purposes
of this article, have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when
the context otherwise indicates:
COOP: A structure housing hens consisting of a covered inside enclosure.
HEN: As used in this article, the female of the species Gallus Domesticus
(chicken), Anser Domesticus or Anser Cygnoides (geese), Meleagris Gallopavo
(domesticated turkey), Anas platyrhynchos (duck) commonly known as domestic
fowl.
PEN: An enclosure connected to a coop for the purposes of allowing domestic
fowl to leave the coop while remaining in an enclosed, predator safe
environment. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-2: LIMIT TO NUMBER OF HENS PERMITTED:
No person shall keep more than eight (8) hens. Male species shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-3: CONFINEMENT:
All hens kept in the City shall be entirely confined in a pen, coop, building,
or other enclosure at all times. During daylight hours hens may also be
temporarily kept in a mobile screened enclosure commonly known as a domestic
fowl tractor. Such domestic fowl tractors shall be located only in a rear yard
in accordance with the structures - location restrictions provided for in this
article. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-4: STRUCTURES - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Structures housing hens including any pens, coops, buildings or enclosures
shall be permitted only in conjunction with a single- family detached dwelling
located in a residential district. Structures housing hens including any pens,
coops, buildings or enclosures shall be located only in a rear yard, erected or
maintained at least twenty feet (20') from any occupied residential structure
other than that of the owner, set back at least six feet (6') from all property
lines of an adjacent property and shall not be visible from a street. (Ord.
2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-5: STRUCTURES - REQUIREMENTS:
Structures housing hens shall consist of a covered inside enclosure known as a
coop and an adjacent covered outside fenced area known as a pen. Structures
housing hens shall provide not less than five (5) square feet per hen with coop
size limited to not more than fifty (50) square feet and pen enclosures limited
to not more than one hundred (100) square feet. Coops shall be constructed
above ground or on a hard surface such as concrete, patio block or gravel and
able to withstand natural forces such as wind, rain and snow. Wooden or pre-
cast concrete posts shall be acceptable foundations if they are placed at least
twenty four inches (24") into the ground and firmly tamped with dirt or gravel.
Any structure housing hens including any pen, coop, building or other enclosure
that is not fully enclosed shall be screened to a height of six feet (6'). Said
screening shall be comprised of fences or walls six feet (6') in height. (Ord.
2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-6: MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All pens, coops, buildings, yards or enclosures for hens shall be kept clean,
sanitary and free from all refuse and waste. Such areas shall be thoroughly
cleaned at least once every twenty four (24) hours and all refuse and domestic
fowl waste shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary fashion. (Ord. 2016-16-
1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-7: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
   A.   All feed for hens shall be kept in rodent proof containers until put
out for consumption by the permitted hens being kept.
   B.   Slaughtering of domestic fowl for sale or gift is prohibited.
   C.   Odors from domestic fowl, domestic fowl manure or other domestic fowl
related substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries of the
property where the domestic fowl are kept, and it is hereby declared a nuisance
and shall be unlawful for any person to allow such nuisance to exist.
   D.   No person shall allow domestic fowl to provide noise loud enough to
annoy or disturb the comfort, health, peace or repose of reasonable persons of
ordinary sensibilities, and it is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be
unlawful for any person to allow such nuisance to exist. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-
2016)
10-3B-8: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall keep domestic fowl within the City without first obtaining a
license therefor issued by the City. Any pen, coop, building or other enclosure
used for the housing of hens may be erected only after obtaining a building
permit as provided for herein. Only landowners shall be eligible to make
application for license. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-9: LICENSE PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   An applicant for a license for the keeping of domestic fowl or for a
building permit for any pen, coop, building or other enclosure used for the
housing of domestic fowl must submit the following to the Public Works
Director:
      1.   Completed applications on forms provided by the City.
      2.   A current plat of survey or other drawing accurately depicting the
potential location of the proposed structure housing hens on the applicant's
property.
      3.   The required building permit fee. The building permit fee for a pen,
coop, building or other enclosure used for the housing of domestic fowl shall
be the same fee as for a shed.
   B.   A license for the keeping of domestic fowl and a building permit for a
structure for the keeping of domestic fowl shall not be granted unless the
applicant can show proof that a proposed structure that complies with all
provisions of this article will be erected.
   C.   A license for keeping of domestic fowl and a building permit for a
structure for the keeping of domestic fowl shall not be transferable or run
with the land and shall terminate and become invalid upon the licensee no
longer occupying the property for which the license and permit were issued.
(Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
In addition to any other penalty which may be authorized by this article or
other City ordinances, the Mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued
pursuant to this article for:
   A.   Failure of the licensee to comply with any provisions of this article,
any other applicable ordinances, the laws of the State, Federal laws or other
applicable legal requirements; or
   B.   Finding that the licensee knowingly furnished false or misleading
information or withheld relevant information in any application for a license
for the keeping of domestic fowl or for a building permit for any structure for
the keeping of domestic fowl. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-11: REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES:
Structures housing hens including any pens, coops, buildings or enclosures
shall be removed upon a licensee no longer keeping domestic fowl, upon a
licensee no longer occupying the property for which a license for the keeping
of domestic fowl was issued or upon a licensee for the keeping of domestic fowl
having been revoked. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-12: CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE COVENANTS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the keeping of domestic
fowl when such activity is prohibited by private covenants, conditions or
restrictions governing the use of property. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
10-3B-13: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failure to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this article shall be guilty of an offense
and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provided by this
Code.
   B.   Any person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation or provision of this article is
committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and such person shall be
punished accordingly. (Ord. 2016-16-1, 2-8-2016)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES RELATING TO PEACE AND SAFETY
SECTION:
10-4A-1: Assault; Affrays
10-4A-2: Disturbing The Peace
10-4A-3: Unlawful Assemblies
10-4A-4: Resisting Officers; Aiding Escape
10-4A-5: Weapons
10-4A-6: False Fire Alarms
10-4A-7: Penalty
10-4A-1: ASSAULT; AFFRAYS:
No person shall assault, strike or beat another or, by mutual agreement, fight
another, nor shall such person be guilty of an affray or any conduct calculated
to provoke a breach of the peace. (1925 Code § 28-1; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4A-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall disturb the public peace and quiet of the city or of any
private family or citizen, or shall be guilty of any violent, tumultuous,
offensive or disorderly conduct, or breach of the peace, or shall make any loud
or unusual noises or disturbance, or shall use any obscene, profane, vulgar or
unseemly language, or shall conduct himself in a riotous manner, or shall aid,
countenance or assist in the said violations. (1925 Code § 28-2; amd. 1981
Code; 2009 Code)
10-4A-3: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to assemble
together within the city for any unlawful purpose or, when being assembled, to
act in concert to do an unlawful act with force and violence against the
property of the city or the person or property of another, or against the
peace, or to the terror of citizens or other persons, or to make any movement
or preparation therefor. It shall further be unlawful for said persons to
refuse to disperse after being requested so to do by any police officer or
other conservator of the peace. (1925 Code § 28-5; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous,
offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon premises owned or occupied by him or
under his control within the city. (1925 Code § 28-6; amd. 1981 Code; 2009
Code)
10-4A-4: RESISTING OFFICERS; AIDING ESCAPE:
No person shall wilfully hinder, delay, resist or obstruct any officer of the
city or any person aiding him in the discharge of any official duty, and no
person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any person from the custody of any
officer or any person having such person legally in custody, or shall molest or
interfere with any officer or person so having any person in custody. (1925
Code § 28-7; amd. 2009 Code)
10-4A-5: WEAPONS:
   A.   Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful for any person, within the
limits of the city and without a permit obtained therefor as provided by law,
to carry or wear under his clothes or concealed about his person any pistol,
revolver, derringer, bowie knife, dirk, razor, dagger, slingshot, metallic
knuckles or other weapons; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to sheriffs, coroners, constables, the chief of police, police
officers or other peace officers in the discharge of their official duties.
(1925 Code § 28-8; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Discharging Firearms: No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol
or other firearm within the corporate limits of the city. (1925 Code § 20-7;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4A-6: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
No person, without a reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise, shall make or
circulate, or cause to be made or circulated, any false alarm of fire. (1925
Code § 19-19; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4A-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (2009 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS AND DECENCY
SECTION:
10-4B-1: Intoxication Or Drunkenness Prohibited
10-4B-2: Indecent Exposure
10-4B-3: Gambling
10-4B-4: Penalty For Intoxication/Drunkenness, Indecent Exposure And Gambling
10-4B-5: Possession Of Cannabis Or The Synthetic Form Commonly Known As K2
Prohibited
10-4B-6: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
10-4B-7: Penalties For Possession Of Cannabis, K2 Or Drug Paraphernalia;
Application Of Fines
10-4B-1: INTOXICATION OR DRUNKENNESS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a state of intoxication or
drunkenness and acting in such a manner as to disturb or breach the peace, or
act disorderly, or endanger him/herself or another, within the corporate limits
of the City, regardless of whether such intoxication or drunkenness occurs in
any public or private place.
Being intoxicated or in a state of drunkenness shall not be the sole basis for
the offense of drunkenness or intoxication 1 .
A person who appears to be intoxicated or drunk in a public place and who may
be in or a danger to himself or others may be assisted to his home, a treatment
facility, or other health/hospital facility either directly by the police or
through an intermediary person. Such person shall be detained for protective
custody purposes only, and shall not be cited and/or arrested 2 . (Ord. 2018-
18-6, 7-9-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 301/55-15.
2 2. 20 ILCS 301/25-15.
10-4B-2: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
No person shall, purposely, publicly make any indecent exposure of his or her
person, or shall appear on the streets in a public place in a state of nudity,
or shall be guilty of any other like indecent or lewd act or misbehavior. (1925
Code § 28-12; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4B-3: GAMBLING 1 , 2 :
   A.   Prohibited Generally: No person shall deal, play or engage in faro,
roulette or any other device or game of chance, either as banker, dealer,
player or otherwise, for the purpose of gaming. (1925 Code § 28-16; amd. 1981
Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   Gaming On Streets: No person shall expose, in any of the streets,
avenues or other public places within the limits of the City, any table or
device of any kind whatever, upon or by which any game of chance or hazard can
be played, or shall play at or upon any such table or device. (1925 Code § 28-
17; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   C.   Keeping Gambling House And Gambling Devices: No person shall, within
the City, set up, keep, maintain or support any gambling house or room or place
used for the practice of gaming or playing for money or property, or shall
knowingly permit any building or premises owned or controlled by him to be used
for any such purpose, or shall keep or use, or permit to be kept or used, in
any building or place occupied, controlled or owned by such person any keno or
faro table, poker table, crap layout, wheel of fortune, roulette,
shuffleboards, slot machine, cards or other instruments or devices commonly
used for the purpose of gaming, or shall keep or have in his possession any
such gaming instruments or devices for the purpose of gaming therewith. (1925
Code § 28-15; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Frequenting Gambling Houses: No person shall patronize, visit, frequent
or be connected with the management of, or shall serve as doorkeeper, runner,
solicitor or agent of any house, room or other premises kept within the City
for the purpose of permitting others to gamble for any thing, or shall be found
therein, and no person shall, in any manner, play, raffle, bet or otherwise
gamble for any thing or shall bet on any game, lot, chance or hazard upon which
others may be playing. (1925 Code § 28-18; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   E.   Exceptions To Subsections A Through D Of This Section: Video gaming
shall be allowed within the City limits in licensed establishments in
accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act, as heretofore established or
hereafter amended. (Ord. 12-15, 8-13-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-1-8 of this title for Police Department duties.
2 2. See also title 8, chapter 6 of this Code.
10-4B-4: PENALTY FOR INTOXICATION/DRUNKENNESS, INDECENT EXPOSURE AND GAMBLING:
Any person violating any provision of sections
10-4B-1,
10-4B-2, and
10-4B-3 of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2018-18-6, 7-9-2018)
10-4B-5: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS OR THE SYNTHETIC FORM COMMONLY KNOWN AS K2
PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall possess 10.0 grams or less of any substance containing
cannabis, or the synthetic form of cannabis, 1-pentyl-3(1-napthoyl)indole,
commonly known as K2.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, cannabis includes marijuana, hashish,
and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant
cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination
of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks
of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination. (Ord. 2018-18-6, 7-9-2018)
10-4B-6: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   No person shall knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body.
   B.   As used in this section, the following terms shall include and have the
following meanings:
    CANNABIS: Shall mean and include any substance defined as cannabis in
section 3 of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/3.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Means any object or device used, designed for use or
intended for use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering, or storing
cannabis. For the purposes of this section, drug paraphernalia includes but is
not limited to:
   A.   Metal, wooden, plastic, glass, stone or ceramic pipes, with or without
screens;
   B.   Water pipes;
   C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   E.   Roach clips;
   F.   Bongs; and
   G.   One-hitters. (Ord. 2018-18-6, 7-9-2018)
10-4B-7: PENALTIES FOR POSSESSION OF CANNABIS, K2 OR DRUG PARAPHERNALIA;
APPLICATION OF FINES:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of section
10-4B-5 or
10-4B-6 of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined no less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per violation. Possession of each gram of cannabis or K2 or each item
of drug paraphernalia may be considered a separate offense. In addition to any
fine imposed for violation of section
10-4B-5 or
10-4B-6 of this article, the violator shall be responsible for reimbursement of
the City's reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in connection with the
prosecution of the ordinance violation as set forth in section
1-4-4 of this Code.
   B.   For every violation of section
10-4B-5 or
10-4B-6 of this article, after reimbursing the City's General Fund for the
attorneys' fees and costs incurred in connection with the prosecution of the
ordinance violation, any fines collected shall be deposited in the City's
General Police Fund for use as determined by the Chief of Police or City
Council. (Ord. 2018-18-6, 7-9-2018)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
SECTION:
10-4C-1: Damage To Property
10-4C-2: Auctions In Public Ways
10-4C-3: Throwing Glass On Streets
10-4C-4: Removing Cornerstones
10-4C-5: Penalty
10-4C-1: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
destroy or otherwise injure any public property of the state, county or city or
any private property. (1925 Code § 28-29; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
   B.   No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently, in any manner,
injure, deface, remove or destroy any fruit, ornamental or shade tree, or
boxing placed around the same, or any shrub, fence, railing, gate or sign upon
any public grounds, sidewalk or private premises, or any bridge, sewer,
culvert, drain or sidewalk, or shall trespass upon any private premises or
public grounds and injure, carry away or destroy any tree, fruit, vegetable,
plant, shrub or other thing which may be therein for ornament or otherwise, or
shall obstruct any public or private doorway or entrance with boxes or other
things to the hindrance or danger of the occupant of the premises, or remove
any gate from its hinges or other fixtures, for mischief. (1925 Code § 28-30;
amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4C-2: AUCTIONS IN PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall be permitted to occupy any of the public streets, sidewalks or
alleyways in the city for the purpose of conducting an auction sale or for the
purpose of vending at auction or otherwise any goods, wares, merchandise or
patent medicines, and no person shall violate any of the provisions of this
section after being notified by the chief of police or any police officer of
the city to desist therefrom. (1925 Code § 27-14; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4C-3: THROWING GLASS ON STREETS:
No person shall throw, cast or lay or place upon any streets within the city
any glass, bottles, window glass or other articles made of or containing glass,
and in case of any accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any such
street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the persons responsible
for such breakage, shall at once remove or cause the same to be removed from
the street. (1925 Code § 35-21)
10-4C-4: REMOVING CORNERSTONES:
No person shall wilfully or heedlessly remove or destroy any stone, stake or
post set or placed to mark the corner of any lot, any parcel of ground, or any
street or alley, or to show the grade of any street or alley of the city. (1925
Code § 28-35; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
10-4C-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (2009 Code)
TITLE 11
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Definitions
11-1-2: Police Department To Enforce
11-1-3: Licenses And Permits Required
11-1-4: Through Streets And Stop Intersections
11-1-5: Speed Limits
11-1-6: Obstructing Intersections
11-1-7: Traffic Flow During Annual Barbecue
11-1-8: Driving Through Processions
11-1-9: Toy Vehicles On Sidewalks
11-1-10: Driving While Intoxicated; Restitution For Emergency Response
11-1-11: Repairing Vehicles On Streets
11-1-12: Leaving Vehicle Unattended
11-1-13: Penalty
11-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOULEVARD: Applies to that portion of the City right-of-way or other premises
between a curb and the sidewalk.
CURB: Applies to the boundaries of a "street", as defined in this section.
DRIVER: Applies to the rider, driver or leader of a horse and a person who
pushes, draws, propels or operates or who is in charge of a vehicle.
HORSE: Applies to any draft animal or beast of burden.
PARK, PARKED AND PARKING: Refers to any vehicle waiting or standing in any
street or alley except when such vehicle is waiting in compliance with the
direction of a traffic officer or to meet others driving emergency vehicles.
STREET: Applies to that part of the public highway intended for vehicles.
STREET INTERSECTION: Applies to any street which joins another at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other street.
VEHICLE: Applies to a horse, motor vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, and to any
conveyance. (1925 Code § 35-26; amd. 2009 Code; Ord. 22-4, 9-12-2022)
11-1-2: POLICE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE:
The police department is hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to exercise
all powers and duties in relation to the management of street traffic and to
direct, control, stop, restrict and regulate, and when necessary, temporarily
divert or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health and convenience,
the movement of pedestrians and animal and vehicular traffic of every kind in
the streets and parks and on bridges in the city. (1925 Code § 35-24)
11-1-3: LICENSES AND PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a street or alleyway
unless such person has a valid license or permit or restricted driving permit
issued by the secretary of state of the state of Illinois, or by some other
state.
   B.   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street or alleyway without
first complying with all requirements for registration and certification with
the secretary of state of the state of Illinois or with some other state.
(Ord., 7-2-1979; amd. 2009 Code)
11-1-4: THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Through Streets Authorized; Vehicle Operation: The city council may, by
resolution passed at a regular meeting of the council, designate certain
streets within the city as through streets for the purpose of regulating the
traffic on said streets. Any person driving a vehicle on or along any street
designated as a through street shall have the right of way over all persons
driving upon and along any intersecting streets, and the city council may, in
said resolution, provide that there be placed upon the pavement of intersecting
streets or other conspicuous places, signs requiring all vehicles to come to a
stop before crossing such through streets.
   B.   Stops At Through Street Intersections: The following stop signs are
hereby erected to regulate the flow of traffic on through streets in the city:
 
Intersection          Stop Street       Direction Of Traffic Ordinance Passage
                                                             Date
Beardstown Street and Beardstown Street Eastbound and        7-1-1985
Hall Street                             westbound
Broadway Street and   Stowe Street      Southbound           10-2-1989
Stowe Street
Cass Street           Illinin Street    Eastbound and        9-12-2019
                                        westbound
Cass Street and       Cass Street       Northbound and       7-6-1982
Myrtle Street                           southbound
County Shed Road and  County Shed Road  Northbound           7-12-2004
Gridley Road
 
   C.   Three-Way Stop Intersections: The following intersections are three-way
stop intersections in the city, and all traffic approaching said intersections,
vehicular or otherwise, shall stop before entering:
South East Street and Broadway Street
Sylvan Street and North Cass Street
(1925 Code § 35-23; amd. Ord., 3-5-1990; Ord. 06-08, 8-14-2006; Ord. 2019-07,
9-12-2019)
11-1-5: SPEED LIMITS:
Every driver operating a vehicle on a street within the city shall drive the
same in a careful and prudent manner and at all times have the vehicle under
control and at a rate of speed not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour
unless otherwise posted. (1925 Code § 35-1; amd. 2009 Code)
11-1-6: OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS:
No person shall stop any automobile, truck or other vehicle for pleasure or
burden on any of the crossings in the streets of the city so as to
inconvenience persons crossing the same or shall in any other manner obstruct
any crossing, except so far as may be necessary in crossing the same. (1925
Code § 28-25; amd. 1981 Code; 2009 Code)
11-1-7: TRAFFIC FLOW DURING ANNUAL BARBECUE:
During the 2006 Virginia City BBQ and all Virginia City BBQs held thereafter,
traffic patterns will be modified as follows and as shown on the diagram
attached to ordinance 06-01 as exhibit A, and made a part hereof:
Front Street, one-way southbound from Jackson Street to Springfield Street to
allow for angle parking.
Jackson Street, one-way westbound from Main Street to Front Street.
Springfield Street, one-way westbound from Front Street to North Second West
Street. (Ord. 06-01, 3-13-2006)
11-1-8: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS:
It shall be unlawful for a driver of any vehicle to drive or lead his vehicle
through any funeral procession or any parade authorized by the mayor within the
limits of the city. (1925 Code § 35-15)
11-1-9: TOY VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS 1 :
The use of bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller blades and similar wheeled
devices on the sidewalks of the Virginia city square is hereby prohibited. This
section specifically does not apply to wheelchairs and scooters used by
disabled persons to provide mobility. (Ord., 8-5-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-1-10 of this code.
11-1-10: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED; RESTITUTION FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person, while in an
intoxicated condition, to drive any vehicle upon the streets of the city. (1925
Code § 35-16)
   B.   Emergency Response Restitution:
      1.   Definition: As used in this subsection, "emergency response" means
any incident requiring a response by a police officer, a firefighter carried on
the rolls of a regularly constituted fire department, or an ambulance.
      2.   Fee Established: Any individual convicted of or who pleads guilty to
and is placed on supervision for a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-501, section 5-7 of the snowmobile registration and safety act 1 , section
5-16 of the boat registration and safety act 2 , or a similar provision, whose
operation of a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or watercraft while in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, section 5-7 of the snowmobile
registration and safety act, section 5-16 of the boat registration and safety
act, or a similar provision, proximately caused an incident resulting in an
appropriate emergency response shall be required to make restitution to the
city for the costs of that emergency response. The restitution may not exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per agency for each emergency response.
      3.   Information To State: The city police chief and city fire chief are
hereby authorized and directed to promptly advise the appropriate state's
attorney of the city's desire to seek said restitution in such instances as
defined under subsection B2 of this section, and to provide the state's
attorney with such further information necessary as to the costs associated
with said emergency response.
      4.   Action To Recover Costs: In the event the appropriate state's
attorney declines to seek the requested restitution, the city attorney is
hereby authorized to maintain a separate action to recover the costs associated
with said emergency response, and in such instance, said person(s) shall be
liable to the city for reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred to recover
said costs associated with said emergency response. (Ord. 08-05, 7-14-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 40/5-7.
2 2. 625 ILCS 45/5-16.
11-1-11: REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREETS:
No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle or race the motor
of same while standing on the public streets or alleys of the city, except in
the case of a breakdown or other emergency requiring same, and no person or
employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use the streets or alleys
in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of working on or upon
automobiles or motor driven vehicles of any description. (1925 Code § 35-19)
11-1-12: LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle or person in charge
thereof to leave unattended upon any street or highway a motor vehicle with the
engine running. (1925 Code § 35-20)
11-1-13: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any provision of this title shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1925 Code § 35-25; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Method Of Parking
11-2-2: Leaving Parking Spaces
11-2-3: No Parking Places; General Parking Restrictions
11-2-4: No Parking On Specific Streets And Places
11-2-5: Limited Parking On Certain Streets And Places
11-2-6: Parking Trucks, Tractors And Commercial Vehicles
11-2-7: Loading And Unloading
11-2-8: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
11-2-9: Payment Of Fines; Responsibility For Additional Costs
11-2-10: Winter Parking Restrictions
11-2-11: Compact Vehicle Parking
11-2-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb as
provided herein and shall be placed so that neither right wheel, or the left
wheel when in the far left lane of a one-way street, shall be further than
eighteen inches (18") from the curb and not nearer than four feet (4') to
either end of any other standing vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to
parking on the public square as provided by resolution of the city council.
(1925 Code § 35-9; amd. 2009 Code)
   B.   Angle Parking In Residence Districts: There shall be no angle parking
on any of the streets in the residence portion of the city, and no parking
space shall be marked off in any part of the residence portion of the city.
(1925 Code § 35-10)
   C.   Parking In Marked Spaces: The city council may, by resolution duly
passed by a majority vote of the council at any regular or special meeting
called for that purpose, designate portions of streets in the city as parking
spaces and mark off said parking space by appropriate markers, either for
parallel or angle parking, and when any such parking space has been designated,
it shall be unlawful for any person to park except upon the space thus marked
off. (1925 Code § 35-11)
11-2-2: LEAVING PARKING SPACES:
The driver of a parked vehicle about to start shall give moving vehicles the
right of way, and the driver of the parked vehicle shall give a timely and
visible warning in some unmistakable manner before starting. (1925 Code § 35-
12)
11-2-3: NO PARKING PLACES; GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked within twenty five feet (25') of any stop
sign or within fifteen feet (15') of the projected property line of any street
or alley intersection.
   B.   No vehicle shall be left standing in such a manner as to obstruct any
crosswalk or private driveway.
   C.   No vehicle shall be parked within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   D.   No vehicle shall be parked in any street for the purpose of exhibition
or sale. (1925 Code § 35-13; amd. 2009 Code)
   E.   On the streets of the city commonly called "alleys", no vehicle shall
be parked except for the purpose of actually loading or unloading and, in no
case, shall a vehicle be parked so as to obstruct traffic in any alley. (1925
Code § 35-22)
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any
motor vehicle upon any sidewalk within the city. (Ord., 10-4-1982; amd. 2009
Code)
   G.   1. The parking of motor vehicles on any street, alley or highway owned
or maintained by the city shall be regulated as follows:
         a.   No motor vehicle shall be allowed to be parked or otherwise left
standing, with or without the motor running, so as to block the ingress or
egress to any business or residence within the city.
         b.   No person shall be allowed to park or otherwise leave standing
any motor vehicle upon any street, alley or highway owned or maintained by the
city so as to impede the efficient removal of snow from said street, alley or
highway.
      2.   The chief of police of the city may, at his or her discretion,
request the removal of any motor vehicle from any street, alley or highway
within the city if, in the sole opinion and discretion of said chief of police,
said motor vehicle impedes in any way the normal course of traffic upon any
street, alley or highway within the city. In such event, the chief of police
shall give the owner of said motor vehicle written notice to remove said motor
vehicle within twenty four (24) hours, and said owner's failure to remove said
vehicle to a position which does not impede traffic as aforesaid shall be
punishable by the imposition of a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   H.   The parking of campers and/or recreational vehicles on city streets and
rights of way is hereby prohibited.
   I.   No vehicle shall stop, park or stand idle, with or without the motor
running, on the boulevard. This prohibition shall not apply to police, fire,
ambulance or other emergency vehicles during emergencies or drills therefor.
Nor shall the prohibition herein apply to tow trucks removing vehicles in
violation of this section of the City Code of Ordinances. (Ord., 4-6-1987; amd.
Ord., 2001; 2009 Code; Ord. 22-4, 9-12-2022)
11-2-4: NO PARKING ON SPECIFIC STREETS AND PLACES:
Cass County Courthouse:
No vehicle shall be parked in any street, crosswalk, intersection or place,
other than a marked parking space, on any street surrounding or comprising the
Cass County Courthouse.
Cass Street:
There is hereby created a no parking zone for the entire length of the east
side of Cass Street between Springfield and Myrtle Streets within the city. Any
person who causes any vehicle to be parked within said no parking zone shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in section
11-2-8 of this chapter.
Main Street:
There is hereby established a "no parking zone" which shall consist of the now
existing two (2) parking spaces on the west side of Main Street, immediately
following said street's intersection with West Beardstown Street; said zone
shall be properly marked and identified by the elimination of the existing
parking space markings and replaced with such markings and signage customarily
used to establish "no parking zones" so as to properly apprise motor vehicle
traffic of said zone. In eliminating said spots, the southernmost remaining
spot shall be designated and properly marked as a loading zone for the purpose
of temporary parking not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. Operators of motor
vehicles parked in the "no parking zone" or in violation of the time
restrictions for the loading zone shall be subject to a fine of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00), plus court costs.
There is hereby established a "no parking zone" which shall consist of all that
part along Main Street along the easterly side of traffic moving in a northerly
direction, between the intersections of Main Street and Jefferson Street and
Main Street and Beardstown Street; said zone shall be properly marked and
identified with such markings and/or signage customarily used to establish "no
parking zones" so as to properly apprise motor vehicle traffic of said zone.
Operators of motor vehicles parked in the "no parking zone" shall be subject to
a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus court costs.
Route 125:
All parking is hereafter prohibited at all locations on Route 125 over which
the city has jurisdiction. (Ord., 8-4-1969; amd. Ord., 7-1-1985; Ord., 1-5-
1987; 2009 Code; Ord. 11-13, 11-14-2011; Ord. 12-16, 8-13-2012)
11-2-5: LIMITED PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS AND PLACES:
From and after the effective date of this chapter it shall be unlawful for any
vehicle, except fire, police, ambulance or other emergency vehicles, in times
of emergencies or drills therefore, to park along the north side of Springfield
Street, in the five parking spaces in front of the grocery store now known as
the Virginia Market, and lying between the intersection of Front and
Springfield Streets to the west and the curb cut on east side of the store for
more than thirty (30) minutes from Monday through Friday from eight o’clock (8:
00) a.m. through three o’clock (3:00) p.m. (Ord. 2020-07, 5-11-2020)
11-2-6: PARKING TRUCKS, TRACTORS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any bus, truck, tractor, tractor and trailer
or trailer and load, or any commercial vehicle to park on either side of the
following streets, except when loading or unloading: (Ord., 11-4-1946; amd.
2009 Code)
 
Street                 Location
East Beardstown Street Main Street east to Cass Street
South Front Street     Beardstown Street south to city parking lot
West Beardstown Street Front Street west to the alley
 
(Ord., 11-4-1946)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any semitruck, tractor or trailer upon any
street within the city. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable by
the imposition of a fine in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord., 7-2-1990; amd. 2009
Code)
11-2-7: LOADING AND UNLOADING:
Special no parking spaces in front of shipping entrances and the entrances to
places of worship, hotels, theaters, office buildings or other buildings where
a large number of people are accustomed to gather may be provided and
established by compliance with the following conditions: (1925 Code § 35-14;
amd. 2009 Code)
   A.   Any owner or occupant of such building adjacent to a street or alley
desiring a certain no parking space immediately in front of the entrance to
such building shall make application to the City Council setting forth all
relevant information and stating the number of feet and the time desired for
such purpose.
   B.   The City Council shall have authority to grant or refuse such
application in their discretion, or to grant the same with such restrictions or
limitations as they may fix.
   C.   In case such application is granted, the City Council shall issue to
the applicant a permit setting forth the location of such no parking space, the
number of feet frontage and the time limits fixed and such other limitations as
may be pertinent. Such permit may at any time be withdrawn or further limited
by the Council.
   D.   To enforce the provisions of the permit, the holder of the same shall
have the right to place "no parking" signs on the sidewalk within the time
limit fixed in such permit, marking the limits of such no parking space. Such
signs shall be of the exact size, character and description required by the
City Council, but shall be provided at the expense of the holder of the permit,
and shall bear the number of the permit issued. (1925 Code § 35-14)
11-2-8: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Designation Of Spots: The following parking spaces are designated as
parking spaces for persons with disabilities:
The four (4) parking spaces immediately west of the existing handicapped
parking space in front of the Presbyterian church.
The parking space immediately in front of the City Hall, 153 South Front
Street, Virginia, Illinois.
Two (2) additional parking spots on the north side of Beardstown Street,
between Front Street and Main Street, and as close as practical to an existing
wheelchair ramp located on the sidewalk running parallel to Beardstown Street.
One additional parking spot on the west side of Beardstown Street, between
Front Street and Main Street, and as close as practical to an existing
crosswalk running across Beardstown Street. (Ord. 03-05, 8-11-2003; amd. Ord.
05-01, 1-10-2005; Ord. 12-19, 10-9-2012; Ord. 2016-11, 10-10-2016)
   B.   Usage And Penalty: Parking in said spots is permitted only when the
disabled person is present, the vehicle is being used for his/her
transportation, and the persons with a disability parking permit issued by the
appropriate governmental body is displayed. The fine for unauthorized use of
said parking spots shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 12-19,
10-9-2012)
11-2-9: PAYMENT OF FINES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADDITIONAL COSTS:
The fines imposed for parking violations shall be paid within forty eight (48)
hours of the notice of the violation. In any action brought by the City which
results in the successful collection of unpaid parking fines, the City shall be
entitled to the payment of reasonable attorney fees. (Ord., 2-1-1988; amd. 2009
Code)
11-2-10: WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The Virginia City Square, as referred in this section, shall be that
portion of Beardstown Street, Springfield Street, Main Street, and Front Street
as defined by the area within the intersections of said streets.
   B.   No vehicle shall park, stop or stand idle on the Virginia City Square
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., when
two inches (2") or more of snow has fallen until said square has been
completely plowed. The official depth for the purpose of this subsection shall
be determined by the City Public Works Director, whose determination shall be
final and not subject to appeal.
   C.   No vehicle shall park, stop or stand idle on the Virginia City Square
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., when
the National Weather Service forecast for the City predicts snowfall to meet or
exceed two inches (2") during any twenty four (24) hour period preceding,
including, or immediately following the commencement of said restricted time
period. For the purpose of this subsection only, the Public Works Director
shall post the start date and end date for parking restrictions called for by
this subsection, by placing notice of "winter parking restriction" at City Hall
or other conspicuous, public place located on said Virginia City Square.
   D.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be towed at the
vehicle owner's expense, which shall be, at a minimum, a one hundred dollar
($100.00) charge. Furthermore, any vehicle towed for violation of this section
shall not be released until all towing and storage charges are paid in full.
Storage charges shall accrue at the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
day, commencing the day following the day the vehicle was towed.
   E.   In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any violation of
this section is also punishable as provided under the City's General Penalty
Ordinance, section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2015-15-02, 5-11-2015)
11-2-11: COMPACT VEHICLE PARKING:
   A.   A compact vehicle is any vehicle that has a combined passenger and
cargo volume of one hundred to one hundred nine (100-109) cubic feet.
   B.   The first three (3) parking spaces at the southeast corner of the
intersection of Front Street and Beardstown Street are hereby declared to be
Compact Vehicle Parking Spaces.
   C.   The City shall cause to be marked at the parking spaces and/or upon the
surface of the pavement, by signs, lines, markings, curbs, or other practical
manner, the size and limits of any parking spaces restricted for compact cars
or smaller vehicles.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than a compact vehicle
in or upon the parking spaces designated for compact vehicle parking.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or trailer across any line or
marking or to park any vehicle or trailer in such a manner that part of the
vehicle extends over or across lines or markings designating the limit of the
compact vehicle parking space.
(Ord. 2024-5, 12-9-2024)
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
11-3-1: Horn
11-3-2: Lights
11-3-3: Brakes
11-3-4: Noise Control
11-3-5: Weight Limit
11-3-1: HORN:
A person driving an automobile within the limits of the city must have same
properly equipped with a horn, bell or other device for signaling by sound, to
give warning of its approach. No horn, bell or other signaling device shall be
used except as necessary to give warning. Siren signaling devices shall not be
used on any vehicle except those operated by the police department, fire
department, the sheriff and authorized public utility vehicles when on
emergency calls. (1925 Code § 35-17)
11-3-2: LIGHTS:
The lights on all vehicles operated within the village shall be in compliance
with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-201. (2009 Code)
11-3-3: BRAKES:
Every motor vehicle operated on the streets of the city shall be provided with
adequate brakes. (1925 Code § 35-17)
11-3-4: NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   Muffler Required; Noisy Vehicles Prohibited: Every motor vehicle,
except electric, operating on the streets of the city shall be equipped with an
adequate muffler which shall not be cut out when used on the streets. No person
operating a vehicle shall permit the pipes, muffler or other devices to emit
sounds of exhaust in a loud and annoying manner, and all such vehicles shall be
operated in as noiseless a manner as possible. (1925 Code § 35-18)
   B.   Jake Brakes Prohibited: It is in the best interests of the city to
control unwanted noise throughout the city. The noise created by the use of
compression braking, also known as "jake brakes", by semitractors and large
trucks is disturbing to the citizens of Virginia, particularly in the evening
and early morning hours. The use of compression braking, also known as "jake
brakes", upon the streets and highways within the city limits is hereby
prohibited. (Ord., 2-7-2000; amd. 2009 Code)
11-3-5: WEIGHT LIMIT:
   A.   Weight Limit Established: The gross weight limit of any truck or other
motor vehicle, including its load, shall be a total weight not in excess of
twenty eight thousand (28,000) pounds.
   B.   Truck Routes: No person shall drive, operate or park any truck or other
motor vehicle having a gross weight in pounds, including the vehicle and its
load, in excess of twenty eight thousand (28,000) pounds in the city, except
streets designated as through state highways. However, this subsection does not
prohibit the driving, operating or parking of a motor vehicle on a residential
street if the most direct route is used for the purpose of making a local
delivery or local pick up within the city.
   C.   Enforcement: The enforcement of this section may be by either a
complaint or on information filed in the circuit court of the county in the
Cass County courthouse, located in the city. (Ord., 1-8-1979; amd. 2009 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
11-4-1: Definitions
11-4-2: Abandonment Prohibited; Removal Authorized
11-4-3: Duty To Notify Police Of Abandoned, Unclaimed Vehicle
11-4-4: Abandoned, Wrecked Vehicle On Street
11-4-5: Records Of Towed Vehicles
11-4-6: Owner Unknown
11-4-7: Reclamation Of Vehicle
11-4-8: Sale And Disposal Of Vehicle
11-4-9: Disposition Of Revenue
11-4-10: Nonliability Of Police And Towing Service
11-4-11: Violation; Penalty
11-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7)
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is more than twenty five (25) years of
age, or a bona fide replica thereof, and which is driven on the highways only
going to and returning from an antique auto show or an exhibition, or for
servicing or demonstration, or a firefighting vehicle more than twenty (20)
years old which is not used as firefighting equipment but is used only for the
purpose of exhibition or demonstration.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the city. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd.
2009 Code)
11-4-2: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, on
any highway in the city is unlawful and subject to the penalties as set forth
herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof
on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the general
public, anywhere in the city is unlawful except on property of the owner or
bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by or
upon the order of the chief of the police department after a waiting period of
seven (7) days or more has expired. (Ord., 6-1-1970)
11-4-3: DUTY TO NOTIFY POLICE OF ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED VEHICLE:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other motor
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
state not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the
police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city.
Upon receipt of such notification, the chief of police shall authorize a towing
service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep
the towed vehicle and its contents and maintain a record of the tow until the
vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to
possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
(Ord., 6-1-1970)
11-4-4: ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLE ON STREET:
   A.   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the
city ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized
by order of the chief of police.
   B.   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the
impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a towing service
may be authorized by order of the chief of police.
   C.   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the chief of police, the owner of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing costs. (Ord., 6-1-1970)
11-4-5: RECORDS OF TOWED VEHICLES:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number and registration sticker year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of
the officer authorizing the tow. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
11-4-6: OWNER UNKNOWN:
   A.   When the police department does not know the identity of the registered
owner, lien holder or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a
directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information.
   B.   The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
Illinois state police to be searched by a directed communication to the
Illinois state police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the
Illinois state police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be
searched by the Illinois state police. The information determined from these
record searches will be used by the police department in sending a notification
by certified mail to the registered owner, lien holder or legally entitled
person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and
setting forth public sale information.
   C.   When the registered owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled
to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the Illinois
state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner, lien holder or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information
obtained by the Illinois state police will be immediately forwarded to the
police department for notification of owner, lien holder or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd. 2009
Code)
11-4-7: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner, lien holder or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police
department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lien holder or other person
under this section until all towing and storage charges have been paid. (Ord.,
6-1-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
11-4-8: SALE AND DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE:
   A.   Vehicles Seven Years Of Age Or Newer:
      1.   Known Owner: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor
vehicle or other vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by
the registered owner, lien holder or other legally entitled person for a period
of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the police
department shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder.
Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place
for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle
has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police
department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner, lien holder or other legally entitled
person. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be
sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the
vehicle. In those instances where the certified notification specified herein
has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department, due to
the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the
registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required.
      2.   Unknown Owner: When the identity of the registered owner, lien
holder or other legally entitled persons of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed
vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or
disposed of in the manner authorized by this chapter without notice to any
person whose identity cannot be determined.
   B.   Vehicles Older Than Seven Years: When an abandoned vehicle of more than
seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, or when any
such vehicle is towed at the request or with the consent of the owner or
operator and is subsequently abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage
for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of
the registered owner, lien holder, or other legally entitled persons and
contacting the registered owner, lien holder, or other legally entitled persons
by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition and an examination of the state police stolen vehicle files for
theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period,
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner, lien holder, or other legally entitled persons, the vehicle
shall be disposed of as junk or salvage.
   C.   Records Kept: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of
the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner, lien holder or
other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or
otherwise disposed of, as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction
will be maintained by the police department for a period of one year from the
date of the sale or disposal. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
   D.   Antique Vehicles Exempt: A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as
an antique vehicle is excluded from the provisions of this section. (Ord., 6-1-
1970)
11-4-9: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to
be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this
chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the city
treasury. (Ord., 6-1-1970)
11-4-10: NONLIABILITY OF POLICE AND TOWING SERVICE:
Any police officer or towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner or his legal representative, lien holder, or any
other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by
this chapter. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd. 2009 Code)
11-4-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue. (Ord., 6-1-1970; amd.
2009 Code)
CHAPTER 5
GOLF CARTS, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV) AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES (UTV)
SECTION:
11-5-1: Definitions
11-5-2: Vehicle Requirements
11-5-3: Restrictions
11-5-4: Operation Of Golf Carts/ Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles/UTVs
11-5-5: Annual Registration Of Golf Carts And Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicles/UTVs
11-5-6: Inspection Of Vehicles
11-5-7: Mandatory Insurance
11-5-8: Operation Limited To Licensed Drivers
11-5-9: Other Laws, Regulations And Ordinances
11-5-10: Use Under The Influence
11-5-11: Convictions
11-5-12: Penalty
11-5-13: Waiver Of Fee
11-5-14: Prior Ordinances
11-5-15: Invalidity
11-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and titles shall have the
following meanings:
 
                                   Any motorized off-highway device,
                                   designed to travel primarily off-highway,
                                   fifty (50) inches or less in width,
                                   having a manufacturer's dry weight of one
                                   thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV):        less, traveling on three (3) or more non-
                                   highway tires, designed with a seat or
                                   saddle for operator use, and handlebars
                                   or steering wheel, for steering control,
                                   except equipment such as lawnmowers as
                                   defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-101.8 of the
                                   Illinois Vehicle Code.
                                   A vehicle specifically designed and
                                   intended for the purpose of transporting
                                   one or more persons and their golf clubs
                                   or maintenance equipment while engaged in
GOLF CARTS:                        the playing of golf, supervising play of
                                   golf, or maintaining the condition of the
                                   grounds on a public or private golf
                                   course as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-123.9
                                   and 11-1426.l(a)(2) of the Illinois
                                   Vehicle Code.
                                   Any motorized off highway device designed
                                   to travel primarily off-highway, sixty-
                                   four (64) inches or less in width, having
                                   a manufacturer's dry weight of two
                                   thousand (2,000) pounds or less,
RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES/ traveling on four (4) or more non-highway
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES (UTV):    tires, designed with a non-straddle seat
                                   and a steering wheel for steering
                                   control, except equipment such as
                                   lawnmowers defined by 625 ILCS 5/1.168.8
                                   and5/11-1426.l(a)(4) of the Illinois
                                   Vehicle Code and go-carts. (Ord. 2022-01,
                                   1-10-2022)
 
11-5-2: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
All vehicles allowed to operate on city streets pursuant to this chapter shall
be equipped with all of the safety systems and equipment as required by the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, including: brakes, a steering
apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the
front and rear, a slow moving emblem on the rear of the vehicle as required in
Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-709, a headlight
that emits a white light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
(100) feet from the rear, brake lights, turn signals, a windshield, and any and
all other safety equipment required to be installed and operational on such
vehicles as set forth in the said statute. No vehicle can be operated with more
people on board than designed by the manufacturer. Each occupant must be on
their own seat. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-3: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Golf Carts and UTV s and all other vehicles that do not meet the
requirements set forth in this chapter are not authorized on the roadways of
the City of Virginia.
   B.   ATVs are not authorized on the roadways or within the City limits of
the City of Virginia, even if the ATV would otherwise meet the requirements set
forth in this chapter. Notwithstanding the preceding restriction, ATVs may be
used for snow removal within the City limits, provided that such ATVs are
transported, and not driven, to the snow removal site. ATVs used for snow
removal need not be covered by mandatory vehicle insurance, but must be covered
under a farm, home, or non-highway vehicle insurance policy issued with
coverage amounts no less than the minimum amounts set for bodily injury or
death and for destruction of property under Section 7-203 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-4: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS/RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES/UTVS:
   A.   Subject to the requirements of Section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, which are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference by the City Council of the City of Virginia and of the provisions
of this chapter, drivers properly licensed to operate motor vehicles on the
roadways of the City of Virginia AND who are sixteen (16) years of age are
allowed to operate golf carts and/or UTVs under this chapter on the roadways of
the City of Virginia having a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per
hour or less. Any such vehicle must, however, abide by all City speed limits,
as well as all other traffic laws and rules of the road in effect from time to
time.
   B.   Golfcarts and UTV s are not allowed on the City sidewalks, parks,
Illinois State Route 78, and Illinois State Route 125 in the City of Virginia.
      1.   However, golf carts and UTVs may cross Illinois State Route 78 at
any intersection with a stop sign or traffic light ( except for those streets
constituting part of the Town Square as set forth in Paragraph C below). Golf
carts and UTVs must come to a complete stop before crossing, and must cross
Route 78 at a ninety (90)-degree angle.
      2.   Golf carts and/or UTVs may cross Illinois Route 125 at the following
intersections:
         a.   Illinois Route 125 and Duncan Street; or
         b.   Illinois Route 125 and County Shed Road. Golf carts and UTVs must
come to a complete stop before crossing, and must cross Route 125 at a ninety
(90)-degree angle.
   C.   No golf cart or UTV shall operate on or around the Town Square. The
Town Square shall be defined as Front Street from the intersection of Front and
Beardstown Streets running northerly to Springfield Street at the intersection
of Springfield and Front Streets, thence easterly along Springfield Street to
the intersection of Main Street (Illinois Route 78), then southerly along Main
Street to the intersection of Main and Beardstown Streets, thence westerly on
Beardstown Street to the intersection of Beardstown and Front Streets.
   D.   Golf carts and UTVs are allowed on the designated areas between the
hours of six o’clock (6:00) a.m. through ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. (Ord. 2022-
01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-5: ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY
VEHICLES/UTVS:
No vehicle authorized under this title and chapter shall be operated on any
street or alley in the City of Virginia unless the owner(s) thereof shall have
first registered such vehicle with the City of Virginia in accordance with the
following requirements:
   A.   Registration of such vehicles shall be administered by the Chief of
Police of the City of Virginia, or his designee. An application for
registration may be made on a form prescribed by the City of Virginia. Said
form shall include a statement under oath or penalties of perjury that the
vehicle proposed to be registered meets the definition of the vehicles defined
by the state statute or in Section
11-5-1 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by an annual registration fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and proof of liability insurance for said
vehicle having at least the same limits of coverage as required from time to
time for motor vehicles under the mandatory insurance law of the State of
Illinois.
   B.   Vehicles registered under this chapter and section of the City of
Virginia Municipal Code shall be issued a sticker from the City of Virginia
which shall be affixed to the rear of the vehicle and shall be viewable to a
police officer from outside of said vehicle.
   C.   The registration of said vehicle shall be effective for a period of one
calendar year and shall be renewed annually on January 2nd of each year in the
same manner as the original registration.
   D.   The registration of said vehicles shall not be transferrable in the
event of a change of ownership. A new registration fee will be required of the
new owner(s). No refund of the original registration fee is allowed in the
event of the change of ownership.
   E.   The registration of said vehicles shall be subject to revocation by the
Chief of Police of the City of Virginia in the event of a violation of the
requirements of Section 11-1426. l of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-
1426.1, or any of the provisions of this chapter. A revocation of such
registration shall be made in writing and shall set forth the provision(s) of
the state statute or this chapter that has been violated. No refund of the
registration fee is allowed in the event of the revocation of said permit.
   F.   In the event that the registration of a vehicle is revoked due to a
failure to maintain the required liability insurance or the failure of the
condition of the vehicle to be in compliance with the state statute or this
chapter, including, but not limited to, maintaining the required safety
systems, the Chief of Police of the City, or his/her designee, in his/her
discretion, may reinstate the registration upon documentation or reinstatement
of the required insurance coverage or of the repair of modification of the
vehicle to cure any deficiencies, as applicable, if the Chief of Police of the
City of Virginia determines that the violation was not intentional and is not
likely to recur. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-6: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Vehicles registered or proposed to be registered, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be subject to inspection before being issued said
registration sticker. The inspection is only required for the first year of
registration or if a sticker lapses. Vehicle owners may obtain an inspection
form from the City of Virginia Police Department and provide that form to the
business conducting the inspection. Businesses must inspect and certify on the
City of Virginia Police Department form that the vehicle meets the required
inspection. The inspector must certify that the vehicle meets the definition as
set forth in the state statute or this chapter, particularly in connection with
the provisions for maintenance in operating condition of required safety
systems and equipment. The certifying business must be a business whose primary
function is the selling of golf carts and/or UTVs, or whose primary function is
the repair of mechanical vehicles. Alternately, and only if no such certifying
business exists within thirty-five (35) miles of the Virginia city limits, then
the owner of the golf cart or UTV may undertake a self inspection and self-
certify using the form provided by the City. Where such self certification
occurs, the owner self certifying is responsible for the truth and accuracy of
the certification and statements on the form, and any violation for improper
certification may result in the assessment of an increased fine and attorneys'
fees as well as permanent revocation of the permit. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-7: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
The owner of any vehicle registered under this chapter shall continuously
maintain liability insurance for said vehicle having at least the same limits
of coverage as required from time to time for motor vehicles under the
mandatory insurance law of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-8: OPERATION LIMITED TO LICENSED DRIVERS:
All persons who operate a vehicle under this chapter within the City of
Virginia must have a valid Illinois driver's license. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-9: OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES:
Vehicles registered under this chapter shall be operated at all times in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the rules of the
road contained therein, and any other laws, regulations or ordinances governing
the operation of motor vehicles in the City of Virginia as well as the laws,
regulations or ordinances specifically pertaining to vehicles operated under
this chapter and the operation thereof. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-10: USE UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
A person who drives, or is in actual physical control of, a vehicle authorized
under this chapter, on a roadway in the City of Virginia, while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, is subject to the provision of Sections 11-500
through 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 11-502.
Further, a violation of the provisions of this Section shall be cause for the
City of Virginia to revoke the permit of the authorized vehicle. Revocation may
occur even if a conviction for a statutory offense has not occurred. (Ord.
2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-11: CONVICTIONS:
Two (2) convictions of any authorized user herein of a vehicle authorized under
the provisions of this chapter for moving violations concerning such vehicle
shall cause the registration provided for herein to be revoked for at least one
(1) year. It shall be the City of Virginia's Chief of Police to determine if
the registration will be reinstated after the one (1) year revocation. If the
Chief of Police denies reinstatement, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the City Council. The City Council's decision on reinstatement shall be a final
administrative determination. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-12: PENALTY:
In addition to the revocation of the registration of a vehicle as provided in
this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to fines for each offense, as well as court costs and the City of
Virginia's attorney's fees. The amount of fines may be between one hundred
dollars ($100.00) through seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. The provisions hereof for prosecuting violations of this chapter are
not intended in any way to supersede the provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code
involving the operation of said vehicles within the City of Virginia. (Ord.
2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-13: WAIVER OF FEE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the use and operation of a
vehicle solely owned by a unit of local govermnent (i.e. City of Virginia,
Virginia Parks, etc.); however, the registration fee for such vehicles are
waived. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-14: PRIOR ORDINANCES:
All prior ordinances and amendments to ordinances which are inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
11-5-15: INVALIDITY:
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
declared or held to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall rem. ain in
full force and effect. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-10-2022)
