VILLAGE CODE
of
WADSWORTH, ILLINOIS
1996
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-1177, passed 9-2-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the Village of Wadsworth, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2025-1177, passed September 2, 2025. Ordinances of
the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF WADSWORTH, ILLINOIS
96-462
   BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Wadsworth, Lake County, Illinois, as follows:
   SECTION I: This Village Code is hereby adopted and declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Wadsworth. This Village Code
of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the WADSWORTH VILLAGE CODE and it is
hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be kept up to
date by the Village Clerk under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting
for said Village Board of Trustees.
   SECTION II: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature
amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the Official Village Code
is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in
each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the
office of the Village Clerk and be available for inspection at any and all
times that said office is regularly open.
   SECTION III: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
Official Village Code.
   SECTION IV: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   SECTION V: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby expressly repealed to the extent, and only to the extent, they are in
conflict herewith.
   SECTION VI: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
   Passed by the Corporate Authorities on December 3, 1996, on a roll call vote
as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1187.png]
 
   Approved by the Village President on December 3, 1996.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1189.png]
 
Published in pamphlet form by the authority of the Village of Wadsworth Board
of Trustees on December 4, 1996.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1191.png]
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Official Municipal Code   1
Saving Clause   2
Definitions   3
General Penalty   4
President And Board Of Trustees   5
Village Officers And Employees   6
Municipal Expenses And Certain Fees   7
Indemnity And Legal Assistance   8
Comprehensive Plan   9
Ethical Conduct   10
Investment Of Public Funds   11
Locally Imposed Taxes Procedures   12
Code Hearing Department   13
Freedom Of Information Act   14
Fund Balance Policy In Accordance With GASB #54   15
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Wadsworth. This
Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as WADSWORTH VILLAGE CODE,
and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be
kept up to date as ordinances are adopted, under the direction of the Village
legal counsel, acting for said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the
number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the
position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to
the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself,
when reference is made to this Village Code by title in any legal document.
(1996 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of a general and
permanent effect, except certain excluded ordinances of a special nature. (1996
Code)
1-1-3: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall
make every effort to maintain this Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Village Board. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Court Proceedings
1-2-2: Severability Clause
1-2-1: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1996 Code)
1-2-2: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or
persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has
been changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1996
Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Wadsworth.
CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Wadsworth, Illinois.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Wadsworth, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The County of Lake, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of Wadsworth".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or for services performed by or costs incurred by, or
otherwise established, by the Village Board.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village is hereby established as commencing
on May 1 of each year and ending on April 30 of the following year.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE 1 : Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Wadsworth".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common.
PERSON: Any partnership, corporation, association, individual, or any other
legal entity.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
directly to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: A public street for public travel including the entire dedicated
width of the street, which includes the shoulders and ditches.
SHALL: The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Wadsworth, county of Lake, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1996 Code; amd. Ord. 2008-754, 6-3-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. Also see definition contained in section
  4-1-1 of this code.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
For all provisions of this code that are not referenced in the table of section
1-13-7 of this title, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this code shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense 1 , and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings
1-5-2: Presiding Officer
1-5-3: Ordinances
1-5-4: The Journal
1-5-5: Adoption Of Robert's Rules Of Order Revised
1-5-6: Reserved
1-5-7: Commencement Of Terms
1-5-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall
be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month of the year at six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. at the Wadsworth Village Hall, 14155 West Wadsworth Road,
Wadsworth, Illinois, or such other location as may be designated from time to
time by the village board. The duration of said meetings shall not exceed two
(2) hours, but may be extended following approval by the village board. (Ord.
2013-889, 2-5-2013)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the village board may be called
by the president, or by any three (3) trustees in accordance with the
provisions of the open meetings act. Notice shall be given to each board member
as soon as possible. (Ord. 2011-840, 4-19-2011)
   C.   Quorum: If no quorum be present, the board of trustees members present
shall adjourn or recess the board by a majority vote to another day. (Ord. 11,
1-14-1963; amd. 1996 Code)
   D.   Public Comment: The public shall be permitted to comment at all regular
village board meetings in accordance with the open meetings act, under such
rules as may be determined from time to time by the village board. (Ord. 2011-
840, 4-19-2011)
1-5-2: PRESIDING OFFICER:
   A.   President: The president shall preside at all meetings of the board of
trustees.
   B.   President Pro Tem: The board of trustees shall elect one of its number
president pro tem of the board who shall act as presiding officer of the board
during a temporary absence or disability of the president, or when requested so
to do by the president. The president pro tem of the board, when acting as
presiding officer, shall vote on all questions on which the vote is taken by
"ayes" and "nays", the president pro tem's name being called last.
   C.   Temporary Chairman: Each meeting of the board of trustees shall convene
at the time appointed for such meeting, as provided by ordinance. In the
absence of the president and president pro tem, a temporary chairman for the
meeting shall be elected by a majority vote of the trustees present from among
their members. The clerk, or someone appointed to fill the clerk's place by the
presiding officer, shall thereupon immediately call the roll of members. (Ord.
11, 1-14-1963; amd. 1996 Code)
1-5-3: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Style Of Ordinances: The style of all ordinances shall be: "BE IT
ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF WADSWORTH" as
is provided by statute.
   B.   Aye And Nay Vote: The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of
all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the
village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other
cases at the request of any member of the board; and such vote shall be entered
on the journal of the proceedings, as is provided by statute.
   C.   Record Of Ordinances: The clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances
passed in an ordinance book for such purpose. (Ord. 11, 1-14-1963; amd. 1996
Code)
1-5-4: THE JOURNAL:
The clerk shall keep the journal and minutes of the proceedings of the village
board of trustees, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-
90. (Ord. 2009-785, 5-19-2009)
1-5-5: ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER REVISED:
The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition
of "Robert's Rules Of Order Revised" shall govern the board in all cases to
which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the
special rules of this board. (Ord. 11, 1-14-1963)
1-5-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2010-805, 1-5-2010)
1-5-7: COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS:
The terms of elected officers in the village of Wadsworth are hereby declared
to commence upon inauguration of the officers. Inauguration of the officers
shall occur at the first regular meeting of the village board of trustees in
the month of May following receipt of the official election results from the
county clerk of the regular municipal election at which the officers were
elected. (Ord. 2009-784, 5-19-2009)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Compensation Of Officers
1-6-2: Employees
1-6-3: Administrative Assistant
1-6-4: Code Compliance Officer
1-6-5: Village Administrator
1-6-6: Village Clerk
1-6-7: Deputy Village Clerk
1-6-8: Treasurer
1-6-9: Village Attorney
1-6-1: COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Village President, Village Clerk, Trustees: The Village President,
Village Clerk and Village Trustees shall receive the following compensation:
 
1. Village President $1,000.00 per month
2. Village Clerk     600.00 per month
3. Village Trustees  525.00 per month
 
Effective May 1, 2025, the Village President and Village Trustees shall receive
the following compensation:
 
1. Village President $1,100.00 per month
2. Village Trustees  625.00 per month
 
Provided, however, any increase in compensation from that established by
Ordinance 2024-1161 shall not be payable to the Village Trustees whose current
terms of office commenced prior to May 1, 2025, but rather during their
respective current terms, they shall be paid five hundred twenty five dollars
($525.00) per month in accordance with the compensation set forth in Ordinance
2019-1057. At such time as such Village Trustee commences a new term of office,
such Village Trustee shall then be paid six hundred twenty five dollars
($625.00) per month in accordance with the terms of this section and shall no
longer be compensated as set forth in Ordinance 2019-1057. (Ord. 2018-1048, 10-
2-2018)
   B.   Village Clerk: Effective May 1, 2025, the Village Clerk shall be paid a
salary of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per month. (Ord. 2019-1057, 4-16-
2019)
   C.   Village Treasurer: The Village Treasurer shall be paid such salary as
the Village Board may establish from time to time.
   D.   Waiver Of Compensation: An elected Village official (Village President/
Village Trustee(s)) shall retain the prerogative to waive compensation by
written notification to the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2018-1048, 10-2-2018; amd.
Ord. 2024-1156, 8-20-2024; Ord. 2024-1161, 10-15-2024)
1-6-2: EMPLOYEES:
Village employees shall be subject to the Personnel Policy Manual adopted by
the Village Board, as such policy may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2013-
894, 5-21-2013)
1-6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT:
   A.   Employment: The Administrative Assistant shall be a full time employee
of the Village.
   B.   Duties Generally: It shall be the duty of the Administrative Assistant
to supervise all Village employees, the operation of the Village Hall, the
administration of escrow of funds for professional fees as set forth in section
1-7-1 of this title and to administrate all policies set forth by the Village
Board. (1996 Code)
1-6-4: CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER:
   A.   Established: The office of code compliance officer is hereby
established.
   B.   Appointment: The code compliance officer shall be appointed by the
village president with the concurrence of the village board and shall serve at
the pleasure of the village president and village board of trustees.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The code compliance officer shall have the power to
investigate ordinance compliance within the village, serve and post notices of
ordinance violations and take action to secure ordinance compliance, including
recommending to the village attorney that court proceedings be initiated to
secure ordinance enforcement and penalties for violation of village ordinances.
(Ord. 250, 2-22-1988; amd. 1996 Code)
1-6-5: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The village administrator shall be an employee and not an officer of the
village.
   A.   The village administrator shall be selected by a two- thirds (2/3) vote
of the village trustees. The terms of his employment shall be set forth in a
written employment contract the term of which shall not exceed the term of the
village president holding office when the contract is executed. The written
contract shall establish salary, duties, benefits, and other particulars of the
employment.
   B.   No member of the corporate authorities shall serve as village
administrator during his term of office or within two (2) years after the
expiration of that term.
   C.   The village administrator is encouraged to but need not be a resident
of Wadsworth.
   D.   The duties of the village administrator shall include:
      1.   The village administrator shall be responsible to the corporate
authorities and shall be responsible for the proper administration of the day
to day activities of the village.
      2.   The village administrator shall be responsible to implement the
policies established by the village board.
      3.   The village administrator shall coordinate and supervise the work of
all village employees, who shall be subordinate to him, but the village
administrator shall not be responsible for the hiring or termination of village
employees.
      4.   The village administrator shall attend all village board meetings.
The village administrator shall also attend the plan commission's, and zoning
board of appeals' meetings when necessary or advisable. The village
administrator shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all
matters coming before the board, the plan commission and zoning board of
appeals.
      5.   The village administrator shall be responsible for preparing the
agenda for all regular and special meetings of the board. The agenda and
supporting material shall be delivered to the president and each board member
two (2) days preceding each regular meeting.
      6.   The village administrator shall be responsible to the president and
board of trustees of the village for the proper administration of all the
affairs and ordinances of the village and provide for the enforcement of all
village ordinances.
      7.   The village administrator shall serve as budget officer and annually
prepare and submit to the village board by the date set by the village board a
recommended budget.
      8.   The village administrator shall prepare and submit to the village
board within sixty (60) days subsequent to the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and the administrative activities of the
village for that fiscal year.
      9.   The village administrator shall make such other reports to the
village board as the village board may require from time to time concerning the
operations of the village.
      10.   The village administrator shall keep the board informed on the
conditions and needs of the village and recommend to the board adoption of any
such measures he may deem necessary or expedient in the operation of the
village.
      11.   The village administrator shall advise the village board on pending
decisions of public policy and make recommendations he deems necessary or
expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the village or its employees.
      12.   The village administrator shall purchase all materials, supplies,
and equipment authorized by the board and for which funds are provided in the
annual appropriation ordinance.
      13.   The village administrator shall annually prepare and submit an
employee review of all employees to the village board by the date set by the
village board.
      14.   The village administrator shall provide staff support services for
the village president and trustees.
      15.   The village administrator shall keep a current inventory of all
real and personal property of the village and the location of such property.
      16.   The village administrator shall be responsible for the care and
custody of all records of the village except as otherwise required by law.
      17.   The village administrator shall investigate all complaints
concerning the administration of the village.
      18.   The village administrator shall monitor to ensure that all
franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the village are faithfully
observed.
      19.   The village administrator shall perform such other duties as
specified by village ordinance, as may be required from time to time by the
village board, and those other duties set forth in the employment contract.
   E.   The village administrator shall be subject to removal by the village
board by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the trustees.
   F.   The village administrator shall devote his full time to the performance
of his duties and not engage in any other employment without consent of the
board.
   G.   The village administrator shall be subject to the authority and
direction of the village board.
   H.   The village administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to be approved by the village board. The
premium for the bond shall be paid by the village.
   I.   Elected officials shall deal with village employees through the village
administrator. Elected officials shall not give orders to any subordinate
employees of the village administrator. (Ord. 2000-550, 6-6-2000)
   J.   The village administrator is authorized to make expenditures that are
specifically authorized by the village board, as well as expenditures for
routine day to day operating and maintenance activities without specific
approval by the village board but only in accordance with the following
policies:
      1.   The administrator is authorized to execute contracts and make
expenditures that have been specifically authorized by the village board.
      2.   The administrator is authorized to execute contracts and make
expenditures for routine operating and maintenance activities that cannot wait
until the next regularly scheduled village board meeting in an amount not to
exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The funds must be on hand to pay for
the resulting costs and authorization is subject to the prior verbal approval
of the mayor and senior trustee, or in their absence, at least two (2) other
trustees. Any such expenditure is subject to ratification by the village board
to confirm that it was made in accordance with this section. Examples of
routine operating and maintenance activities include utility bills, janitorial
services, and similar expenditures that occur on a regular basis.
      3.   The administrator is authorized to execute contracts and make
expenditures up to and including fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for
urgent repairs to Village infrastructure or equipment that cannot wait until
the next regularly scheduled village board meeting. The funds must be on hand
to pay for the resulting costs and authorization is subject to the prior verbal
approval of two trustees who sit on the Board's Road and Bridge Committee, one
of whom must be the Committee's Chair. Any such expenditure is subject to
ratification by the village board to confirm that it was made in accordance
with this section.
      4.   The administrator is authorized to execute contracts and make
expenditures up to and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for an
emergency situation that poses an imminent danger to the health, safety, and
welfare of the village that cannot wait forty eight (48) hours to schedule and
convene a special village board meeting. The funds must be on hand to pay for
the resulting costs and authorization is subject to the prior verbal approval
of the mayor and senior trustee, or in their absence, at least two (2) other
trustees. Any such expenditure is subject to ratification by the village board
to confirm that they were made in accordance with this section. In the event
any emergency expenditure would exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00),
the village administrator must notify the village president that a special
meeting must be called to authorize the expenditure.
      5.   For any expenditure in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
the village administrator must obtain at least three (3) written quotes for the
expenditures except for emergency situations. (Ord. 2000-550, 6-6-2000; amd.
Ord. 2013-911, 11-5-2013; Ord. 2020-1087, 6-16-2020)
1-6-6: VILLAGE CLERK:
The Office of Village Clerk is hereby established. Beginning on May 1, 2025,
the Village Clerk shall be elected. The Village Clerk shall perform all duties
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-90. (Ord. 2019-1058, 5-7-
2019; amd. Ord. 2024-1156, 8-20-2024)
1-6-7: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
There is hereby created the position of Deputy Village Clerk. The Deputy
Village Clerk shall be appointed by and be under the direct supervision and
control of the Village Clerk. The Deputy Village Clerk shall perform all duties
prescribed by the Village Clerk pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
3.1-35-95. The salary, if any, of the Deputy Village Clerk shall be as from
time to time established by the Village Board of Trustees. The Deputy Village
Clerk may be terminated at any time by the Village Clerk or the Village Board
of Trustees. The Deputy Village Clerk need not be a resident of the Village of
Wadsworth. (Ord. 2018-1051, 10-16-2018)
1-6-8: TREASURER:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer
shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall perform all duties
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-40 thru 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-35-85. The Village Treasurer need not be a resident of the
Village of Wadsworth. (Ord. 2018-1051, 10-16-2018)
1-6-9: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
The Office of Village Attorney is hereby established. The Village Attorney
shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. The Village Attorney shall have the status of an
independent contractor. (Ord. 2018-1051, 10-16-2018)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL EXPENSES AND CERTAIN FEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Responsibility
1-7-2: Professional Escrow
1-7-3: Administrative Assistant, Duties
1-7-4: Estimated Costs; Deposit
1-7-5: Account
1-7-6: Notification Of Professionals; Billing
1-7-7: Disbursements
1-7-8: Replenishment
1-7-9: Bill Directly
1-7-10: Final Disbursement
1-7-11: Copies Of Documents
1-7-1: RESPONSIBILITY:
Any person seeking the village's approval or consideration of any matter shall
be responsible for any professional fees incurred by the village in reviewing
the requested action or matter and in acting upon the requested approval or
consideration, including, but not limited to, engineering fees, planner fees
and attorney fees incurred by the village. This obligation remains in effect
notwithstanding that the professional escrow fund has not been established, is
insufficient or has been depleted. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-2: PROFESSIONAL ESCROW:
Any person requesting consideration or action by the village shall be required
whenever practicable to deposit sufficient funds necessary to defray
anticipated professional costs to be incurred by the village. (Ord. 2001-573,
3-6-2001)
1-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT, DUTIES:
The administrative assistant or such other person as may be designated from
time to time by the village board shall be responsible for the administration
of escrow of funds for professional fees. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-4: ESTIMATED COSTS; DEPOSIT:
The administrative assistant shall, upon receipt of a matter which may or will
require professional services to be rendered to the village, whenever
practicable make an estimate of the amount of the cost of expected services
based on the nature of the matter, its complexity, the relative need for
professional advice and the expected duration of processing the matter. The
administrative assistant shall so notify the individual applicant in writing:
   A.   With the estimate of the necessary funds to defray all professional
costs the village might incur in the course of reviewing the matter submitted
by the applicant or other individual. The estimate shall be derived from the
approved fee schedule in effect from time to time or when necessary by
consultation with the professionals who are expected to render services
regarding the matter.
   B.   And advise the individual that the application or matter shall not
thereafter be reviewed or acted upon by the village unless and until said sum
is received by the administrative assistant. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-5: ACCOUNT:
Upon receipt of said sum, the administrative assistant shall deposit the same
in a separate escrow account. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-6: NOTIFICATION OF PROFESSIONALS; BILLING:
Simultaneously with the sending of notice to the applicant or other individual,
the administrative assistant shall also notify the professionals whom the
village expects to utilize to review the matter. These professionals shall bill
not less frequently than monthly on said matter and otherwise keep the village
apprised of time and cost expended in providing services relating to this
matter. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-7: DISBURSEMENTS:
The escrow funds as deposited shall be utilized to pay for professional
expenses and any and all disbursements therefrom shall be approved by the
administrative assistant or the village board. The individual applicant who has
deposited the funds shall be periodically apprised of disbursements. (Ord.
2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-8: REPLENISHMENT:
The administrative assistant shall periodically review the escrow funds on
deposit to ensure that adequate funds are available to satisfy all professional
statements relating to said matter. In the event that the administrative
assistant determines that sufficient funds are not available, the
administrative assistant shall so notify the applicant or other individual and
request a further amount to defray the anticipated additional costs in
accordance with the standards set forth above. The professionals previously
engaged shall be advised not to do any further work until said sum has been
received and the individual applicant shall be given fourteen (14) days to
deposit the additional funds. In the event that said funds are not deposited,
the village shall take no further action on the matter and shall so advise the
applicant or other individual. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-9: BILL DIRECTLY:
It is preferred that escrow funds are obtained whenever possible. In the event
that an escrow has not been established and funded, the responsible person
pursuant to section
1-7-1 of this chapter may be billed directly by the village. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-
6-2001)
1-7-10: FINAL DISBURSEMENT:
At the conclusion of the matter and after all outstanding professional fees
incurred by the village in review of the matter have been satisfied in full,
the administrative assistant shall remit the balance, if any, to the person who
had deposited the funds. (Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
1-7-11: COPIES OF DOCUMENTS:
A fee for providing copies of documents to the public is hereby established as
follows:
 
1 to 4 pages               $0.25 per page
5 pages and above          0.15 per page in excess of 4 pages
Certification of documents 1.50 per document to be certified by the clerk
 
(Ord. 2001-573, 3-6-2001)
CHAPTER 8
INDEMNITY AND LEGAL ASSISTANCE
SECTION:
1-8-1: Purpose
1-8-2: Application
1-8-3: Legal Assistance
1-8-4: Indemnification
1-8-5: Applicability Of Chapter
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to indemnify and hold harmless Village
officials, officers, employees and agents acting on behalf of the Village from
any claims or causes of action that arise as a result of the performance of
their duties. (1996 Code)
1-8-2: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to and be for the benefit of all
elected or appointed officers and officials, employees, and agents, including,
but not limited to the Village Engineer, Village Planner and Village Attorney
of the Village. (1996 Code)
1-8-3: LEGAL ASSISTANCE:
The Village may, at the request of an officer, employee or agents, or former
officer, employee or agent, appoint counsel to appear and defend him and pay
costs or shall reimburse said officer, employee or agent for reasonable
attorney's fees and costs expended by him, upon the following conditions:
   A.   Claim Or Action Against Officer Or Employee: If any claim or action or
investigation, either civil or criminal in nature, is instituted against an
officer, employee or agent, or former officer, employee or agent, of the
Village where such claim or action arises out of:
      1.   An act or omission made in good faith occurring within the scope of
his employment and respective duties as elected or appointed official, employee
or agent of the Village.
      2.   An investigation by any Federal, state or municipality, or agency
thereof, involving the officer, employee or agent of the Village in nature of
his duties or actions as such officer, employee or agent of the Village.
      3.   An investigation of any officer, employee or agent of the Village by
any Federal, State or municipality, or agent thereof, by reason of his office,
employment or agency in the Village.
      4.   An investigation of any other officer, employee or agent of the
Village by any Federal, state or municipality, or agency thereof, to which such
officer, employee or agent may be subjected to by reason of another officer's,
employee's or agent's duties or actions as such Village officer, employee or
agent.
   B.   Reimbursement For Counsel: No officer, employee or agent of the Village
shall be entitled to reimbursement for counsel when his action was done with
malice or wilful misconduct. No officer, employee or agent of the Village shall
have further use of appointed counsel or be reimbursed where there is a finding
of guilty against him in a criminal or quasi-criminal action or wilful
misconduct in a civil action.
   C.   Matter Of Right: The appointment of counsel and payment of costs shall
not be a matter of right of any officer, employee or agent, but is a matter in
the sole discretion of the Village. Reimbursement, however, shall be a matter
of right to any officer, employee or agent and shall cover only those duties or
actions committed within the course of employment or by the nature of the
office, employment or agency held.
   D.   Appointment Of Counsel: The appointment of counsel shall be made by the
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The President,
with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may terminate such appointment at
any time. Appointed counsel shall be paid up to time his employment is
terminated. No officer, employee or agent shall be entitled to reimbursement
unless he notifies the Clerk and Village Attorney in writing within fifteen
(15) days after receiving first notice that a claim, action or investigation is
being made or instituted against him. No officer, employee or agent shall be
entitled to reimbursement if he does not accept the offer of appointed counsel.
No officer, employee or agent shall be entitled to reimbursement if he refuses
to cooperate in the investigation of any matter or claim, including the taking
of a polygraph examination or breathalyzer test. No officer, employee or agent
shall be entitled to reimbursement if he does not cooperate in the defense of
the suit, action or claim.
   E.   Right And Duty To Defend: The Village shall have the right and duty to
defend any suit against any officer, employee or agent, or any former officer,
employee or agent, for breach of duty made against that person by reason of any
negligent act, error or omission, including misfeasance, malfeasance and
nonfeasance, or any other claim, arising out of the scope of duties of said
person. (1996 Code)
1-8-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Generally: The Village shall indemnify and hold harmless any officer,
employee or agent of the Village, or any former officer, employee or agent of
the Village, from any and all liability, lawsuits or damages any such person
may suffer as a result of claims, demands, costs or judgment against him for
actions or inactions within the scope of his employment or duties, and the
Village shall further indemnify him for any damages awarded or monies paid in
compromise or settlement. No indemnification shall be made where there is
adequate insurance, nor where there is a finding of guilty in a criminal or
quasi-criminal case and fines or penalties are assessed.
   B.   Persons Entitled To Indemnification: No officer, employee or agent of
the Village, or former officer, employee or agent of the Village, shall be
entitled to indemnification unless he notifies the Village Clerk and Village
Attorney in writing within fifteen (15) days after receiving first notice that
a claim, action or investigation is being made or instituted against him. No
officer, employee or agent of the Village, or former officer, employee or agent
of the Village, shall be entitled to indemnification if he does not accept the
offer of appointed counsel. No officer, employee or agent of the Village, or
former officer, employee or agent of the Village, shall be entitled to
indemnification if he refuses to cooperate in the investigation of any matter
or claim, including the taking of a polygraph examination or breathalyzer test.
No officer, employee or agent of the Village, or former officer, employee or
agent of the Village, shall be entitled to indemnification if he does not
cooperate in the defense of the suit, action or claim. (1996 Code)
1-8-5: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
This Chapter shall apply to any claims heretofore or hereafter made coming
within the terms of the provisions of this Chapter. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 9
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
1-9-1: Adoption Of Plan
1-9-2: Approval Of Map
1-9-1: ADOPTION OF PLAN:
The Wadsworth comprehensive plan dated December 5, 2000, which is on file with
the village clerk, be and the same is hereby adopted and approved, and said
plan hereby supersedes and replaces the prior comprehensive plans of the
village of Wadsworth. (Ord. 2001-571, 1-2-2001)
1-9-2: APPROVAL OF MAP:
The comprehensive plan map amendment dated March 14, 1996, as prepared by the
village planner and as approved by the plan commission on May 9, 1996, which is
on file with the village clerk, be and the same is hereby approved. (Ord. 96-
443)
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL CONDUCT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Definitions
1-10-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-10-3: Gift Ban
1-10-4: Exceptions
1-10-5: Disposition Of Gifts
1-10-6: Penalties
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Wadsworth, whether on a full time
or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Wadsworth.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
659, 5-18-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-10-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of
Wadsworth in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-659, 5-18-
2004)
1-10-3: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of
or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 2004-659, 5-18-2004)
1-10-4: EXCEPTIONS:
Section
1-10-3 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
   B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
   C.   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   D.   Educational materials and missions.
   E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
   F.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual
as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's
spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
   G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
   H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
   I.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   J.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   K.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   L.   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 2004-659, 5-18-2004)
1-10-5: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living
with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to
its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or
succeeded. (Ord. 2004-659, 5-18-2004)
1-10-6: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the state officials and employees ethics act 1 . (Ord. 2004-659,
5-18-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 11
INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Policy
1-11-2: Scope
1-11-3: Prudence
1-11-4: Objective
1-11-5: Delegation Of Authority
1-11-6: Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest
1-11-7: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
1-11-8: Authorized And Suitable Investments
1-11-9: Collateralization
1-11-10: Safekeeping And Custody
1-11-11: Diversification
1-11-12: Maximum Maturities
1-11-13: Internal Control
1-11-14: Performance Standards
1-11-15: Reporting
1-11-16: Marking To Market
1-11-17: Policy Review
1-11-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the Village to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the Village and conforming to all State and
local statutes governing the investment of public funds. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-
1999)
1-11-2: SCOPE:
This policy includes all funds governed by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 99-533,
10-19-1999)
1-11-3: PRUDENCE:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-4: OBJECTIVE:
The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
   A.   Legality: Conformance with Federal, State and other legal requirements.
   B.   Safety: Preservation of capital and protection of investment principal.
   C.   Liquidity: Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements.
   D.   Yield: Attainment of market rates of return.
   E.   Review: The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its
effectiveness in meeting the Village's needs for safety, liquidity, rate of
return, diversification and its general performance. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-5: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer who, under the delegation of the Board of
Trustees, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-6: ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-7: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by credit worthiness. (Ord. 99-533,
10-19-1999)
1-11-8: AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested. (Ord. 99-533,
10-19-1999)
1-11-9: COLLATERALIZATION:
Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, etc.) in excess
of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed by a
written agreement and held at an independent third party institution in the
name of the Village. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-10: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the Village, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment
(DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-11: DIVERSIFICATION:
The Village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-12: MAXIMUM MATURITIES:
To the extent possible, the Village shall attempt to match its investments with
anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the
Village will not directly invest in securities maturing more than ten (10)
years from the date of purchase. Reserve funds may be invested in securities
exceeding ten (10) years if the maturity of such investments are made to
coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use of the funds. (Ord. 99-
533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-13: INTERNAL CONTROL:
The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the Village are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
internal controls shall address the following points:
   A.   Control of collusion.
   B.   Separation of transaction authority from accounting.
   C.   Custodial safekeeping.
   D.   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and wire
transfers. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-14: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to bench marks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-15: REPORTING:
The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The report
should be provided to the Board of Trustees and available on request. The
report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An
annual report should also be provided to the Board. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-16: MARKING TO MARKET:
A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the Board
of Trustees quarterly. (Ord. 99-533, 10-19-1999)
1-11-17: POLICY REVIEW:
The investment policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer and
any modifications made thereto must be approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
99-533, 10-19-1999)
CHAPTER 12
LOCALLY IMPOSED TAXES PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Scope
1-12-2: Definitions
1-12-3: Notices
1-12-4: Late Payment
1-12-5: Payment
1-12-6: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-12-7: Audit Procedure
1-12-8: Appeal
1-12-9: Hearing
1-12-10: Interest And Penalties
1-12-11: Abatement
1-12-12: Installment Contracts
1-12-13: Statute Of Limitations
1-12-14: Voluntary Disclosure
1-12-15: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-12-16: Internal Review Procedure
1-12-17: Application
1-12-18: Severability
1-12-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village and not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Wadsworth, Illinois. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-3: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-4: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-5: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be one
year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The
village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly
to the village.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum, based
on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund
check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer to occur
within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
   C.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   D.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   E.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local
tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   G.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-8: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-9: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-12-8 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 9.5
percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and
the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2000-
570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-
2000)
1-12-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-16: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-17: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
1-12-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-570, 12-5-2000)
CHAPTER 13
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-13-1: Adopted
1-13-2: Department Established
1-13-3: Authorization
1-13-4: Hearing Officer
1-13-5: Rules Applicable To All Code Violations
1-13-6: Instituting Code Hearing Proceedings
1-13-7: Fines Applicable To All Offenses
1-13-8: Additional Costs Collected
1-13-1: ADOPTED:
   A.   65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., "code hearing
departments", 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., "building code
violations", and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, "administrative
adjudication of violations of traffic regulations concerning the standing,
parking or condition of vehicles", as amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted in their entirety and any person charged with the violation of a
municipal code may be prosecuted under and in accordance with the provisions
herein. (Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
1-13-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A code hearing department is established as an independent agency of the
municipal government to adjudicate any violation of a municipal code except for
moving violations under the Illinois vehicle code and any reportable offenses
pursuant to section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-
2008)
1-13-3: AUTHORIZATION:
Individuals authorized to issue code violations are any and all police
officers, building code inspectors and any other person appointed by the
village administrator to issue code violations. These individuals shall be
called "compliance administrators". (Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
1-13-4: HEARING OFFICER:
The village president, with advice and consent of the village board, shall
appoint a hearing officer to hear contested hearings under this chapter. Prior
to conducting proceedings under this chapter, hearing officers shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following: a)
instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will conduct; b)
orientation to each subject area of the code violations they will administer;
c) observation of administrative hearings; and d) participation in hypothetical
cases, including rules of evidence and issuing final orders. In addition, every
hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of
Illinois for at least three (3) years 1 . (Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40.
1-13-5: RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL CODE VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Compliance Administrator: The village administrator shall appoint a
compliance administrator(s) authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking
and other violation notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for
violation of certain ordinances and operate an administrative adjudication
system 1 .
   B.   Opportunity To Contest: Any person receiving a code violation shall
have an opportunity for a hearing in which a party may contest the merits of
the alleged violation. Persons appearing at the hearing may be represented by
counsel at their own expense. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside
and hear testimony and accept evidence as to the existence or nonexistence of a
code violation 2 .
   C.   Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of liability
shall occur following a hearing officer's determination of liability and the
exhaustion or failure to exhaust the administrative review procedure provided
in this chapter. The hearing officer's determination of liability shall become
final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
2) upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without such filing
having been made 3 .
   D.   Subpoenas: At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer
may, at the request of either party, issue subpoenas for witnesses to appear
and give testimony at the hearing 4 .
   E.   Failure To Appear: If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default
and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the code
violation 5 .
   F.   Not Applicable: The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter 6 .
   G.   Findings, Decision And Order: At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make a determination based upon the evidence presented.
The determination shall be in writing. The findings, decision and order shall
include: 1) the hearing officer's finding of facts; 2) a decision of whether or
not the code violation exists based on the finding of facts; and 3) an order
that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proven. A
copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the defendant
within five (5) days after it is issued 7 .
   H.   Administrative Review: The findings, decision, and order of the hearing
officer shall be subject to review in the judicial circuit court of Lake
County, Illinois. The provisions of the administrative review law, and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under
this chapter 8 .
   I.   Collection Of Costs: Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or
part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the
administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village of
Wadsworth, and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing, parking or
compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation 9 .
(Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(1).
2 3. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-35; 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4).
3 4. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(7).
4 5. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25.
5 6. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25.
6 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-35; 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4).
7 2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45.
8 3. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50; 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(d).
9 4. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(e).
1-13-6: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Code Violations Other Than Building Or Parking, Standing Or Compliance
Violations:
      1.   When a compliance administrator finds that a code violation exists,
that individual shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice
that indicates the following:
         a.   The name and address of the alleged violator;
         b.   The type and nature of the violation;
         c.   The date and time the violation was observed; and
         d.   The names of witnesses to the violation.
      2.   The violation form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
      3.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the municipality so that he or she may prepare evidence of the
code violation for presentation at the hearing, and one copy of the report form
shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons
commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing 1 .
      4.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in said circuit court for
the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple
findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was
issued in accordance with the applicable municipal ordinance. Service of the
summons and a copy of the petition may be made by any method provided for by
section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and
costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings,
decision and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., and that the
defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial
review as provided:
         a.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and
against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs;
         b.   The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in
the same manner as other judgments for recovery of money; and
         c.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation 2 .
   B.   Building Code Violations:
      1.   Violation Notice: When a compliance administrator finds a code
violation while inspecting a structure or property, he or she shall note the
violation on a multiple copy violation notice indicating:
         a.   The name and address of the structure;
         b.   The type and nature of the violation;
         c.   The date and time the violation was observed;
         d.   The names of witnesses to the violation; and
         e.   The address of the structure or property where the violation is
observed.
      2.   Service: The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code
hearing department and a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the
report and a hearing date shall be noted on the form. The hearing date shall
not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation
is reported. One copy of the violation report shall be maintained in the files
of the code hearing department and shall become part of the record of the
hearing. One copy of the report shall be returned to the individual issuing the
code violations. One copy of the report form shall be served by first class
mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear
on the specified hearing date.
If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service
on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by
posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the
structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before
the hearing is scheduled 3 .
      3.   Defenses To Building Code Violations: It shall be a defense to a
building code violation charged if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent
or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
         a.   The building code violation alleged in the notice does not in
fact exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or
removed;
         b.   The building code violation has been caused by the current
property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to
maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the violations; and
         c.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the building code violation.
      4.   Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property: The order to correct a
building code violation and the sanction imposed by the village as the result
of a finding of a building code violation under this chapter shall attach to
the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a
building code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing
officer under this chapter.
   C.   Parking, Standing Or Compliance Notice Violations:
      1.   Specifications: A parking, standing or compliance violation notice
shall:
         a.   Specify the date, time and place of violation of a parking,
standing, or compliance regulation;
         b.   Specify the particular regulation violated;
         c.   Specify the fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late
payment, when so provided by ordinance;
         d.   Specify the vehicle make and state registration number;
         e.   Specify the identification number of the person issuing the
notice;
         f.   State that payment of the indicated fine and of any applicable
penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation;
         g.   Contain information as to the availability of a hearing in which
the violation may be contested on its merits;
         h.   Specify the time and manner in which a hearing may be had 4 .
Service: Service of the parking, standing or compliance violation notice may be
achieved by affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
parked vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle if he/she
is present. A person authorized by ordinance to issue and serve parking,
standing, and compliance violation notices shall certify as to the correctness
of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing his/her name to the
notice at the time of service or in the case of a notice produced by a
computerized device, by signing a single certificate to be kept by the traffic
compliance administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced
by the device while it was under his/her control. The original or a facsimile
of the violation notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance
administrator and there shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of
business. A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice issued, signed
and served in accordance with this section, or a copy of the notice, shall be
prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts shown on the notice. The notice or copy shall be admissible in any
subsequent administrative adjudication or legal proceedings 5 .
Service of additional notices may be sent by first class United States mail,
postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the secretary of state, or, under section 11-1306 of the Illinois
vehicle code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to
the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease. The service shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The
notices shall be in the following sequence and shall include, but not be
limited to, the information specified herein:
      2.   Second Notice Of Violation: This notice shall:
         a.   Specify the date and location of the violation cited in the
parking, standing or compliance violation notice;
         b.   Specify the particular regulation violated;
         c.   Specify the vehicle make and state registration number;
         d.   Specify the fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late
payment when so provided by ordinance;
         e.   Specify the availability of a hearing in which the violation may
be contested its merits;
         f.   Specify the time and manner in which the hearing may be had;
         g.   State that failure either to pay the indicated fine and any
applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits in the time and
manner specified, will result in a final determination of violation liability
for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated;
         h.   State that, upon the occurrence of a final determination of
violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to
exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid
fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village of Wadsworth.
      3.   Notice Of Final Determination Of Parking, Standing, Or Compliance
Violation Liability: This notice shall be sent following a final determination
of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability and the conclusion of
judicial review procedures taken under this section. The notice shall:
         a.   State that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the
municipality; and
         b.   Contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing the municipality within the time specified may result in the
municipality's filing a petition in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine
or penalty rendered a judgment as provided by this section, or may result in
suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations under section 6-306.5 of the
Illinois vehicle code 6 .
      4.   Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of
impending driver's license suspension shall:
         a.   Be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains
due and owing on ten (10) or more parking violations;
         b.   State that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty
five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the municipality notifying
the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code;
         c.   State that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self- addressed,
stamped envelope to the municipality along with a request for the copy; and
         d.   Be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address recorded with the secretary of state 7 .
      5.   Hearings On Standing, Parking And Condition Of Vehicles: An
opportunity for a hearing for the registered owner of the vehicle cited in the
parking, standing or compliance violation notice in which the owner may contest
the merits of the alleged violation, and during which formal or technical rules
of evidence shall not apply; provided, however, that under section 11-1306 of
the Illinois vehicle code, the lessee of a vehicle cited in the violation
notice likewise shall be provided an opportunity for a hearing of the same kind
afforded the registered owner. The hearings shall be recorded, and the person
conducting the hearing on behalf of the traffic compliance administrator shall
be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers.
Persons appearing at a hearing under this section may be represented by counsel
at their expense 8 .
      6.   Final Determinations Of Violation Liability: A final determination
of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty
after a hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the
exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures
provided by ordinance. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest
the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed
notice, the hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall become
final:
         a.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination;
or
         b.   Upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a
filing having been made 9 .
A petition to set aside a determination of parking, standing or liability may
be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty and shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the finding of liability and ruled upon by the compliance
administrator within thirty (30) days thereafter. The grounds for such a
petition are limited to: a) the person not having been the owner or lessee of
the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued; b) the person
having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question; and c)
excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. After the
determination of violation liability has been set aside upon a showing of just
cause, the person owing the unpaid fine or penalty shall be provided with a
hearing on the merits for the violation 10 .
      7.   Procedures For Nonresidents: If the alleged violator does not reside
within the state of Illinois, he or she may contest the violation in writing.
In such circumstances, the hearing officer must receive a request in writing
from the nonresident to contest the violation seven (7) days prior to the
initial hearing. If the hearing officer receives such a written request, the
nonresident may submit his or her position, in writing, as to why the issuance
of the violation was improper 11 . (Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
 
Notes
1  1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20.
2  2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55.
3  1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-4.
4  1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(2).
5  1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(3).
6  1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(5)(i), 5/11-208.3(b)(5)(ii).
7  2. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(6).
8  1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4).
9  2. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(7).
10 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(8).
11 4. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(9).
1-13-7: FINES APPLICABLE TO ALL OFFENSES:
The following ordinance violations may be heard in an administrative
adjudication as set forth in this chapter and shall carry the following listed
fines indicated below. All fines are per offense and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day a violation occurs or continues.
                     First Offense Fine Second Offense Fine Third Offense Fine
Code Section Offense Check For Priors
                     IVC = IL Vehicle Code*
                                   First Offense Second Offense Third Offense
Code Section     Offense           Fine          Fine           Fine
                                   Check For Priors
                                   IVC = IL Vehicle Code*
3-1-3A           Liquor license    $750.00       $750.00        $750.00
                 required
3-1-3B through I Liquor license    250.00        500.00         750.00
                 regulations
3-1-8            Display of liquor 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 license
3-2              Garage and        100.00        100.00         100.00
                 vehicle sales
                 Peddlers,
                 canvassers and
3-3-1            transient         100.00        100.00         100.00
                 merchant (PCT)
                 license required
3-3-4            PCT sales; public 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 place
3-3-5            PCT fraud         100.00        250.00         500.00
3-5-1            Contractor        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 provisions
3-5-2            Contractor        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 requirements
3-5-3            Contractor        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 information
3-8-3            Raffle license    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 required
3-8-10           Conduct of        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 raffles
4-1-2,           Nuisances         100.00        250.00         500.00
4-1-3
4-1-4            Unnecessary noise 100.00        250.00         500.00
4-1-5            Litter            250.00        500.00         750.00
4-1-5C           Litter from       750.00        750.00         750.00
                 vehicle
4-1-6            Sump pump         100.00        250.00         500.00
                 discharge
                 Scavenger license                              $750.00/
4-2-2            required          750.00        750.00         license
                                                                revocation
                 Dumping and
4-2-5            garbage           750.00        750.00         $750.00
                 accumulation
                 Mobile home,
                 house trailer and
4-4-2            recreational      250.00        500.00         750.00
                 vehicle
                 restrictions
4-5-2            Burning           100.00        250.00         500.00
                 restriction
4-5-3            Burning           100.00        250.00         500.00
                 regulations
4-5-4            Burning of off    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 site materials
4-6-1            Weeds nuisance    100.00        250.00         500.00
4-6-2            Removal of weeds  100.00        250.00         500.00
4-6-3            Cutting of grass  100.00        250.00         500.00
                 yards
                 Weeds and grass
4-6-4            yards cutting     100.00        250.00         500.00
                 violation
                 Discharge
5-1-2            prohibited/       250.00        500.00         750.00
                 hunting
5-2-1            Minors; vandalism 100.00        250.00         500.00
5-2-2            Minors; curfew    100.00        250.00         500.00
5-3-1,           Dog at large      100.00        250.00         500.00
5-3-2
5-3-2-1          Dog leash         100.00        250.00         500.00
                 required
5-3-3            Rabies            100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vaccination
                 Sales, use or
5-5-2            explosion of      250.00        500.00         750.00
                 fireworks
                 Public display of
5-5-3            fireworks permit  750.00        750.00         750.00
                 required
5-6-1            Public            250.00        500.00         750.00
                 intoxication
5-6-2            Possession and    250.00        500.00         750.00
                 use of cannabis
5-6-3            Weapons           250.00        500.00         750.00
                 possession
5-6-4            Drug              250.00        500.00         750.00
                 paraphernalia
5-6-5            Resisting police  250.00        500.00         750.00
                 officer
                 Obstructing
5-6-6            service of        250.00        500.00         750.00
                 process
5-6-7            Obstruction of    250.00        500.00         750.00
                 justice
5-6-8            Disturbing lawful 250.00        500.00         750.00
                 assemblages
5-6-9            Assault           250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-10           Battery           250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-11           Trespassing       250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-12           Harassment        250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-13           Theft             250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-14           Theft by          250.00        500.00         750.00
                 deception
5-6-15           Retail theft      250.00        500.00         750.00
5-6-16           Disorderly        250.00        500.00         750.00
                 conduct
6-1-4            Parking           100.00        150.00         200.00
                 restrictions
6-2-1C           Overnight truck   250.00        500.00         750.00
                 parking
6-3-2            Snowmobile use    100.00        250.00         500.00
6-3-4            Snowmobile        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 equipment
6-4-2            Off road vehicle  100.00        250.00         500.00
                 use
6-4-4            Off road vehicle  100.00        250.00         500.00
                 equipment
6-5-1            Inoperative       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vehicle
                 Inoperative
6-5-2            vehicle on street 250.00        500.00         750.00
                 or way
6-5-3            Unattended        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vehicle
6-5-4            Parking following 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 snowfall
6-5-5            Inoperable        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vehicles
6-5-6            Abandonment of    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vehicles
                 Permit required;
7-1-1            moving certain    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 vehicles
                 Spilling
7-1-2            materials on      250.00        500.00         750.00
                 streets
7-1-3            Use after         100.00        250.00         500.00
                 snowfall
                 Annual
7-2-3            registration      100.00        250.00         500.00
                 required;
                 utilities
7-2-4            ROW permit        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 required
7-2-6            Effect of ROW     100.00        250.00         500.00
                 permit
7-2-7            Revised ROW       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 permit drawings
7-2-8            ROW permit        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 insurance
7-2-9            Utility           100.00        250.00         500.00
                 indemnification
7-2-10           Required security 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 fund
7-2-12           Change in         100.00        250.00         500.00
                 ownership
7-2-13           Construction      100.00        250.00         500.00
                 standards
7-2-14           Traffic control   100.00        250.00         500.00
7-2-15           Location of       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 facilities
                 Construction
7-2-16           methods and       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 materials
7-2-17           Vegetation        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 control
7-2-18           Change in utility 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 facilities
7-2-19           Cleanup and       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 restoration
7-2-20           Maintenance       100.00        250.00         500.00
7-3-1 through    Park regulations  100.00        250.00         500.00
7-3-8
8-1-1            Building permit   100.00        250.00         500.00
                 procedures
                 Surface drainage
8-1-1-1          footing tile      100.00        250.00         500.00
                 drainage system
8-1-1-2          Masonry veneer    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 construction
8-1-1-3          Building          100.00        250.00         500.00
                 inspections
8-1-1-4          Required toilet   100.00        250.00         500.00
                 facilities
8-1-1-5          Conveyances       100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-2,           International     100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-2-1          building code
8-1-3,           International     100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-3-1          residential code
8-1-3-2          Structural        100.00        250.00         500.00
                 insulated panels
8-1-4 through    National          100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-4-2          electrical code
8-1-5            Illinois plumbing 100.00        250.00         500.00
                 code
8-1-6,           International     100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-6-1          mechanical code
8-1-7,           International     100.00        250.00         500.00
8-1-7-1          fire code
                 Satellite earth
8-3-1            stations/dish     100.00        250.00         500.00
                 antennas
8-3-2            Silt fences       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 Culverts, ditches
8-4-1            and swales;       100.00        250.00         500.00
                 permit required
8-4-2            CDS insurance/    100.00        250.00         500.00
                 bond
8-4-3            CDS inspections   100.00        250.00         500.00
                 Culvert
8-4-4            installation      100.00        250.00         500.00
                 regulations
                 Ditch and swale
8-4-5            installation      100.00        250.00         500.00
                 regulations
                 Drainage ditch
8-4-6            enclosure         250.00        500.00         750.00
                 regulations
                 Other
8-4-7            miscellaneous     100.00        250.00         500.00
                 violations
8-5-3            Required street   500.00        750.00         750.00
                 improvements
8-5-4            Village standards 500.00        750.00         750.00
8-5-5            Guarantee         500.00        750.00         750.00
8-6-1            Mailbox materials 100.00        100.00         100.00
8-6-2            Mailbox           100.00        100.00         100.00
                 installation
8-6-3            Mailbox address   100.00        100.00         100.00
                 labeling
                 Special flood
9-1-4            hazard area       250.00        500.00         750.00
                 provisions
9-1-5            Other SFHA        250.00        500.00         750.00
                 provisions
9-1-7            SFHA; preventing  250.00        500.00         750.00
                 damages
9-1-8            SFHA; protecting  250.00        500.00         750.00
                 buildings
                 SFHA; other
9-1-9            development       250.00        500.00         750.00
                 requirements
9-1-10           SFHA; permit      250.00        500.00         750.00
                 required
9-1-13           SFHA; disclosure  250.00        500.00         750.00
                 statement
                 Stormwater
9-2-1            management        250.00        500.00         750.00
                 regulations
                 Zoning
10-3-1           certificate       250.00        500.00         750.00
                 required
10-3-7           Principal uses on 500.00        500.00         750.00
                 zoning lot
10-3-8           Buildings on      500.00        500.00         750.00
                 zoning lot
10-3-9           Division of       500.00        500.00         750.00
                 zoning lot
10-3-11          Access to public  500.00        500.00         750.00
                 street
10-4-1           Uses permitted in 500.00        500.00         750.00
                 zones
10-4-2           District          500.00        500.00         750.00
                 regulations
10-4-3           Overlay district  500.00        500.00         750.00
                 regulations
10-5-7           Accessory use     500.00        500.00         750.00
                 standards
10-5-8           Sign regulations  100.00        250.00         500.00
10-5-10          Home occupations  250.00        500.00         750.00
10-5-11          Fences            100.00        250.00         500.00
10-5-12          Temporary uses    250.00        500.00         750.00
10-6-2           Nonconforming     500.00        750.00         750.00
                 lots
10-6-3           Nonconforming     500.00        750.00         750.00
                 structures
10-6-4           Nonconforming     500.00        750.00         750.00
                 uses
10-6-5           Nonconforming     500.00        750.00         750.00
                 accessory uses
10-9-3           Communication     500.00        750.00         750.00
                 tower guidelines
                 Subdivision plat
11-1-4           invalid without   250.00        500.00         750.00
                 approval
                 Acceptance of
11-1-6           public            750.00        750.00         750.00
                 improvements
11-1-8           Division of lands 250.00        500.00         750.00
                 without platting
12-4-1           Cutting of        250.00        500.00         500.00
                 protected trees
12-4-2           Tree protection   250.00        500.00         500.00
12-4-4           Replacement of    250.00        500.00         500.00
                 trees
12-4-5           Tree removal      250.00        500.00         500.00
                 permit required
                 Registration; no
3-401            valid vehicle     IVC           IVC            IVC
                 plate
                 Registration;
3-413            expired vehicle   IVC           IVC            IVC
                 plate or sticker
12-201           Lighted lamps     IVC           IVC            IVC
                 required
                 Spot lamps and
12-207           auxiliary driving IVC           IVC            IVC
                 lamps
                 Tires (operating
12-405           condition of      IVC           IVC            IVC
                 pneumatic tires)
                 Windshields
12-503           (obstructions/    IVC           IVC            IVC
                 wipers)
12-602           Mufflers          IVC           IVC            IVC
                 Seat belts; no
12-603.1         seat belts        IVC           IVC            IVC
                 (driver or
                 passenger)
12-608           Bumpers           IVC           IVC            IVC
12-610.5         Registration      IVC           IVC            IVC
                 plate covers
                 Sound and
12-611           amplification     IVC           IVC            IVC
                 systems
 
   *   The Illinois vehicle code (IVC) has been adopted by the village in title
5, chapter 4 of this code, as permitted pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/20-204.
(Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008; amd. Ord. 2008-754, 6-3-2008; Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-
2010; Ord. 2010-835, 12-21-2010; Ord. 2012-886, 12-18-2012; Ord. 2013-905, 8-
20-2013; Ord. 2016-979, 3-1-2016; Ord. 2020-1080, 2-3-2020)
1-13-8: ADDITIONAL COSTS COLLECTED:
In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, the hearing officer shall, upon a
finding of guilty of any offense charged, tax the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per offense as costs. The costs so collected shall be used to defray
the expense of staffing, maintaining, administering and providing security for
the adjudication court system. The village treasurer shall maintain records
showing the actual costs of operation once established and shall report
periodically to the village board on the balance between costs collected and
the expense of operations so that the corporate authorities may review the
amount of costs imposed and adjust these amounts from time to time to ensure
that they are as close as practicable to the actual expenses of operation.
(Ord. 2008-752, 2-5-2008)
CHAPTER 14
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-14-1: Rules And Procedures
1-14-1: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The village of Wadsworth shall provide access to public records as
required by the Illinois freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   All requests for inspection or copies of public records must be
submitted in writing in accordance with the village of Wadsworth freedom of
information act policy, which policy is available for inspection at the office
of the village. (Ord. 2010-806, 1-19-2010)
CHAPTER 15
FUND BALANCE POLICY IN ACCORDANCE WITH GASB #54
SECTION:
1-15-1: Background And Purpose
1-15-2: Definitions And Policies
1-15-1: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Background: In February 2009, the Governmental Accounting Standards
Board (GASB) issued GASB #54 Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund Type
Definitions. The statement substantially changes how fund balances are
categorized. It clarifies/modifies how some of the governmental funds are
presented and classified.
   B.   Purpose: To provide a stable financial environment for the Village of
Wadsworth (hereinafter, referred to as "Village") operations that allows the
Village to provide quality services to its residents in a fiscally responsible
manner designed to keep services and taxes as consistent as possible over time.
This Fund Balance Policy is meant to serve as the framework upon which
consistent operations may be built and sustained. (Ord. 2020-1088, 7-7-2020)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS AND POLICIES:
The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
             The assigned fund balance is the portion of the spendable fund balance that
             reflects funds intended to be used by the government for specific purposes
             assigned by more informal operational plans (e.g., capital goods replacement, the
             constraint on use is not imposed by external parties or by formal Board action).
ASSIGNED     In governmental funds other than the General Fund (e.g., Special Revenue Funds,
FUND         Capital Project Funds, Debt Service Funds and permanent funds), assigned fund
BALANCE:     balance represents the amount that is not restricted or limited. The authority to
             "assign" fund balance is delegated to the Village Treasurer and Village
             Administrator; the Village Board shall approve same prior to any final action
             being taken on the Village's Audited Financial Statements and Annual Treasurer's
             Report for the given fiscal year.
             At the end of each fiscal year, the Village Treasurer and Village Administrator
CAPITAL      will report "assigned" fund balance for equipment replacement according to the
GOODS        Village Capital Improvement Plan. The Village Board shall approve same prior to
REPLACEMENT: any final action being taken on the Village's Audited Financial Statements and
             Annual Treasurer's Report for the given fiscal year.
             A.   At the end of each fiscal year, the village will maintain spendable
             unassigned portions of the fund balance for cash flow in a range equal to 25-50%
             of the General Fund operating expenditures. In addition to the cash flow needs,
             this accommodates emergency contingency concerns.
             B.   In the event that amounts designated for cash flow fall above or below the
             desired range, the Treasurer shall report such amounts to the Board of Trustees
CASH FLOW:   as soon as practical after the end of the fiscal year. Should the actual amount
             designated for cash flow fall below the desired range, the Village shall create a
             plan to restore the appropriate levels. Should the actual amount designated for
             cash flow rise above the desired range, any excess funds will remain undesignated
             pending the Board's final decision concerning transfer to another fund. It is the
             policy of the Village that such excess funds will be, by Board action, reported
             in the spendable limited category of this Policy.
             A.   The committed fund balance classification includes the portion of the
             spendable fund balance that reflects constraints that the village has imposed
             upon itself by a formal action of the Board of Trustees (for example, an
COMMITTED    ordinance or resolution passed by the Board of Trustees). This constraint must be
FUND         imposed prior to year-end, but the amount can be determined at a later date.
BALANCE:     B.   Policy: Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Village will report
             "committed" fund balance for long-term loan receivables, such as advances to
             other funds and similar accounts, including the Wadsworth Farmer's Market
             checking account.
FUND         Fund balance is the difference between assets and liabilities in governmental
BALANCE:     funds (i.e., general fund, special revenue funds, capital project funds, debt
             service funds and permanent funds).
             A.   Describes the amount of a fund balance that cannot be spent because it is
NON-         either not in spendable form or there is a legal or contractual requirement for
SPENDABLE    the funds to remain intact.
FUND         B.   Policy: At the end of each fiscal year, the Village will report the portion
BALANCE:     of the fund balance that is not in spendable form as Non-Spendable Fund Balance
             on the financial statements.
             A.   The restricted fund balance category includes the portion of the spendable
             fund balance that reflects constraints on spending because of legal restrictions
             stipulated by outside parties (e.g., encumbrances for goods or services with
RESTRICTED   outside parties, creditors, grantors, outstanding at the end of the year); also,
FUND         any legal restrictions based on state statutes or grant requirements placed on
BALANCE:     the use for specific purposes.
             B.   Policy: At the end of each fiscal year, the Village will report "restricted"
             fund balance for amounts that have applicable legal restrictions per GASB #54. In
             addition, encumbrances or funds restricted by enabling legislation will be
             reported as "restricted."
             A.   Describes the amount of fund balance that is available for appropriation
             based on the constraints that control how specific amounts can be spent.
SPENDABLE    Typically, a significant portion of a government's spendable resources can be
FUND BALANCE spent only for specified purposes. The following categories define the revenue
(OVERVIEW):  source and the level of force of the constraint on spending.
             B.   Categories should be supported by actual plans approved by either the
             governing body, an appropriate officer, grant providers or enabling legislation.
             This is the residual classification for the government's General Fund and
             includes all spendable amounts not contained in the other classifications and,
             therefore, not subject to any constraints. Unassigned amounts are available for
             any purpose. These are the current resources available for which there are no
UNASSIGNED:  governmental self-imposed limitations or set spending plan. Although there is
             generally no set spending plan for the undesignated portion, there is a need to
             maintain a certain funding level. Undesignated fund balance is commonly used for
             emergency expenditures not previously considered. In addition, the resources
             classified as undesignated can be used to cover expenditures for revenues not yet
             received. (Ord. 2020-1088, 7-7-2020)
 
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Plan Commission   1
Zoning Board Of Appeals   2
Business And Economic Development Committee   3
Beautification Committee   4
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Chairman Of Board
2-1-2: Membership
2-1-3: Term
2-1-4: Compensation
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-6: Concurrent Membership Of Plan Commission And Zoning Board Of Appeals
2-1-1: CHAIRMAN OF BOARD:
The chairman of the board shall be appointed each year by the president,
subject to confirmation by the board of trustees, and shall be one of the
regular members of said commission. (Ord. 12, 3-11-1963)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the
president, subject to confirmation by the board of trustees. (Ord. 91-346, 6-4-
1991)
2-1-3: TERM:
Initially seven (7) members are appointed. Appointments are made in May by the
village president after consultation with the village board. As of August 1,
2015, the term of each member of the plan commission serving concurrently on
the zoning board of appeals shall be that term for which the member is
appointed to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to section
 2-2-4 of this title. (Ord. 2015-956, 7-21-2015)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
The Chairman of the Board of the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals
shall receive seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per meeting attended as
compensation. The members of the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals
shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting attended as compensation.
(Ord. 12, 3-11-1963; amd. Ord. 2024-1166, 12-17-2024)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of said commission shall be those outlined and provided
for by the Illinois municipal code 1 . (Ord. 12, 3-11-1963)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.
2-1-6: CONCURRENT MEMBERSHIP OF PLAN COMMISSION AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
As of August 1, 2015, the members of the plan commission shall also serve as
members of the zoning board of appeals, and the chair of the plan commission
shall also serve as the chair of the zoning board of appeals. The resignation,
removal, or replacement of any member from the zoning board of appeals shall be
deemed to be a resignation, removal, or replacement from the plan commission.
(Ord. 2015-956, 7-21-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 1
SECTION:
2-2-1: Creation
2-2-2: Jurisdiction
2-2-3: Meetings; Rules
2-2-4: Term
2-2-5: Concurrent Membership Of Zoning Board Of Appeals And Plan Commission
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-7-1B of this code.
2-2-1: CREATION:
The zoning board of appeals of the village, as created in accordance with the
statutes of the state of Illinois 1 , is the zoning board referred to in title
10 of this code. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. 1996 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12.
2-2-2: JURISDICTION:
The zoning board shall hold public hearings on request for conditional use
permits, amendments to title 10 of this code and variations and appeals and
shall make reports and recommendations to the village board. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-
1991; amd. 1996 Code)
2-2-3: MEETINGS; RULES:
All meetings of the zoning board shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such times as the zoning board may determine. All meetings conducted by the
board shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at a
hearing either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The
chairman, if absent or the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. The zoning board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every
amendment and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning
board shall be filed immediately in the office of the clerk and shall be a
public record. The zoning board shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in
conflict with this title or with the applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 91-
341, 4-2-1991)
2-2-4: TERM:
The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members who are
appointed by the village president subject to confirmation by the village
board. As of August 1, 2015, one member will be appointed for a one year term,
one member appointed to a two (2) year term, one member appointed to a three
(3) year term, two (2) members appointed to a four (4) year term, and two (2)
members appointed to a five (5) year term. Members are appointed for five (5)
year terms after the expiration of the initial terms prescribed by law. (Ord.
2015-956, 7-21-2015)
2-2-5: CONCURRENT MEMBERSHIP OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND PLAN COMMISSION:
As of August 1, 2015, the members of the zoning board of appeals shall also
serve as members of the plan commission, and the chair of the zoning board of
appeals shall also serve as the chair of the plan commission. The resignation,
removal, or replacement of any member from the plan commission shall be deemed
to be a resignation, removal, or replacement from the zoning board of appeals.
(Ord. 2015-956, 7-21-2015)
CHAPTER 3
BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment Of Committee
2-3-2: Size And Composition Of Committee
2-3-3: Terms And Vacancies
2-3-4: Compensation And Expenses
2-3-5: Meetings
2-3-6: Functions And Purposes
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEE:
There is hereby established a Business and Economic Development Committee for
the purpose of promoting and assisting business and industry growth within the
Village consistent with economic need, community goals and sound planning
requirements and for the purpose of making recommendations from time to time to
the Board of Trustees as to effectuating said purposes. (Ord. 248, 1-11-1988)
2-3-2: SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE:
The Committee shall consist of seven (7) members as appointed by the President
of the Board of Trustees by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Said members to be appointed shall be:
   A.   Two (2) members from business or industry, whether or not residents of
the Village;
   B.   Three (3) public members who shall be residents of the Village at the
time of the appointment and who shall maintain said residency during the term
thereof;
   C.   One member who shall be a member of the Board of Trustees of the
Village;
   D.   One member who shall be a Village staff employee or consultant. (Ord.
248, 1-11-1988)
2-3-3: TERMS AND VACANCIES:
Each member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and until their
successor shall have been designated and appointed. In the event a vacancy
occurs on the Committee, the replacement shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original member for the unexpired balance of the term, if any. The
Committee shall elect from its membership one person to serve as chairperson
and shall designate one person to act as recording secretary. (Ord. 248, 1-11-
1988)
2-3-4: COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES:
The Committee shall serve without compensation. Expenses incurred by the
Committee will be approved in the manner established as a policy by the Board
of Trustees. (Ord. 248, 1-11-1988)
2-3-5: MEETINGS:
The Committee shall meet periodically on the call of its chairperson or any
three (3) members thereof, but in any event, not less frequently than
quarterly. The Committee shall promptly issue a report of each meeting to the
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 248, 1-11-1988)
2-3-6: FUNCTIONS AND PURPOSES:
The Committee shall consider all matters referred to it by the Board of
Trustees, and in addition, shall initiate programs and planning related to its
purposes for its own consideration; the Committee shall additionally make
recommendations from time to time to the Board of Trustees with respect to the
development of business and industry within the Village, shall ascertain the
existence and qualifications for public grants, if any, with regard to business
and industry promotion with the Village. The Committee shall take all necessary
steps for providing the privacy and safety of documents and records or
information that comes into its possession or knowledge with respect to
inquiries or proposals for business or industrial development. (Ord. 248, 1-11-
1988)
CHAPTER 4
BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment Of Committee
2-4-2: Size And Composition Of Committee
2-4-3: Terms And Vacancies
2-4-4: Compensation And Expenses
2-4-5: Meetings
2-4-6: Functions And Purposes
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEE:
There is hereby established the Wadsworth Beautification Committee for the
purpose of serving as an advisory committee to the Village Board's Road and
Bridge Committee on developing and pursuing plans and initiatives that promote
the beautification of the Village. (Ord. 2019-1077, 12-3-2019)
2-4-2: SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE:
The Committee shall consist of five (5) members as appointed by the Village
Board's Road and Bridge Committee. Said members to be appointed shall be as
follows:
   A.   One (1) member who may be a resident or nonresident of the Village;
   B.   Three (3) public members who shall be residents of the Village at the
time of the appointment and who shall maintain said residency during the term
thereof; and
   C.   One member who shall be the Chairman of the Village Board's Road and
Bridge Committee. (Ord. 2019-1077, 12-3-2019)
2-4-3: TERMS AND VACANCIES:
Each member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and until their
successor shall have been designated and appointed. In the event a vacancy
occurs on the Committee, the replacement shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original member for the unexpired balance of the term, if any. The
chairperson of the Committee shall be the Chairman of the Village Board's Road
and Bridge Committee. After the initial 2-year term of the Committee, the
Committee shall elect from its membership one person to serve as chairperson
and shall designate one person to act as recording secretary. (Ord. 2019-1077,
12-3-2019)
2-4-4: COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES:
The Committee shall serve without compensation. Expenses incurred by the
Committee will be approved in the manner established as a policy by the Board
of Trustees. (Ord. 2019-1077, 12-3-2019)
2-4-5: MEETINGS:
The Committee shall meet periodically on the call of its chairperson or any
three (3) members thereof, but in any event, not less frequently than
quarterly. The Committee shall promptly issue a report of each meeting to the
Village Board's Road and Bridge Committee. (Ord. 2019-1077, 12-3-2019)
2-4-6: FUNCTIONS AND PURPOSES:
The Committee shall consider all matters referred to it by the Village Board's
Road and Bridge Committee, and in addition, shall (1) initiate programs and
planning related to its purposes for its own consideration; (2) make
recommendations from time to time to the Village Board's Road and Bridge
Committee with respect to beautification in the Village; and (3) ascertain the
existence and qualifications for public grants, if any, with regard to
beautification in the Village. The Committee shall take all necessary steps for
providing the privacy and safety of documents and records or information that
comes into its possession or knowledge with respect to inquiries or proposals
for village beautification. (Ord. 2019-1077, 12-3-2019)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Liquor Control   1
Garage And Vehicle Sales   2
Peddlers, Canvassers And Transient Merchants   3
Reserved   4
Contractors   5
Municipal Taxes   6
Nonhome Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax And Nonhome Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax   6A
Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax   6B
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2003-643,
11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)   7
Raffles   8
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax   9
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee   10
Adult Entertainment Establishments   11
Municipal Hotel Use Tax   12
Cannabis Business Establishments   13
Video Gaming Regulations   14
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-9-8 of this title.
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-1-1: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-1-2: Liquor Control Commission
3-1-3: Licenses
3-1-4: Classification; Schedule Of Fees; Number Of Licenses
3-1-5: List Of Licenses
3-1-6: License Is A Privilege
3-1-7: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
3-1-8: Display Of License
3-1-9: Termination Date
3-1-10: Renewals
3-1-11: Terminations
3-1-12: Waiver Of License For Sale Of Business
3-1-13: Violations; Penalty
3-1-14: Appeals
3-1-1: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Commissioner Defined: The village president shall be the local liquor
control commissioner ("LLCC").
   B.   Duties: The LLCC shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by
law, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Grant, Suspend Or Revoke License: To grant, or suspend for not more
than thirty (30) days, or to revoke for cause, any local license subject to his
jurisdiction.
      2.   Inspection: To enter, or to authorize any inspector, law enforcement
officer, or peace officer, to enter at any time upon any premises licensed
hereunder for the purpose of determining whether any of the provisions of this
chapter have been or are being violated, and to inspect or examine such
premises at the time of entry thereon.
      3.   Sanitary Conditions: To require that all licensed premises be
maintained and operated in a sanitary condition, and in compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the Lake County health department, and in
compliance with all ordinances of the village.
      4.   Certificate Of Approval: To require that any licensee secure and
file with the LLCC a current certificate demonstrating licensure and compliance
with all applicable rules and regulations of the Lake County health department.
      5.   License Fees: To receive all local license fees and to pay the same
forthwith to the village treasurer.
      6.   Examinations: To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any
applicant for a license, or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom a
notice or revocation or suspension has been served, and to examine or cause to
be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee. The LLCC,
in conducting such examination, may hear testimony and receive proof, and in
connection with such examination, may issue subpoenas which shall be effective
in any part of the state. In conducting such examinations, the LLCC may
authorize his agent to act on his behalf.
      7.   Transfer To Different Premises: After a license has been granted for
a particular premises, the LLCC, upon proper showing, may permit the licensee
to abandon the premises therein described and to relocate his place of business
to other premises approved by the LLCC. However, in order to obtain such
approval, the licensee shall file with the LLCC a written request and a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) hearing fee. The LLCC shall confirm that the proposed
new premises shall comply in all respects with the provisions of all applicable
ordinances of the village. Upon receipt of such request, the LLCC will conduct
a hearing to inquire into, and receive evidence bearing upon the relocation to
other premises. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996)
3-1-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION:
   A.   Appointment: The LLCC may appoint a person, or persons to serve at the
will of the LLCC, and to advise him in the exercise of his powers and duties as
such commissioner. Such persons shall be members of the village board of
trustees, and shall constitute the liquor control commission of the village.
   B.   Filing Of Appointment: The LLCC shall file a written appointment of the
members of the Liquor Control Commission in the office of the Village Clerk,
within five (5) days after making the appointment of said members.
   C.   Duties: The Liquor Commission shall have the following duties:
      1.   To recommend to the Village Board such further regulations and
restrictions regarding the issuance of, and operations under local licenses,
not inconsistent with law, as the public good and convenience may require.
      2.   To conduct hearings upon all matters referred to it by the LLCC and
to make recommendations thereon to the LLCC. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-
30-1996)
3-1-3: LICENSES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall sell or permit the sale, use, or
consumption, or solicit or receive an order for, or keep or expose for sale or
keep with the intention of selling, or barter or trade, any alcoholic liquors
in the Village without first having obtained a liquor license.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   Restaurants, dining rooms, cabarets, night clubs, dance halls, and
places in which entertainment is provided or food served, and which are not
part of a premises licensed hereunder, are prohibited from allowing patrons to
bring upon the premises alcoholic beverages to be there served or consumed by
said patrons.
      2.   Where two (2) or more locations, places, or premises are under the
same roof, or are located at one street address, a separate license shall be
obtained for each such location, place or premises, unless all rooms in which
alcoholic liquors are served are directly connected or are adjacent to, and
accessible to each other without leaving the building. Each licensee shall
identify the room or rooms in which liquor is to be sold.
      3.   No person licensed to sell liquor under any license issued by the
LLCC shall be permitted to sell, give away or otherwise dispose of alcoholic
liquor at any place other than the licensed premises, as described in the
license; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to
prevent any hotel operator, or motel operator licensed under this Chapter from
serving alcoholic liquor to registered guests of the hotel, or motel in any
room or part of the hotel or motel. However, such liquor so served shall be
kept in and served from a licensed location, place or room in said hotel or
motel. The foregoing provisions shall apply only to hotels and motels conducted
and maintained as such.
   C.   Prohibited Transactions: No person shall make, ferment, distill or
cause to be distilled, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish
or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes, except as specifically
provided by law and the provisions of this Chapter.
      1.   No licensee under this Chapter, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to
any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be an habitual
drunkard, a spendthrift, or an insane, mentally ill, or mentally deficient
person or one in need of mental treatment.
      2.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor, nor shall such person have alcoholic liquor in his
possession (except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service).
      3.   A licensee shall whenever necessary require presentation of at least
one positive identification, showing proof of age, which identification has
been issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. It
is the absolute responsibility of the licensee to insure that no person who is
prohibited from purchasing or consuming alcoholic liquor is served any
alcoholic liquor within the premises.
      4.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall misrepresent
his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic
beverage in any place where such beverage is sold. No person shall transfer,
alter or deface an identification card, use the identification card of another,
carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification
card by means of false information.
      5.   No person shall operate, or attempt to operate any premises for the
sale of alcoholic beverages for which the license has been revoked for any
cause, for the period of one year after such revocation.
      6.   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person known by him to
be a habitual drunkard, or insane, or mentally ill.
      7.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the issuance of a license to
a church or private school or the local volunteer fire department to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor provided that such sales are limited to periods when
groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   D.   Application For License: Written application for a liquor license
hereunder verified by oath or affidavit; signed by the applicant, if an
individual; or by the duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation;
when any applicant for a liquor license is a corporation, said application
shall be signed by the president and secretary thereof; and should the
applicant be a partnership, then each and every member of the partnership
(including a silent partner, if any) shall sign such application; said
application shall be made to the LLCC, and shall include all information
required by the LLCC, including, but not limited to, the following information
and statements:
      1.   Name, Age, Address, Social Security Number: The name, age, last
three (3) residence addresses and social security number of the applicant. In
the case of a partnership, the application must contain the names, ages, last
three (3) residence addresses and social security number of each partner. If a
corporate license is sought, the application must contain the name of the
corporation, the date of incorporation, the articles of incorporation, the
names and addresses and social security numbers of all officers and directors.
If a majority of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person, or his
nominee, the name, address and social security number of each such person shall
be set forth in the application. All applicants shall furnish a photocopy of
their state issued driver's license or identification card (front and back).
      2.   Citizenship, Place Of Birth: The citizenship of the applicant, his
place of birth and the time and place of naturalization, if applicable.
      3.   Location And Description Of Premises: The location and description
of the premises to be licensed. If the premises is leased, the applicant shall
attach a copy of the lease to the license application. Said lease must have a
coverage period equal to, or longer than, the duration of the applicant's
liquor license and must name the applicant as lessee.
      4.   Character Of Business: The character of business of the applicant,
and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      5.   Length Of Time Of Business Existence; Charter Date: The length of
time said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a
corporation, the date when its charter was issued.
      6.   Amount Of Merchandise: The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on
hand at the time application is made.
      7.   Other Applications For License: A statement whether the applicant
has made a similar application for a similar license on the premises other than
described on this application and the disposition of such application.
      8.   Reasons For Revocation: A statement indicating whether a previous
license by the state of Illinois, or any other state, or subdivision thereof or
by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons thereof.
      9.   Agree To Abide By The Laws: A statement that the applicant will not
violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois or of the United States, and
that the applicant will not violate any ordinance, resolution or rule of the
village of Wadsworth in the conduct of his place of business.
      10.   Felony Conviction: A statement that the applicant has never been
convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of
any matter or thing contained in this chapter, the laws of the state of
Illinois or the ordinances, resolutions or rules of the village of Wadsworth.
      11.   Certificate Of Good Standing: For license renewals, a certificate
of good standing issued by the Illinois secretary of state's office.
      12.   Fingerprinting And Complete Criminal Check: The applicant(s), and
in the case of a corporation, all officers and persons owning in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporate applicant, may be
required by the LLCC to be fingerprinted and have a complete criminal check
performed by the sheriff of Lake County. The LLCC may also require the manager
(s) of an applicant to be fingerprinted and undergo a background check. The
LLCC shall collect a fee from the applicant and forward same to the Illinois
department of state police, bureau of identification to pay for the costs
associated with the processing of fingerprints by the bureau.
      13.   Health Department Certificate: The applicant, or applicants, shall
present a valid certificate from the Lake County health department.
      14.   Insurance Requirements:
         a.   No liquor license shall be granted to an applicant until such
applicant furnishes evidence satisfactory to the LLCC that such applicant is
covered by a policy of insurance issued by a responsible insurance company
authorized and licensed to do business in the state of Illinois insuring such
applicant against liability which such applicant may incur under the provisions
of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21 as follows: 1) the amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury liability; one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support; and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability; or 2) a one
million dollar ($1,000,000.00) single limit dramshop policy.
         b.   No liquor license shall be granted to an applicant until such
applicant furnishes evidence satisfactory to the LLCC that such applicant is
covered by a policy of insurance issued by a responsible insurance company
authorized and licensed to do business in the state of Illinois insuring such
applicant against general liability in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
         c.   Said insurance policies shall specifically designate the village
of Wadsworth as an additional insured. The evidence of the insurance policy
shall indicate that the term of the insurance is of sufficient length to
encompass the period of the license sought. In the event of cancellation, the
LLCC shall be notified immediately of such cancellation. The failure of the
licensee to have insurance coverage in full force and effect at any time during
the term of the license shall be cause for revocation of the license or
immediate closure for not more than seven (7) days pursuant to 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7-5.
      15.   Responsible For All Costs: Applicant shall be responsible for any
and all costs incurred by the village of Wadsworth in the course of processing
the application including, but not limited to, the costs associated with
processing a complete criminal check of the applicant(s), fingerprinting
charges, Illinois state police and federal bureau of identification charges, if
applicable.
   E.   Ineligible Applicants: No license shall be issued to any person who is
ineligible under Illinois law, or to:
      1.   A person who is not a resident of the village of Wadsworth, except
in the case of railroad or boat licenses.
      2.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides.
      3.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
      4.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law, unless the LLCC determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person's application and the LLCC's investigation. The burden of proof
of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
      5.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping
a house of ill fame.
      6.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
      7.   A person whose license has been revoked for cause.
      8.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      9.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within Lake County.
      10.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
Village.
      11.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified to transact business in Illinois.
      12.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
      13.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
      14.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
      15.   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Board
of Trustees, and no such official shall be interested directly in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may
be granted to such official in relation to premises, which are not located
within the Village, if the issuance of such license is approved by the State
Liquor Control Commission.
      16.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
      17.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed
by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as
proscribed by section 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28,
1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
      18.   A person to whom a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
Federal government for the current tax period.
      19.   A copartnership to which a Federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the Federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners
have been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the
Federal government for the current tax period.
      20.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a Federal wagering stamp for the current
tax period.
      21.   Any premises for which a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the Federal government for the current tax period.
      22.   Any person who has not paid the appropriate fees required by this
Chapter on the date specified.
      23.   A person who is legally indebted to the Village for payment of
other fees, charges, bills or taxes which have remained unpaid for more than
sixty (60) days.
   F.   Prohibited Sales: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of
any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other
than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval
station, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or
other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on; nor the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where
such church or school has been established within such one hundred feet (100')
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the
distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of
any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to
property boundaries. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a
license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any
such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises
solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors.
   G.   Regulations Applicable To All Licensees: All licenses shall be granted
subject to the following regulations, and by the act of acceptance of a license
to sell alcoholic liquors at retail, all licensees agree:
      1.   To operate the licensed premises in compliance with all applicable
statutes, laws and ordinances and be responsible for the conduct and actions of
all of its employees.
      2.   To see that the premises are at all times kept free of all persons
under twenty one (21) years of age who are not escorted by a parent or legal
guardian. However, this restriction does not prohibit the serving of food to
persons under twenty one (21) years of age in a dining room on the premises
separated from any bar for the serving of alcoholic liquors.
      3.   That any false or untrue statements contained in the application for
license or at license hearing or any violations of the terms and conditions of
the application, or of any of the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
hereof, shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the license by the LLCC,
as is provided in the liquor control act.
      4.   Not to employ any persons under sixteen (16) years of age, nor to
employ any persons under the age of twenty one (21) years for the purpose of
drawing, pouring, or mixing any alcoholic liquor.
      5.   However, a person less than twenty one (21) years of age, but at
least eighteen (18) years of age, may serve or deliver alcoholic liquor when in
the presence of and under the direct supervision and control of an employee
twenty one (21) years of age or older. A class C or E license holder must
employ a person twenty one (21) years of age for the purpose of selling package
liquor.
      6.   Not to employ any waiter or waitress under eighteen (18) years of
age.
      7.   Not to permit the following conduct on licensed premises:
         a.   Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or other
sexual act.
         b.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.
         c.   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
         d.   Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who
exposes to public view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals,
vulva, or anus.
         e.   The display of films or photographs, including slides, depicting
a live performance of anything prohibited in subsections G7a, G7b, G7c, and G7d
of this section.
      8.   To operate licensed premises so that assaults, fights or disorderly
conduct do not occur on or about the licensed premises.
      9.   Not to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors any person who because of ill health is prohibited by the rules and
regulations of the Lake County health department from being so employed.
      10.   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned
on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant of a
license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission. Proof of same shall
be provided to the village upon request by the Wadsworth local liquor control
commissioner. No Wadsworth liquor license shall authorize the retail sale of
any alcoholic liquor until proof of acquisition of such Illinois liquor license
is furnished to the Wadsworth local liquor control commissioner. If any license
is refused, suspended or revoked by the Illinois liquor control commission,
then any Wadsworth liquor license issued or conditionally issued under this
chapter shall immediately become null and void without further action by the
village or the Wadsworth local liquor control commissioner.
   H.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   Persons holding class A, B, D, or E licenses shall not sell, permit
to be sold, give away or allow to be consumed, any alcoholic beverages between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays,
and between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturdays,
Sundays, and nights prior to, and on holidays.
      2.   Persons holding class C, F, G or H licenses may not sell, permit to
be sold, or give away any alcoholic beverages between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day, and must
illuminate the licensed premises by means of an electric light of at least
twenty five (25) watts' power located at the rear of the premises and visible
from the street.
      3.   Persons holding class I licenses shall not sell, permit to be sold,
give away or allow to be consumed, any alcoholic beverages between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays, and
between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturdays,
Sundays, and nights prior to, and on holidays.
   I.   Change Of Ownership: All changes in partnerships, officers, directors,
or persons holding directly, or beneficially, more than five percent (5%) of
the stock or ownership interest, or in managers of establishment licensed under
this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the LLCC within ten (10) days of
the change. All such personnel shall comply with all applicable requirements of
this chapter. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review, or
hearing, by the LLCC in his discretion. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-
1996; amd. Ord. 2004-657, 5-18-2004; Ord. 2007-722, 4-3-2007; Ord. 2011-837, 3-
15-2011; Ord. 2011-839, 4-19-2011; Ord. 2014-932, 7-15-2014; Ord. 2016-984, 4-
19-2016; Ord. 2020-1081, 3-3-2020)
3-1-4: CLASSIFICATION; SCHEDULE OF FEES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
There shall be the following classes of licenses with the following license
fees:
   A.   Class A Licenses: The initial fee for the first license year, or any
part thereof, shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall
permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors to be
consumed only on the premises so licensed, and in the original package for
consumption off the premises. Any display area of alcoholic liquor for retail
sale in the original package shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in the
premises so licensed, and no advertising of retail sales of package goods shall
be carried on, other than the price of the package being attached to the
display area. The renewal fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) annually.
   B.   Class B Licenses: Holders of class A or E licenses may apply for a
class B license to operate, outside the structure designated for such sale,
upon those premises a beer garden, or area for use of umbrella, or cabana type
structures for serving alcoholic liquors at retail. Such license may be issued
pursuant to written application, after hearing before the LLCC, and payment of
an additional fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually.
   C.   Class C Licenses: The initial fee for the first license year, or any
part thereof, shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall
permit the holder to sell at retail, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold, alcoholic liquor in the original package, and without any
limitation of display area or advertising by a person so engaged in the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor. The renewal fee for such license shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) annually.
   D.   Class D Licenses: A twenty four (24) hour permit to sell, deal and
traffic in intoxicating liquor only on the premises so licensed. A twenty
dollar ($20.00) fee will be charged by the building and zoning department for a
temporary use permit. The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
period of twenty four (24) hours; provided, that the permit may be extended to
ninety six (96) hours, consecutively, at a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
additional twenty four (24) hour period or fraction thereof. Class D permits
will be issued only to specific organizations, and in no case to private
individuals. Not more than four (4) class D licenses shall be issued to the
same location in any calendar year. The LLCC shall have the authority to waive
the fee under this section for charitable organizations.
   E.   Class E Licenses: The initial fee for the first year, or any part
thereof, shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and shall permit the holder
to sell, deal or traffic in beer and wine to be consumed only on the premises
so licensed, and in the original package for consumption off the premises. Any
display area of beer and wine for retail sale in the original package shall not
exceed eighteen (18) square feet in the premises so licensed, and no
advertising of retailed sales of package goods shall be carried on, other than
the price of the package being attached to the display area. The renewal fee
for such license shall be eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) annually.
   F.   Class F Licenses: The initial fee for the first license year, or any
part thereof shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and shall permit the
holder to sell at retail, but not for consumption on the premises where sold,
beer and wine in the original package, and without any limitation of the
display area or advertising by a person so engaged in the retail sale of beer
and wine. The renewal fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) annually.
   G.   Class G Licenses: A class G license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises and shall be issued only to
fraternal, charitable or religious organizations. The annual fee for a Class G
license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
   H.   Class H Licenses: The initial fee for the first license year, or any
part thereof, shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall
permit the holder of a Class H license to sell at retail alcoholic liquor in
the original package for consumption off premises and beer and wine for
consumption on the premises where sold. The renewal fee for such license shall
be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) annually.
   I.   Class I Licenses: The initial fee for the first license year, or any
part thereof, shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall
permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors to be
consumed only on the premises so licensed, and in the original package for
consumption off the premises. The licensed premises shall be a banquet
facility; consumption of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted when it is
accessory to food service. Any display area of alcoholic liquor for retail sale
in the original package shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in the
premises so licensed, and no advertising of retail sales of package goods shall
be carried on, other than the price of the package being attached to the
display area. The renewal fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) annually.
   J.   Class J License: A Class J license shall entitle the licensee to sell
alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises of a village-
sponsored event, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   For the purposes of this license classification, "village-sponsored
event" means an event which the village supports or promotes and is designated
as a village-sponsored event by the village board.
      2.   A Class J license may only be issued to the holder of a valid Class
A, Class E, Class G, Class H, or Class I license issued by the village.
      3.   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may only occur
within the designated areas of the village-sponsored event.
      4.   The sale of alcoholic beverages may only occur during the hours
designated by the liquor commissioner for the specific village-sponsored event.
      5.   A Class J license shall be required for each specific village-
sponsored event, and shall only be valid for the length of the specific
village- sponsored event as determined by the liquor commissioner.
      6.   A Class J licensee must provide the liquor commissioner with
evidence of sufficient dram shop liability insurance.
      7.   A Class J licensee shall hold harmless the village, its elected and
appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives from any
and all claims or causes of action arising out of the sale of alcoholic liquor
by the licensee at the village-sponsored event.
   8.   The liquor commissioner shall have authority to supply limitations,
conditions, or additional requirements upon the issuance of a Class J license
as appropriate for the specific v   illage-sponsored event.
      9.   The annual fee for Class J license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
This fee may be waived at the LLCC's discretion.
   K.   Number Of Licenses: The following shall be the number of licensees to
be issued: there shall be issued no more than five (5) Class A licenses; two
(2) Class B licenses; three (3) Class C licenses; zero Class D licenses; three
(3) Class E licenses; two (2) Class F licenses; one (1) Class G license; five
(5) Class H licenses; one (1) Class I license; and one (1) Class J license.
Upon revocation, forfeiture, nonrenewal, voluntary surrender or termination
(pursuant to subsection 3-1-3I, and section 3-1-11 of this chapter) of an
existing license of any class A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, or I license, the number
of licenses available for such class shall automatically be reduced accordingly
and then this subsection shall be deemed to be amended in conformance with such
reduction. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996; amd. Ord. 2014-932, 7-15-
2014; Ord. 2016-984, 4-19-2016; Ord. 2018-1049, 10-2-2018; Ord. 2020-1083, 5-
19-2020; Ord. 2020-1091, 9-15-2020; Ord. 2020-1095, 11-4-2020; Ord. 2021-1102,
4-20-2021; Ord. 2021-1107, 11-2-2021; 2021-1108, 11-2-2021; Ord. 2022-1120, 10-
4-2022; Ord. 2023-1127, 3-7-2023; Ord. 2023-1129, 5-22-2023; Ord. 2023-1130, 6-
20-2023; Ord. 2023-1135, 8-1-2023; Ord. 2023-1137, 8-1-2023; Ord. 2023-1139, 9-
5-2023; Ord. 2024-1150, 4-16-2024; Ord. 2025-1172, 7-1-2025)
3-1-5: LIST OF LICENSES:
   A.   Report To Clerk And Treasurer: The LLCC shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a complete record of all licenses issued by him under this chapter, and
shall furnish the Clerk and Treasurer of the Village each with copies thereof.
Upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old license, the
LLCC shall give written notice of such action to these officers within forty
eight (48) hours.
   B.   Report To Board Of Trustees: The LLCC shall report to the Village Board
all of his acts in the enforcement of this chapter, and in regard to the
collection of liquor license fees, the date collected, and the date the fees
were turned over to the village treasurer, whenever such a report is requested
by the village board. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996)
3-1-6: LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE:
A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege, and
shall expire on the next April 30, following the issuance thereof and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or
execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but shall
cease upon the death of the licensee, provided the personal representative of
any deceased licensee when such decedent's estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, shall apply for a license within thirty (30) days following the death
of the licensee. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996)
3-1-7: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all fees for licenses
issued under this chapter shall be delivered to the LLCC on or before April 30
of the year for which such license is to be issued. All applications for
renewals must be made, and the fee therefor paid before April 30 of such year,
or in the discretion of the liquor commissioner, such application for renewal
may be denied. Failure to pay the appropriate fee as required shall be cause
for revocation of the license involved. If the license application is granted,
the fee shall be deposited by the village treasurer in the general corporate
fund of the village. If the application for license is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
   B.   Applications for new licenses may be accepted after April 30 for the
current license year, and fees for such licenses will be prorated according to
the number of months remaining in the license year, including the month during
which the application is approved.
   C.   Licensees may apply for a new license of a different classification for
the current license year for a licensed premises. Upon approval of an
application for a new license of a different classification for the licensed
premises, licensee shall surrender the previous license for the licensed
premises to the village. Based on the number of months remaining in the license
year, including the month during which the new application is approved, a
prorated amount of the fees paid toward the previous license may be applied
toward the fees due for the new license. (Ord. 2009-787, 6-16-2009)
3-1-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed in plain view in a
conspicuous place within the licensed premises. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff.
4-30-1996)
3-1-9: TERMINATION DATE:
Each license shall terminate on April 30 following its issuance. If the
application for renewal and renewal fee are not received by the LLCC by April
30, the renewal of the license may be denied. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-
30-1996)
3-1-10: RENEWALS:
Any licensee may apply for renewal of his license prior to the expiration
thereof; provided, however, that at the time of renewal he is then qualified as
for an original application, and provided that the premises for which such
renewal of license is sought are in compliance with all applicable ordinances
of the village. The right to file an application for renewal of a license
hereunder shall not be construed to create any vested interest, or right in an
applicant. An application for renewal of a license hereunder shall not prevent
the village from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued. (Ord. 95-433,
12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996)
3-1-11: TERMINATIONS:
   A.   Partnership, Change In Ownership: When a license has been issued to a
partnership and a change of ownership occurs, resulting in the creation of a
partnership interest in a person who is not eligible to receive a liquor
license, such license shall thereby be terminated.
   B.   Corporation, Change In Ownership: When a license has been issued to a
corporation or limited liability company and a change takes place as to
officers, or directors, or of shareholders holding more than five percent (5%)
of the stock, or in a manager resulting in the holding of office, the
corporation or LLC has thirty (30) days to file a new liquor license
application before the existing liquor license will automatically terminate. A
completed liquor license application on file with the LLCC will stay the
expiration of the existing license until such time as the LLCC either approves
or denies the new liquor license application. However, if a change takes place
in the transfer of shares to one who is not eligible for a license or if a new
liquor license application is not filed within thirty (30) days of any such
change, such license shall thereby terminate.
   C.   Ineligible Individual: When a license has been issued to an individual
who becomes ineligible to receive a license, the license theretofore issued to
such individual shall thereby terminate.
   D.   Transfer Of Ownership: In the case of a license issued to a
corporation, limited liability company, or to a partnership, upon the transfer
of more than thirty percent (30%) of the ownership interest of the original
stockholders, or of the original members of a partnership, such transfer, or
transfers, shall require the issuance of a new license, with the payment of the
required new license fee. The corporation, LLC, or partnership will have thirty
(30) days to file a new liquor license application before the existing liquor
license will automatically terminate. A completed liquor license application on
file with the LLCC will stay the expiration of the existing license until such
times as the LLCC either approves or denies the new liquor license application.
   E.   Closure Of Business: Any licensee who ceases to do business, or who
closes his place of business for a period in excess of forty five (45) days
shall be required, pursuant to notice of hearing served upon him, to show cause
why the LLCC should not declare the license for such place of business
terminated. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-1995, eff. 4-30-1996; amd. Ord. 2023-1131, 6-20-
2023)
3-1-12: WAIVER OF LICENSE FOR SALE OF BUSINESS:
If a licensee shall sell or dispose of his business during the period of the
license, he may waive his rights as a licensee in writing to the LLCC. Upon
submittal of said letter to the LLCC, the licensee must surrender his liquor
license. The person to whom the business is being sold may make application for
a new license and deliver to the LLCC with such application a check in payment
of the initial license fee. (Ord. 2007-722, 4-3-2007)
3-1-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, the LLCC may suspend for not more than
thirty (30) days, or revoke, any license issued by him, if he determines that
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any
provision of the Illinois liquor control act. When a license shall have been
revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period
of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic
liquors in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. 95-433, 12-5-
1995, eff. 4-30-1996; amd. 1996 Code)
3-1-14: APPEALS:
In accordance with 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 and all other
applicable authority, any appeal shall be limited to a review of the official
record of the proceedings of the LLCC. A certified official record of the
proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter shall be filed by the LLCC within five (5) days after notice
of the filing of such appeal, if the appellant licensee pays for the cost of
the transcript. In any appeal, the only evidence which may be considered in the
review shall be the evidence found in the certified official record of the
proceedings of the LLCC. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or
considered. (Ord. 2004-657, 5-18-2004)
CHAPTER 2
GARAGE AND VEHICLE SALES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Garage Sales
3-2-1-1: Garage Sales Permitted
3-2-1-2: Duration
3-2-1-3: Time
3-2-1-4: Signs
3-2-1-5: Violation; Penalty
3-2-2: Vehicle Sales
3-2-2-1: Temporary Sales
3-2-2-2: Violation; Penalty
3-2-1: GARAGE SALES:
3-2-1-1: GARAGE SALES PERMITTED:
Garage sales shall be allowed in any residential district without a permit,
provided that no more than two (2) garage sales shall be conducted on a zoning
lot in any calendar year. The sales must be incidental to the use of the
property for residential purposes and must be conducted in such a manner as to
be compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood. (Ord. 2016-
978, 2-16-2016)
3-2-1-2: DURATION:
No garage sale shall be conducted for longer than four (4) consecutive days in
duration. (Ord. 2016-978, 2-16-2016)
3-2-1-3: TIME:
Sales events may be conducted during daylight hours only. (Ord. 2016-978, 2-16-
2016)
3-2-1-4: SIGNS:
No more than two (2) signs may be used to advertise a permitted garage sale
event. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and must be
located within the boundaries of the zoning lot on which the sale takes place
or on other private property, with the consent of the owner. (Ord. 2016-978, 2-
16-2016)
3-2-1-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this section
3-2-1 shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-978, 2-16-2016)
3-2-2: VEHICLE SALES:
3-2-2-1: TEMPORARY SALES:
Temporary sales of vehicles shall comply with the following conditions:
   A.   Only permitted in residential zoning districts and only on a zoning lot
containing a residential dwelling unit;
   B.   Only one fully operable vehicle may be sold on a zoning lot at any
given time;
   C.   Only two (2) vehicles may be sold on a zoning lot during the course of
a rolling calendar year;
   D.   For this section, a "vehicle" shall be defined as a noncommercial
automobile or recreational vehicle that is generally of the same size or
smaller than a pickup truck, van, or sport utility vehicle typically associated
with residentially generated transportation needs;
   E.   Vehicles must be registered to the address on which it is to be located
for sale in the village of Wadsworth;
   F.   Vehicles must be displayed on an improved, paved surface;
   G.   For sale vehicles may be located within thirty feet (30') of a ROW line
provided appropriate sightlines are maintained for the safety of vehicles and
pedestrians but in no case closer than ten feet (10') to a ROW line;
   H.   Two (2) "For Sale" signs not exceeding three (3) square feet each may
be displayed within the windows along with the contact information, and writing
shall not be directly painted on the vehicle or on the windows. (Ord. 2016-978,
2-16-2016)
3-2-2-2: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this section
3-2-2 shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-978, 2-16-2016)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: License Required
3-3-2: Applications
3-3-3: Fee
3-3-4: Public Places
3-3-5: Fraud
3-3-6: Penalty
3-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of being a
transient merchant, hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article or thing and
canvassing or soliciting orders for future deliveries for intangible services
or subscriptions without having first secured a license therefor. (Ord. 37, 12-
2-1968)
3-3-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for such license shall be made to the Clerk and shall state
thereon the description and number of vehicles, if any, intended to be
operated, the kind of merchandise to be peddled or solicited and the permanent
address of the peddler, vendor or solicitor. (Ord. 37, 12-2-1968)
3-3-3: FEE:
The fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for an annual
license. (Ord. 37, 12-2-1968)
3-3-4: PUBLIC PLACES:
No peddler, vendor or solicitor shall ply his/her vocation on any street,
sidewalk, park, parkway or in any other public place unless his/her license
specifies that peddling, vending or soliciting in such public places is
permitted thereunder. (Ord. 37, 12-2-1968)
3-3-5: FRAUD:
Any licensed peddler, vendor or solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud,
cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself/herself or through an
employee, while acting as a peddler, vendor or solicitor in the Village or who
shall barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other than those
specified in the application for a license shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 37, 12-2-1968)
3-3-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
CHAPTER 5
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Compliance With Provisions
3-5-2: State License And Insurance Requirements
3-5-3: Building Permit Issuance
3-5-4: Penalty
3-5-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   Generally: All contractors and subcontractors (hereinafter collectively
referred to as "contractors") shall perform their work in such a manner to
comply with all applicable state laws and village ordinances. Contractors shall
promptly repair, restore, or clean all streets, curbs, sidewalks, or other
public property, which has been disturbed, damaged, or otherwise impaired due
to their construction activities, to a condition as good or better than existed
prior to said disturbing, damaging, or impairing.
   B.   Safety Requirements: Contractors shall maintain their equipment and
work areas in a safe condition. All debris shall be contained on the site and
promptly disposed of in accordance with all applicable laws. All openings and
excavations shall be well marked or covered, in accordance with applicable OSHA
requirements. Curbs, sidewalks, and streets shall be sufficiently planked
before any equipment is moved across or upon them so that they are not thereby
damaged. Any dirt, mud, or other debris which is deposited upon public property
as a result of any construction activity shall be promptly removed no less
frequently than daily. Inspectors shall be provided with safe access for
inspections, including planking over muddy areas and safe ladders, when
necessary for inspection. (Ord. 2015-947, 4-8-2015)
3-5-2: STATE LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   State License: Any such contractor to whom a state license has been
issued for plumbing, water well, pump installation, roofing and any other trade
that is exclusively regulated by the state must maintain for the duration of
the work within the village a valid license from the state for the licensed
activity.
   B.   Insurance: Any such contractor doing work within the village upon any
public property, public roadway, public street or public right of way must
submit to the village a certificate of insurance that contains both general
liability and workers' compensation coverages and specifically names the
village of Wadsworth as an additional insured. An indemnification agreement may
also be required. Insurance certificates must be in force at all times while
the construction/improvement activities are taking place. (Ord. 2015-947, 4-8-
2015)
3-5-3: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the owner or contractor shall
provide the village with a complete list of the names, addresses, telephone
numbers and state license numbers for the general contractor as well as all
subcontractors. The permit holder is responsible to keep this information
current and shall notify the village of any changes. Verification of and/or a
copy of any state license that has been issued for plumbing, water well, pump
installation, roofing and any other trade that is exclusively regulated by the
state must be submitted along with the building permit application. (Ord. 2015-
947, 4-8-2015)
3-5-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2015-947, 4-8-2015)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL TAXES
ARTICLE A. NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND NONHOME RULE
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-6A-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-6A-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-6A-3: Exemptions
3-6A-4: Use Of Tax Revenues
3-6A-5: Collection Of Taxes
3-6A-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
Effective July 1, 2015, a tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with section 8-
11-1.3 of the Illinois municipal code, upon all persons engaged in the business
of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of personal property
titled or registered with an agency of the government of the state of Illinois,
at retail in the village at a rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts
from sales made in the course of the business, which tax shall be in addition
to any retailers' occupation tax imposed by the state or any other governmental
agency. (Ord. 2015-943, 3-3-2015)
3-6A-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
Effective July 1, 2015, a tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with section 8-
11-1.4 of the Illinois municipal code, upon all persons engaged in the business
of making sales of service in the village at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by serviceman
either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate
as an incident to a sale of service, which tax shall be in addition to any
service occupation tax imposed by the state or other governmental agency. (Ord.
2015-943, 3-3-2015)
3-6A-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The taxes imposed by sections
3-6A-1 and
3-6A-2 of this article shall not apply to the sale of food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption); and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles
used by diabetics. (Ord. 2015-943, 3-3-2015)
3-6A-4: USE OF TAX REVENUES:
All revenues resulting from the imposition of any tax imposed pursuant to
sections
3-6A-1 and
3-6A-2 of this article shall be used by the village for expenditure on public
infrastructure, property tax relief, municipal operations, or as otherwise
authorized by section 8-11-1.1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord.
2015-943, 3-3-2015)
3-6A-5: COLLECTION OF TAXES:
The taxes imposed pursuant to sections
3-6A-1 and
3-6A-2 of this article, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident of these taxes, shall be collected and enforced by the state of
Illinois department of revenue. (Ord. 2015-943, 3-3-2015)
ARTICLE B. CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-6B-1: Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-6B-1: CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling cannabis at retail at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in
effect. This Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax shall not be
applicable to the sales of cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-22). Persons subject to any tax imposed under this article may
reimburse themselves for their tax liability hereunder by separately stating
this tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that such sellers are required to collect.
   B.   Collection Of Tax: The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall
have full power to administer and enforce this article; to collect all taxes
and penalties due hereunder; to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in
the manner provided by law; and to determine all rights to credit memoranda
arising on account of the erroneous payment of tax or penalty under this
article. (Ord. 2019-1070, 9-17-2019)
CHAPTER 7
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-9-8 of this title.
CHAPTER 8
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Purpose
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: License Required
3-8-4: Limitations
3-8-5: Fee
3-8-6: Duration
3-8-7: Licensing
3-8-8: Application
3-8-9: Persons Ineligible
3-8-10: Conduct Of Raffles
3-8-11: Bond
3-8-12: Records
3-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate raffles occurring within
the village of Wadsworth. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: An agency of the state or a unit of local government in
the state that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public
order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the "criminal code
of 2012", conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
3-8-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall conduct raffles or
chances without having first obtained a license. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002)
3-8-4: LIMITATIONS:
All raffles shall be subject to the following limitations:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 2003-616, 1-21-2003)
3-8-5: FEE:
Unless waived by the village board for good cause shown, a twenty five dollar
($25.00) fee shall be paid to the village for each raffle license. (Ord. 2002-
602, 6-4-2002)
3-8-6: DURATION:
Each license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles
to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter or
the raffles act 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1 et seq. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-
4-2002)
3-8-7: LICENSING:
Licenses shall be issued only (i) to the village, bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans', or other bona
fide not-for-profit organizations that operate without profit to their members
and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years
immediately before making application for a license and which have had during
that entire five (5) year period been engaged in carrying out their objects,
(ii) to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster, or
(iii) to any law enforcement agency or statewide association that represents
law enforcement officials. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-
2019)
3-8-8: APPLICATION:
The license and application for license must specify the area or areas in which
raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle
chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances
and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined, and
a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective
licensee, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that
organization. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
3-8-9: PERSONS INELIGIBLE:
The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony that will impair the
person's ability to engage in the licensed position;
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   D.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B or
C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a "raffle" as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
3-8-10: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of
the sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management of the
raffle. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management of the raffle. Sponsoring organizations may
contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the
sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may
pay reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the
following: (a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b) legal, (c) procurement
of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the
raffle, (d) rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented,
(e) accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting, (g) mailing and
delivery, (h) banking and payment processing, and (i) other services relating
to the operation of the raffle.
   C.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined as a percentage
of receipts or profits from the raffle.
   D.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued throughout the state, including
beyond the borders of the Village. Winning chances may be determined only at
those locations specified on the license.
   E.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area
where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent
or guardian. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
3-8-11: BOND:
All management operation, and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision
of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in an amount not less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be
given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization, provided that a license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by the affirmative vote
of the members, or if there are no members, the affirmative vote of the
governing board, of the licensed organization. (Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord.
2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
3-8-12: RECORDS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, or if there are no
members to its governing board, and to the licensing local unit of government,
its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 2002-602, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2019-1072, 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 9
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Tax Imposed
3-9-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-9-4: Returns To Department
3-9-5: Resellers
3-9-6: Severability
3-9-7: Bills
3-9-8: Repealer
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the
interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross
charge" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and community
affairs;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices; or
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Wadsworth, Illinois.
PERSON: Any legal entity including a natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation,
limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state
governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city,
town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined herein. The department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized,it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-
1-2004)
3-9-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four
percent (4%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four
percent (4%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such
other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-9-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-9-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before August 31, 2004, and on or before the last day of every month
thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the
department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and
regulations created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-
4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-9-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the
grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale
number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff.
7-1-2004)
3-9-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2003-
643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-9-7: BILLS:
The tax provided for herein shall take effect for all bills issued on or after
July 1, 2004. Any amounts due or payable to the municipality for any tax
periods ending prior to July 1, 2004, shall nevertheless remain payable as if
this chapter had not been adopted. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
3-9-8: REPEALER:
Chapter 7 of this title is hereby expressly repealed effective July 1, 2004,
provided however that if public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason,
or if this chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then
chapter 7 of this title shall not be repealed and shall be deemed in full force
and effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or this chapter is repealed or
becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2003-643, 11-4-2003, eff. 7-1-2004)
CHAPTER 10
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-10-3: Applicable Principles
3-10-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-10-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-10-6: Late Fees/Payments
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
section.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2007-749, 12-4-2007)
3-10-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-749, 12-4-2007)
3-10-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2007-749, 12-4-2007)
3-10-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2007-749,
12-4-2007)
3-10-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 2007-749, 12-4-2007)
3-10-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill
of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2007-749, 12-4-
2007)
CHAPTER 11
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Purpose And Findings
3-11-2: Definitions
3-11-3: Establishment License Required
3-11-4: Employee License Required
3-11-5: Establishment License Application
3-11-6: Issuance Of An Adult Entertainment Establishment License
3-11-7: Employee License Application
3-11-8: Issuance Of Adult Entertainment Establishment Employee License
3-11-9: Fees
3-11-10: Expiration And Renewal Of License
3-11-11: Suspension
3-11-12: Revocation
3-11-13: Appeal Rights
3-11-14: Transfer Of License
3-11-15: Additional Regulations Concerning The Operation Of Adult Entertainment
Establishments
3-11-16: Penalty
3-11-17: Injunction
3-11-18: Effect Of Partial Invalidity
3-11-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the WADSWORTH
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING ORDINANCE.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of
adult entertainment establishments within the village in order to promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the village. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communication,
including adult entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose or effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult entertainment
protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is
not the intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.
   C.   Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult entertainment establishments presented to the village from findings
incorporated in the cases of City Of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120
S.Ct. 1382 (2000); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City Of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) Young v. American Mini
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Berg v. Health And Hospital Corporation, 865 F.2d
797 (7th Cir. 1989); Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d 1243 (9th Cir.
1982); Bamon Corp v. City Of Dayton, 730 F.Supp 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990) and EWAP
Inc. v. City Of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr. (1979), and on
studies in other cities including the "Report Of The Attorney General's Working
Group On The Regulation Of Adult Entertainment Establishments" (Minnesota,
1989); "Memorandum Re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance", of the assistant chief
of police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990); Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., "Report To
The American Center For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of Sex
Oriented Businesses" (March 31, 1996); "Adult Entertainment Businesses In
Indianapolis, An Analysis" (1984) and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D. and Meeker,
James W., Ph.D., "Final Report To The City Of Garden Grove: The Relationship
Between Crime And Adult Business Operations On Garden Grove Boulevard" (Garden
Grove, CA, October 23, 1991), this legislative body finds:
      1.   Adult entertainment establishments lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities.
      2.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at
adult entertainment establishments, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually
oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
      3.   Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that
encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
      4.   Sanitary conditions in some adult entertainment establishments are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate
those activities and maintain their facilities.
      5.   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of adult entertainment establishments where persons view adult films
concealed from public view.
      6.   The findings noted in subsections C1 through C5 of this section
raise compelling and substantial governmental concerns.
      7.   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect the compelling and
substantial governmental interests in protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare.
      8.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
adult entertainment establishments. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that adult
entertainment establishments are run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
village. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee
is the actual operator of the adult entertainment establishment, and fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
      9.   The regulation of nudity, seminudity, and physical contact between
employees and patrons in adult entertainment establishments will further the
compelling and substantial governmental interests in preventing prostitution
and other sex related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare.
      10.   Requiring open sight lines in adult entertainment establishments
and requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult entertainment establishments and will facilitate enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and local laws,
thereby furthering the compelling and substantial governmental interest in
protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
      11.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of adult entertainment
establishments, and by employees of such businesses, will facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other federal, state and
local laws, and will thereby further the compelling and substantial government
interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
      12.   A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related
crime is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in an adult
entertainment establishment.
      13.   Barring such individuals from the management of and employment in
adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent
to and prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      14.   A reasonable licensing procedure for adult entertainment
establishments assists the village in preventing the adverse secondary effects
of such businesses on property values, the prevention of crime, and the public
health. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following when done in a place
where the public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial
purpose including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the
consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
   A.   Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of
nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions.
   B.   Engaging in, promoting, or permitting a natural person or people to
engage in specified sexual activities or excretory functions.
   C.   Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between natural persons, when one or more of the persons is nude or seminude.
   D.   Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural
person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent,
employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
   E.   Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural
person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any
medium, including, without limitation, film, videotape, closed circuit
television, digital video disk (DVD), laser disk, compact disc (CD), floppy
disk, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software,
which is:
      1.   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
      2.   Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical
areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use
of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX".
   F.   The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices,
or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of
the specified anatomical areas.
The term "adult entertainment establishment" shall exclude the following:
   A.   The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other
nonprescription contraceptives, unless displayed and offered to others on the
premises of a business which would otherwise be considered an adult
entertainment establishment;
   B.   The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices
which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under
the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois;
   C.   The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises
where a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois is employed to dispense
prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
   D.   Breast feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a
commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast feeding an infant;
   E.   The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format,
which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association Of America of
G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in their
entirety;
   F.   Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or
local governmental funds;
   G.   The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise
qualify as an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this section, if
and only if the display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all
of the following apply to the business displaying and offering such items to
others:
      1.   Less than twenty five percent (25%) of its gross income comes from
the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
         a.   Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
         b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as
being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without limitation, the
use of the term "adult" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such
as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
      2.   Less than twenty five percent (25%) of its display space is used for
the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in subsections G1a and
G1b of this definition; and
      3.   Less than twenty five percent (25%) of the items it offers to others
are the items described in subsections G1a and G1b of this definition; and
         a.   The items described in subsections G1a and G1b of this definition
are segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the premises by a
solid partition from floor to ceiling with no openings or windows and with
entrance and egress by means of a solid door posted with a sign not less than
one foot by one foot (1' x 1') with the words "Under 18 Not Admitted" lettered
on the sign, except that magazines characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities,
excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof
may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is
encased or otherwise covered up and concealed from common view of anything
other than the magazine title or text or other materials which would not be
described as sexually oriented.
   H.   Certain uses which fall within the definition of adult entertainment
establishment may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or
federal law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses
constitute an adult entertainment establishment under the definition set forth
in this chapter, they shall not be permitted uses in any district.
EMPLOYEE: A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of
an adult entertainment establishment, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or
performing support functions, on a full time, part time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include
a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EMPLOYEE STATION: An area on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment designated for occupancy exclusively by one or more employees
whose duties include assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The village administrator of the village of Wadsworth or
his or her designee.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended
to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial purpose. It
shall not mean lactation as part of breast feeding an infant, unless performed
or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast feeding an infant.
LICENSEE: With respect to an adult entertainment establishment license issued
under this chapter a person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment establishment has been issued, as well as the individual(s)
designated on the license application as principally responsible for the
operation of the adult entertainment establishment. With respect to an adult
entertainment establishment employee license issued under this chapter,
licensee means a natural person in whose name a license has been issued
authorizing employment in an adult entertainment establishment.
NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device,
costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any specified
anatomical areas.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To control or hold primary responsibility for
the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, either as a business
entity, as an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared
responsibility. It shall also mean to cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated an
adult entertainment establishment whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult
entertainment establishment.
PATRON: Any natural person who is not an employee.
PERSON: A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque
covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, any
portion of the buttocks, or the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. This definition shall include
the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is
not exposed in whole or in part.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the female
breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and
opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar matter applied directly
to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: A. Any of the following offenses, as set forth in
the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially similar
offenses to those set forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local
jurisdiction, state, country, or international law: indecent solicitation of a
child, indecent solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public
indecency, sexual exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct,
presence within school zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual relations
within families, bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution, solicitation of a
sexual act, soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute,
pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a place of juvenile
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, patronizing a juvenile prostitute,
pimping, juvenile pimping, exploitation of a child, obscenity, child
pornography, commercial film and photographic print processor - reports,
harmful material, tie-in sales of obscene publications to distributors,
criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual assault, predatory criminal
sexual assault of a child, criminal sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual
abuse, criminal transmission of HIV, ritualized abuse of a child, female
genital mutilation, violation of the sex offender registration act, stalking
(if the basis of the conviction is the threat of immediate or future sexual
assault, or placing a person in reasonable apprehension of immediate or future
sexual assault), first degree murder (if the basis for the conviction is 720
ILCS 5/9-1(a)(3), commonly known as felony murder, where the predicate felony
is any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), burglary (if the basis
for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in
this definition), residential burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an
intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), armed
violence (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony
otherwise set forth in this definition), attempt to commit any of the foregoing
crimes, conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes, and any other felony
or misdemeanor for which an element of the offense is the commission of any of
the foregoing crimes or an intent to commit any of the foregoing crimes.
   B.   For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor, business
offense or petty offense; or 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female
breasts, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a
state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
   B.   The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by
the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or uncovered, or
by any device, if the person performing the manipulation is in a state of
nudity or seminudity;
   C.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual,
including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anilingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism,
and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
   D.   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or
with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: A.
The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
VILLAGE: The village of Wadsworth, Illinois. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-3: ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall operate an adult entertainment establishment without a
valid adult entertainment establishment license issued by the village pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   No person shall, in connection with operating an adult entertainment
establishment, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not
licensed as an adult entertainment establishment employee by the village
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-4: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall act as an employee on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment without having secured an adult entertainment establishment
employee license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-5: ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall
be submitted to the village clerk on a form provided by the enforcement
officer. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the
village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established
in this chapter.
   B.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall
identify the following persons and be signed under oath by said persons that
the information contained therein is true:
      1.   If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that sole
proprietor;
      2.   If the business entity is a corporation, each officer and director
of the corporation and each individual with a ten percent (10%) or greater
ownership interest in the corporation;
      3.   If the business entity is a partnership, each general partner, and
each limited partner who owns ten percent (10%) or more of total limited
partnership interest;
      4.   If the business is a limited liability company, each manager, and
each member with a ten percent (10%) or greater ownership interest in the
company.
   C.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license must
designate one or more natural persons who are to be principally responsible for
the operation of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, if a license
is granted. At least one natural person so designated must be involved in the
day to day operation of the proposed adult entertainment establishment on a
regular basis. Each natural person so designated, as well as the business
entity itself, shall be considered a license applicant, must qualify as a
licensee under this chapter, and shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   D.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall
be completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall
require the following:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         a.   An individual, state the legal name, business address, date of
birth, and any aliases of such individual;
         b.   A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and all
of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and provide
a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the information specified in
subsection D1a of this section for each partner;
         c.   A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and the
date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and of Illinois, and
state the names and capacity of all officers and directors, all persons owning
ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation, the name of the
registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for
service of process, and the information specified in subsection D1a of this
section for each officer, director and owner of ten percent (10%) or more of
the stock;
         d.   A limited liability company, state the complete name of the
company and the date of its organization, provide evidence that the company is
in good standing under the laws of its state of organization and of Illinois,
and state the names and capacity of all members, owners and managers, the name
of the registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service
of process, and the information specified in subsection D1a of this section for
each member, owner and manager.
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment
establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, state the
fictitious name to be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the
registration of the business name under applicable laws.
      3.   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place, and jurisdiction of each such conviction.
      4.   State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the adult entertainment
establishment for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as
the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or ten
percent (10%) or greater owner of a corporation, or a member or manager of a
limited liability company, licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well
as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
      5.   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this
chapter or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if
so, the names and locations of other such licensed businesses.
      6.   State the nature of the adult entertainment establishment for which
the applicant is filing.
      7.   State the location of the proposed adult entertainment
establishment, including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and
lot), street address, telephone number(s), e-mail address and internet website
URL, if any.
      8.   State the mailing address of each applicant and each person signing
the application.
      9.   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify the
location of any tattoos on such person's face, arms, legs, or hands, or any
other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the
premises of the proposed adult entertainment establishment.
      10.   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at
least eighteen (18) years old.
      11.   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises of the adult entertainment establishment, including the location of
all stages, walls, partitions, designated sales areas, bookcases, and patron
seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the adult entertainment
establishment license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot (±1'). (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-
2010)
3-11-6: ISSUANCE OF AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
   A.   Upon receipt of a completed application for an adult entertainment
establishment license, the village clerk shall immediately file a copy of the
completed application with the enforcement officer.
   B.   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for an adult
entertainment establishment license, the enforcement officer, or any peace
officer designated by the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicants and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the enforcement officer,
then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the
enforcement officer within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation.
   C.   Within five (5) days of receipt of a copy of a completed application
for an adult entertainment establishment license, the enforcement officer shall
notify the village's fire chief and building department of such application. In
making such notification, the enforcement officer shall request that the fire
chief and the building department promptly inspect the premises for which the
adult entertainment establishment license is sought to assess compliance with
the regulations under their respective jurisdictions.
   D.   The fire chief shall provide to the enforcement officer a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the fire code
within five (5) days of completing the inspection.
   E.   The building department shall provide the enforcement officer a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the building code,
the planning and zoning code, and the provisions of this chapter related to
physical characteristics of the premises within five (5) days of completing the
inspection.
   F.   The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      1.   An applicant is a natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has
provided false information.
      3.   An applicant has been denied an adult entertainment establishment
license or has had a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment
revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months by any jurisdiction.
      4.   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
      5.   The proposed adult entertainment establishment or the premises on
which it would operate would violate or fail to be in compliance with any
provisions of the zoning code, the provisions of this chapter related to
physical characteristics of the premises, or any state or federal law.
      6.   The application and investigation fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.
      7.   An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in compliance
with any provision of this chapter.
   G.   If the enforcement officer determines that no grounds for denial of a
license exist under this section, the enforcement officer shall not delay
approval of the application.
   H.   An adult entertainment establishment license, if granted, shall state
on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the licensed adult entertainment
establishment. All adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may
be easily read at any time.
   I.   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2010-
809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-7: EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment employee
license shall be submitted to the village's clerk on a form provided by the
enforcement officer. The application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.
   B.   An application for an adult entertainment establishment employee
license shall be completed according to the instructions of the application
form, signed by the applicant under oath that the information contained therein
is true, and shall require the following:
      1.   State the applicant's name and any other names (including "stage"
names) or aliases used by the applicant.
      2.   State the applicant's date and place of birth.
      3.   State the applicant's height, weight, and hair and eye color.
      4.   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the applicant's
face, arms, legs, or hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be
visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed adult
entertainment establishment.
      5.   State the applicant's present and intended business address and
telephone number, identifying the adult entertainment establishment at which
the applicant intends employment.
      6.   Submit proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years old.
      7.   Provide a statement detailing the adult entertainment establishment
employee license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate an adult entertainment
establishment, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the applicant has
ever had an adult entertainment establishment license or an adult entertainment
establishment employee license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended by this or any other jurisdiction. In the event of any
such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation, or suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation, or
suspension.
      8.   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and the date of release
from confinement, if any, for such conviction. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-8: ISSUANCE OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
   A.   Upon receipt of a completed application for an adult entertainment
establishment employee license, the village's clerk shall immediately file a
copy of the completed application with the enforcement officer.
   B.   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for an adult
entertainment establishment employee license, the enforcement officer, or any
peace officer designated by the enforcement officer, shall promptly investigate
the information provided in the application concerning the criminal background
of the applicant and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five (5) days of the completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is done by a peace officer designated by the enforcement officer,
then the written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the
enforcement officer within five (5) days of the completion of the
investigation.
   C.   The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the enforcement officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      1.   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or has given
false information.
      2.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      3.   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity.
      4.   The adult entertainment establishment employee license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law,
statute, rule or regulation.
      5.   The adult entertainment establishment where the applicant intends
employment is not a licensed adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this
chapter.
      6.   The applicant has been denied an adult entertainment establishment
license or an adult entertainment establishment employee license, or has had an
adult entertainment establishment license or an adult entertainment
establishment employee license revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months
by any jurisdiction.
   D.   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States postal service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The enforcement officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2010-
809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-9: FEES:
   A.   Every application for a new adult entertainment establishment license
shall be accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) nonrefundable
application and investigation fee.
   B.   Every application for renewal of an adult entertainment establishment
license shall be accompanied by a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00)
nonrefundable application and investigation fee.
   C.   In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
subsections A and B of this section, every applicant that is granted an adult
entertainment establishment license (new or renewal) shall pay to the village
an annual, nonrefundable license fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) prior
to or at the time of issuance or renewal. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-10: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from
the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as provided in
this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than ninety (90)
days and no less than twenty eight (28) days before the expiration date. If
application is made less than twenty eight (28) days before the expiration
date, the license will not be extended pending a decision on the application,
but will expire on its normal expiration date.
   B.   An application for renewal of an adult entertainment establishment
license or adult entertainment establishment employee license shall be
submitted to the village clerk on a form provided by the enforcement officer.
The renewal application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary to enable the village to determine whether
the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter. The
completed renewal application shall describe any changes or additions to, or
deletions from, the information provided in the applicant's initial license
application. The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by copies
of any document or material submitted in connection with the initial license
application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any change in
circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an initial
adult entertainment establishment license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in
writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
   C.   The enforcement officer shall make the determination concerning the
approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and using the same
procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this chapter.
   D.   The enforcement officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any renewal denial, and shall serve the written renewal denial on
the applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial application.
   E.   When the enforcement officer denies an application for renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from
the date of denial. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-11: SUSPENSION:
   A.   The enforcement officer shall suspend an adult entertainment
establishment license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the
enforcement officer determines that a licensee: 1) has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this chapter except as set forth in subsection B
of this section; or 2) has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to
comply with any section of this chapter.
   B.   The enforcement officer shall suspend an adult entertainment
establishment employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if
the enforcement officer determines that a licensee has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this chapter, except as set forth in subsection
C of this section.
   C.   The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the suspension is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United
States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
(5) days before the suspension is to take effect. The enforcement officer may,
but is not required to serve the written suspension by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-12: REVOCATION:
   A.   The enforcement officer shall revoke an adult entertainment
establishment license or adult entertainment establishment employee license if
a cause of suspension under section
3-11-11 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended two (2) times
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   The enforcement officer shall revoke an adult entertainment
establishment license if he/she determines that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;
      2.   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
      3.   A licensee has knowingly allowed any specific criminal activity, or
the commission of any felony on the premises;
      4.   A licensee knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment
during a period of time when the licensee's license was pending initial
application, expired or suspended;
      5.   A licensee has knowingly allowed one or more specified sexual
activities to occur in or on the licensed premises;
      6.   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license; or
      7.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village for any taxes or
fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any business or
business property.
   C.   The enforcement officer shall revoke an adult entertainment
establishment employee license if he/she determines that:
      1.   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;
      2.   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of
an adult entertainment establishment during a period of time when the
licensee's license was pending initial application, expired or suspended; or
      3.   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license.
   D.   The enforcement officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five (5) days before the revocation is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United
States postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
(5) days before the revocation is to take effect. The enforcement officer may,
but is not required to serve the written revocation by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
   E.   When the enforcement officer revokes a license, the licensee shall not
be issued another license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-13: APPEAL RIGHTS:
   A.   Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a new or renewal license under
this chapter may be appealed to the village president by written notice filed
with the village clerk within ten (10) days of the effective date of such
denial, suspension, or revocation. A suspension or revocation of a license
shall be stayed pending appeal.
   B.   The village president shall notify the appellant in writing of the date
for the hearing on the appeal. The written notice shall be either served on the
appellant personally on or before five (5) days before the hearing, or by
placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the appellant at the address set
forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States postal
service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before seven (7) days before
the hearing. The village president may, but is not required to serve the
written notice by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
   C.   The village president shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written notice of appeal by the village's
clerk, at which hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence
opposing the denial, suspension or revocation. The enforcement officer may also
present witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or
revocation. Both parties shall have the right to cross examine witnesses.
   D.   The village president shall determine whether the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing supported the decision of the enforcement
officer to deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.
   E.   The village president shall issue a written decision setting forth his
findings regarding the evidence presented at the hearing, and his decision to
affirm or overrule the decision of the enforcement officer. The village
president shall serve a copy of his written decision on the appellant and the
enforcement officer in writing. The written decision shall be either served on
the parties personally on or before five (5) days after the date of the
hearing, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the respective
parties at the address set forth in the application and at the enforcement
officer's ordinary business address, and depositing it with the United States
postal service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five (5) days
after the hearing. The village president may, but is not required to serve the
written decision by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
   F.   The written decision of the village president shall be considered a
final decision. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A.   An adult entertainment establishment license is not transferable from
one licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer
of an adult entertainment establishment license shall automatically and
immediately revoke that license.
   B.   An adult entertainment establishment employee license is not
transferable from one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the
individual to whom it was issued may be transferred from one licensed adult
entertainment establishment to another such licensed establishment during the
term of the license, provided that the licensee gives written notice of such
transfer to the enforcement officer within fifteen (15) days after such
transfer. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Employee Behavior: No employee on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment may engage in any specified criminal activity,
specified sexual activities or excretory functions.
   B.   Nudity Prohibited: No employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment may appear, be present, or perform while nude.
   C.   Distance From Patrons: Any employee appearing on the premises of an
adult entertainment establishment in a place that can be viewed by patrons when
said employee is in a state of seminudity must be on a stage that is at least
forty five inches (45") from the floor, and at a distance at least seventy two
inches (72") from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons will
be present, and no patron shall be permitted in any area closer than seventy
two inches (72") from the stage.
   D.   Touching Prohibited: No employee appearing on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment in a state of seminudity may intentionally or
knowingly touch a patron or a patron's clothing or permit himself or herself to
be touched by a patron or a patron's clothing. No employee may intentionally or
knowingly touch a patron's specified anatomical areas either directly or
through clothing or other covering. No employee may intentionally or knowingly
permit a patron to touch the employee's specified anatomical areas either
directly or through clothing or other covering. For purposes of this
subsection, touching need not be accomplished by the hand, and includes the
touching by any part of the toucher's body, clothing or device held by the
toucher.
   E.   Female And Male Dressing Rooms Separate: All adult entertainment
establishments that offer live entertainment must provide separate dressing
room facilities for female and male employees, and which shall not be occupied
or used in any way by anyone other than employees.
   F.   Persons Under The Age Of Eighteen: No person under the age of eighteen
(18) years shall be permitted on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment. Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section,
unless the person under the age of eighteen (18) who was permitted on the
premises exhibited to the employee a driver's license, or other apparently
official government issued identification card bearing the patron's photograph,
and purporting to show that the person was eighteen (18) years of age or over,
and the employee to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have
reasonable cause to believe that the person seeking admittance was under
eighteen (18) years.
   G.   Hours: No adult entertainment establishment shall remain open at any
time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on weekdays and Saturdays, and must be closed on Sundays and any
legal state of Illinois or federal holiday, nor shall any entertainment,
service, or product be provided to a patron on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment during those hours.
   H.   Minimum Lighting Level:
      1.   The premises of every adult entertainment establishment shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access, including restrooms, at an
illumination level of not less than one hundred fifty (150) foot-candles as
measured at floor level.
      2.   The illumination described in subsection H1 of this section shall be
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. In the
event of a power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all
patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be reopened
until the minimum illumination level is restored.
   I.   Observation From Outside Premises: No adult entertainment establishment
shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation from outside the
premises of any image, material or entertainment depicting or describing
excretory functions, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
or any person in a state of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display,
decoration, sign, window or any other means. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-16: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits the
violation of any section of this chapter shall be fined the amount of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Each day that an adult entertainment establishment or employee operates
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense or violation.
(Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-17: INJUNCTION:
Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment
establishment in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction
as well as prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in section
3-11-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-809, 4-6-2010)
3-11-18: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, clauses and phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. 2010-
809, 4-6-2010)
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL HOTEL USE TAX
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Tax Imposed; Collection Of Tax
3-12-3: Records; Right Of Village To Inspect
3-12-4: Transmittal Of Revenue
3-12-5: Action To Enforce Payment
3-12-6: Local Government Taxpayers' Bill Of Rights Act
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses.
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure offered for rental on a
daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental
with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single hotel or
motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within the suite shall be
computed on a basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation
of a hotel or motel room or receiving the consideration for the rental of such
hotel or motel room.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user, or owner, or any officer, agent, employee, or other representative,
acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. (Ord. 2012-857,
2-21-2012)
3-12-2: TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Effective April 1, 2012, there is hereby levied and imposed a tax of
five percent (5%) of the gross receipts of the rent charged for the privilege
and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the village for each twenty
four (24) hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is
made.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel
room, said person hereinafter referred to as "renter".
   C.   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to
secure said tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and to pay over to
the village clerk said tax under procedures prescribed by the village clerk, or
as otherwise provided in this section.
   D.   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this section shall
secure said tax from the renter at the time the rental payment for the hotel or
motel room is collected. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount
due under the tax provided in this section shall be stated separately on said
documents.
   E.   The tax authorized under this section does not apply to any rental or
lease payment by a permanent resident of that hotel. (Ord. 2012-857, 2-21-2012)
3-12-3: RECORDS; RIGHT OF VILLAGE TO INSPECT:
   A.   It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books
and records to which the village clerk or his deputy or representative shall at
all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
      1.   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four
(24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel room where such
shall occur; and
      2.   The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question.
   B.   The village clerk, or his designee, may enter the premises of any hotel
or motel for inspection and examination of the books and records in order to
effectuate the proper administration of this section and to assure the
enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the duties in the performance of
this section. (Ord. 2012-857, 2-21-2012)
3-12-4: TRANSMITTAL OF REVENUE:
   A.   The owner or owners of each hotel or motel room within the village
shall file tax returns on a quarter annual basis showing tax receipts received
with respect to each hotel and motel room during each quarter upon forms
prescribed by the village clerk, with the return for January, February, and
March of a given year being due by April 30 of such year; with the return for
April, May, and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year; with
the return for July, August, and September of a given year being due by October
31 of such year; and with the return for October, November, and December of a
given year being due by January 31 of the following year.
   B.   At the time of filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the
village clerk all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
      1.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one percent (1%) per month on the amount of the unpaid tax which
remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
      2.   Except as provided in this section, all information received by the
village clerk from returns filed under this section, or from any investigation
conducted under the provisions of this section, shall be confidential except
for official purposes with the accounts and finances department or pursuant to
official procedures for collection of any state tax or enforcement of any civil
or criminal penalty or sanction imposed by this section.
      3.   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village clerk
from publishing or making available to the public the names and addresses of
persons filing returns under this section and the number of rooms covered in
said return, or from publishing or making available reasonable statistics
concerning the operation of the tax wherein the contents of returns are grouped
into aggregates in such a way that the information contained in any individual
return shall not be disclosed. The village clerk may make available to the
secretary of the treasury of the United States, or a proper official of the
state, or a delegate of any other state imposing a tax upon a motel or hotel
room, for exclusively official purposes, information received by the village
clerk in the administration of this section. (Ord. 2012-857, 2-21-2012)
3-12-5: ACTION TO ENFORCE PAYMENT:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the village
attorney shall, upon the request of the village clerk or his designee, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2012-857, 2-21-2012)
3-12-6: LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS ACT:
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 12 of
this code implementing the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
(Ord. 2012-857, 2-21-2012)
CHAPTER 13
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: License Required
3-13-3: License Eligibility
3-13-4: Number Of Licenses
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained Title 10 of this
code governing cannabis business establishments apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. (Ord. 2019-1069, 9-17-2019)
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or entity may operate a cannabis business establishment in the
Village without first having obtained a license issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-1069, 9-17-2019)
3-13-3: LICENSE ELIGIBILITY:
A cannabis business establishment will only be eligible for a license under
this chapter if (1) it has received the appropriate license to operate from the
appropriate stage agency; (2) it has received all necessary zoning approvals
required under Title 10 of this code to operate within the Village limits; and
(3) a license in the respective classification is available under this chapter
and has not already been issued. (Ord. 2019-1069, 9-17-2019)
3-13-4: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The following shall be the total number of licenses allowed, the number of
licenses issued, and the number of available licenses to be issued to cannabis
business establishments in the Village:
License Classification Total Licenses Number Issued Number Available
License Classification           Total Licenses Number Issued Number Available
Cannabis Dispensary              2              1             1
Cannabis Cultivation Center      0              0             0
Cannabis Craft Grower         0              0             0
Cannabis Infuser                 0              0             0
Cannabis Transporter          0              0             0
Cannabis Processor            0              0             0
On-Premises Cannabis Consumption 0              0             0
Establishment    
 
(Ord. 2019-1069, 9-17-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-1153, 6-18-2024; Ord. 2025-1169, 2-
25-2025)
CHAPTER 14
VIDEO GAMING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Video Gaming Permitted
3-14-2: License Required; Application
3-14-3: Fees
3-14-4: Term Of License
3-14-5: Privilege
3-14-6: Regulations
3-14-7: Compliance
3-14-8: Revocation
3-14-1: VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED:
   A.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., is permitted in the Village subject to the
provisions of this Code.
   B.   Video gaming is not permitted within the Village except pursuant to a
valid liquor license issued by the Village's local liquor commissioner and
pursuant to the issuance of a valid gaming terminal license as set forth in
this Chapter. Establishments licensed to operate video gaming terminals as
truck stops by the State of Illinois without the need for a liquor license are
also required to obtain a valid video gaming terminal license from the Village
as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A liquor license holder eligible to permit video gaming terminals, and any
truck stop eligible to permit video gaming terminals, must apply for and obtain
a valid gaming terminal license from the Village President for each video
gaming terminal to be operated within the Village. Information about the
location and operation of the video gaming terminals must be submitted with the
application, along with a copy of the licensee's State video gaming license
issued by the Illinois Gaming Board, and payment of the gaming terminal fee
required by this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-3: FEES:
An annual fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is hereby imposed on each
video gaming terminal operated within the Village. The annual fee must be paid
at the time of submission of an application for a video gaming license, and
annually thereafter. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license issued under this Chapter will terminate on April 30 following its
issuance. Applications for new licenses may be accepted after April 30 for the
current license year, but the license fee will not be prorated. (Ord. 2022-
1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-5: PRIVILEGE:
A video gaming license is purely a personal privilege and does not constitute
property nor is it transferable. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-6: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments operating a
video gaming terminal on the licensed premises:
   A.   A valid State video gaming license must be clearly displayed at all
times.
   B.   A valid Village video gaming license must be clearly displayed at all
times.
   C.   No more than six (6) video gaming terminals may be located on the
licensed premises of a licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is
drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises.
Truck stops licensed as "large truck stops" by the State of Illinois may have
no more than ten (10) video gaming terminals.
   D.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons over twenty one (21) years of age. The entrance to the restricted area
must be within the view of at least one employee of the establishment who is
over twenty one (21) years of age. Any licensed establishment that allows
persons under twenty one (21) years of age to enter the establishment must
isolate video gaming terminals in a separate area inaccessible to minors.
   E.   No licensed establishment may permit any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years to use, play, or operate a video gaming terminal.
   F.   Signage must be posted at the entrance to, and inside of, the
designated gaming area in accordance with the regulations adopted by the
Illinois Gaming Board.
   G.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with all applicable
Village ordinances, including the Village's liquor control regulations, as well
as any applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.
   H.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, as amended, and all rules, regulations, and restrictions imposed by
the Illinois Gaming Board.
   I.   Licensed establishments must immediately notify the Village President
in the event the Illinois Gaming Board revokes or suspends the licensed
establishment's video gaming license. The revocation, loss, or suspension of a
valid State video gaming license shall automatically result in the revocation,
loss, or suspension of the Village video gaming license for all video gaming
terminals without any refund of any fee.
   J.   An owner, manager, or employee over the age of twenty one (21) must be
present during all hours of operation when video gaming terminals are available
for use by the public. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-7: COMPLIANCE:
The Village and its agents must be allowed unrestricted access to enter the
licensed establishment to determine compliance with this article and the
Illinois Video Gaming Act. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
3-14-8: REVOCATION:
In addition to the general penalty authorized for violations of this Code, the
Village President may revoke or suspend any video gaming license and/or any
liquor license issued by the Village if the Village President determines the
licensed establishment has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, any
provision of other Village ordinances, including, but not limited to, the
Village's liquor control regulations, or any applicable state or federal law or
regulation. No video gaming license shall be revoked or suspended, however,
until a public hearing has been conducted by the Village President, with a
three-day written notice to the licensed establishment to the licensee or the
licensee's manager of the licensed premises. No hearing will be required,
however, to revoke or suspend a village video gaming license for an
establishment that has its state video gaming license revoked or suspended. No
liquor license may be revoked for violations of this Chapter without following
the revocation process provided for under the Village's liquor control
regulations. (Ord. 2022-1110, 2-1-2022)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Nuisances   1
Refuse And Recycling Disposal   2
Tree Removal Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)   3
Mobile Home, House Trailer, And Recreational Vehicle Restrictions   4
Burning   5
Weeds And Grasses   6
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Illustrative Enumeration
4-1-3: Nuisance Prohibited
4-1-4: Unnecessary Noise
4-1-5: Litter
4-1-6: Sump Pump Discharges
4-1-7: Abatement Of Nuisance
4-1-8: Penalty
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least thirty (30) days, the engine, wheels, license or other parts have been
altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
legally driven or of being driven or of being under its own motor power.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Canadian thistle (Cirsium arvense) and all its varieties,
perennial sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis), European bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), leafy spurge (Tithmyalus esula), Russian knapweed (Centaurea
repens), hoary cress (Lepidium draba), ragweed (Ambrosia), poison oak, poison
ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, cocklebur or any weed designated as noxious by the
Illinois Department of Agriculture.
NUISANCE: Any person doing an unlawful act, omitting to perform a duty or
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:
   A.   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
or
   B.   Offends decency; or
   C.   Is offensive to the senses; or
   D.   Interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, encroaches upon or
renders dangerous to the passage of motorized and nonmotorized vehicles and
conveyances or pedestrian traffic on or in any street or highway right of way,
sidewalk, alley, stream, ditch, drainage way, commons or other public property;
or
   E.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
   F.   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
PERSON: Shall mean and include any individual, association, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988; amd. Ord.
92-371, 8-18-1992)
4-1-2: ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION:
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of any of the following items,
conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
   A.   Noxious Weeds: It shall be the duty of all owners or occupants of land
on which noxious weeds are found growing to either cut, pull, destroy or spray
with a broadleaf weed killer as approved by the Illinois Department of Health
(in such a mixture and manner so as not to sterilize the land on which the
weeds are located and so as not to promote or cause soil erosion).
   B.   Rubbish, Trash, Junk: Accumulation of rubbish, trash, junk and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things.
   C.   Rats And Other Vermin: Any condition which provides harborage for rats,
mice, snakes and other vermin.
   D.   Noise And Vibrations 1 : All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and
annoying vibrations, including animal noises, electronic devices such as but
not limited to amplifiers, speakers and loud microphones.
   E.   Obnoxious Odors: All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as
well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the
emission or generation of such odors and stenches. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988)
   F.   Carcasses Of Animals Or Fowl: The carcasses of animals or fowl not
disposed of within a reasonable time, not to exceed twelve (12) hours, after
death. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988; 1996 Code)
   G.   Pollution Of Wells Or Cisterns: The pollution of any public or private
well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals,
creamery or industrial waste or other substances.
   H.   Dangerous Building: Any building, structure or other place or location
where any activity which is in violation of local, State or Federal law is
conducted, performed or maintained. For any person to keep, operate, maintain
or to permit to remain upon any premises owned, used, leased, occupied or
controlled by him/her or them, any dangerous buildings as hereinafter defined.
A dangerous building is hereby defined for the purposes of this subsection to
be any building or structure which shall have any one or more of the following
defects:
      1.   Those whose interior walls or vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity falls outside of the middle one-third (1/3) of its base.
      2.   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty three percent
(33%) or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members of
fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing
or outside walls or covering.
      3.   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
      4.   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the people of the Village.
      5.   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, unsafe, unsanitary or
which fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are
unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to
work injury to health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living
therein.
      6.   Those having light, ventilation and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human
beings who live or may live therein.
      7.   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators or fire escapes, as
provided by the Building Code of the Village now or hereinafter in effect.
      8.   Those which are liable to collapse or fall or parts of which are so
attached that a part may fall and cause injury to persons or property.
      9.   Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the
Village.
      10.   Those buildings constructed, reconstructed or altered in violation
of any provision of the Building, Mechanical, Plumbing or Electrical Code or
any other provision of this Code.
   I.   Uncovered Structural Opening: Any building, concrete base or structural
opening on land which is not completed but remains open and uncovered for a
period of ten (10) days. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988)
   J.   Incomplete Construction: Any foundation or similar structure
incomplete, open and unused for a period of thirty (30) days or more, unless
such foundation shall be covered or filled in and all exposed pipes capped;
provided, however, that the compliance officer, as enforcement officer, or such
other person or persons as shall be from time to time designated by the
Corporate Authorities as the enforcing authority hereunder, may defer
enforcement of this provision temporarily, for reasons of acts of war, acts of
God, natural or manmade disasters beyond the control of the owner or
controlling party, until such acts or disasters shall have abated, when in the
discretion of the enforcement official such deferral of enforcement shall not
of itself result in increased danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 251, 3-7-1988; amd. 1996 Code)
   K.   Stagnant Water: Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or
maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
   L.   Smoke; Noxious Fumes: Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders,
in unreasonable quantities resulting from burning rubber, plastics or any
chemicals.
   M.   Open Land Areas:
      1.   To fail to maintain open areas abutting parkways or rights-of-way
abutting parkways or public easements, including, but not limited to, road and
street rights-of-way, as fall within the property boundary lines of such owners
or persons in control of property, so as to permit the accumulation of trash or
debris thereon or so as to fail to mow grass or control other plant growth
contrary to any remaining provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The growth to a height of eighteen inches (18") or more of any
uncontrolled or uncultivated weeds, grasses or prairie growth; excluding,
however, trees, bushes, shrubs and other woody stemmed plants 2 . All such
vegetation or ground cover as aforementioned found to be higher than eighteen
inches (18") shall be cut, pulled or destroyed, but not in such manner as would
leave the underlying soil sterilized or unfertile or as to promote or cause
soil erosion. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall apply to any
undeveloped real property within the Village boundaries.
   N.   Improvements To Developed Lands: In any parcel of developed land
improved with any building, parking lot or other permanent or temporary
accessory improvement to fail to maintain said parcel in good order and to mow
all ground cover, including, but not limited to, customary lawn grasses, on a
regular basis or to permit such ground cover to exceed six inches (6") to eight
inches (8") in height 3 .
   O.   Exemptions: This does not include mailboxes erected in accordance with
United States postal regulations, public and utility company equipment, poles,
streetlights and street signs.
   P.   Projection Of Mailbox: Projection of a mailbox beyond any curb into any
public or private street or highway.
   Q.   Inoperable Motor Vehicle: Any inoperable motor vehicle, whether on
public or private property, except motor vehicles kept within a building when
not in use or motor vehicles rendered temporarily incapable of being driven
under their own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations. Any vehicle without a current State license (cars, trucks, boats,
motorcycles and the like) is considered a nuisance. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988)
   R.   Recreational Vehicles And Boats: Recreational vehicles in excess of
thirty feet (30') in length and boats in excess of thirty feet (30') in length
stored on yards or driveways are a nuisance. (Ord. 2003-644, 11-4-2003)
   S.   Farm Animals At Large; Running At Large Unlawful: It shall be unlawful
to permit any farm animals including specifically, alpaca, cow, horse, goat,
pig, hog, sheep or any other livestock or any chickens, geese, ducks, or other
domestic fowl, to roam at large in the Village. The word "horse" shall include
not only horses, strictly so called, but also miniature horses, ponies, colts,
mares, fillies, mules and asses. (Ord. 2018-1042, 6-19-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  4-1-4 of this Chapter.
2 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
3 2. See also chapter 6 of this title.
4-1-3: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance. (Ord. 251, 3-7-1988)
4-1-4: UNNECESSARY NOISE 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the limits of the Village. The following acts, among others, are
declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises which constitute a
violation of this section, but said enumerations shall not be deemed to be a
comprehensive list of all prohibited noises:
   A.   Horns, Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling device
on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place,
except as a danger warning; or the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
   B.   Radios, Phonographs: The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated any radio, television, stereo, musical instrument, compact
disc player or other machine or appliance in such a manner to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring persons or at any time at such a volume
which is louder than necessary for convenient hearing.
   C.   Loudspeakers And Amplifiers For Advertising: The using, operating or
permitting to be used, played or operated any television, radio, musical
instrument, photograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound which is broadcast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure.
   D.   Animals And Birds: The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing
frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of
persons within the vicinity.
   E.   Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion machine, motorboat or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   F.   Construction Or Repairs: The erection, including excavating,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure, road, bridge or
any other construction activity, including, but not limited to, the operation
of pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, derricks, steam or electric
hoists or heavy construction equipment, other than between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on weekdays, and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturdays, except in the
event of a bona fide emergency or in the interest of public health and safety.
If the building inspector should determine that construction activities at
other times are necessary due to a bona fide emergency, or in the interest of
public health and safety and that no unreasonable inconvenience will result to
others, the building inspector may grant a permit for a specific duration for
specific hours for such construction activities, upon application being made
prior to or during the progress of any such construction activity. Homeowner
performed repairs or improvements are permitted on Sundays from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 92-371, 8-18-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-1-2D of this chapter.
4-1-5: LITTER:
   A.   Depositing Of Litter Prohibited; Exception: It shall be unlawful for
any person, in person or by such person's agent, employee or servant, to cast,
throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or other
public place in the village or any river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or
receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the village, any kind of dirt,
rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid.
Nor shall any person cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the
aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the village in such
manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action
of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into any of the aforementioned places.
Provided, that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a
permit authorized by any provision of this code or to goods, wares or
merchandise deposited upon any public way or other public place temporarily, in
the necessary course of trade, and removed therefrom within two (2) hours after
being so deposited; or to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the
village sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the provisions of
this code relating thereto.
   B.   Littering By Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or
by such person's agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any
kind of dirt, rubbish, waste articles, things or substance, whether liquid or
solid, unless such vehicle is covered or otherwise equipped to prevent any part
of its load from spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in
motion on any street or alley in the municipality; provided, however, that the
requirements herein for covering such vehicle shall not apply to vehicles
carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste
material, if such matter is securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling
or dropping as aforesaid. (Ord. 59, 9-13-1971)
   C.   Littering From Vehicle: No person shall throw from a motor vehicle any
litter, garbage, or any other item upon public or private property. (Ord. 2004-
653, 3-2-2004)
4-1-6: SUMP PUMP DISCHARGES:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to discharge sump pump or
downspout water, directly or indirectly, upon an adjacent owner's property,
unless the village engineer determines that such a discharge is consistent with
sound engineering practice. (Ord. 91-347, 7-2-1991)
4-1-7: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the
village, the compliance officer, the police chief or some other duly designated
official of the village shall give ten (10) days' written notice to the owner
or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person
causing or maintaining the nuisance.
Failure, however, to give such notice shall not constitute a defense to
enforcement of the payment of any penalty or other remedy provided for or
created under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Contents Of Notice: The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall contain:
      1.   An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a
stated time which shall be reasonable under the circumstances;
      2.   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
      3.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      4.   A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance;
      5.   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the village will abate
such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person;
      6.   A statement that the creation or maintenance of a nuisance or the
allowing of same is subject to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   C.   Service Of Notice: The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as
any other legal process may be served pursuant to law.
   D.   Abatement By Village: Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice
to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to
abate the same, the compliance officer or other duly designated official of the
village shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of
costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
   E.   Emergency Abatement By Village: When, in the opinion of the compliance
officer or other duly designated official, there is actual and immediate danger
to the public or occupants of a particular premises caused by a nuisance on
such premises, the compliance officer or duly designated official is hereby
authorized and empowered, without any notice or hearing, to order and require
such premises to be vacated. The compliance officer or other duly designated
official shall immediately post the premises, warning of the dangerous
condition and shall then abate such nuisance and prepare a statement of costs
incurred in the abatement thereof.
   F.   Village's Costs Declared Lien; Collection As Taxes:
      1.   Any and all costs incurred by the village in the abatement of a
nuisance under the provisions of this chapter or any fines levied hereunder
shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed
and a notice of lien shall be filed with county recorder of deeds.
      2.   Such remedy on behalf of the village shall not be exclusive and all
other remedies at law or in equity shall be available to the village for
enforcement of such lien or recovery of the expenses incurred. (Ord. 251, 3-7-
1988)
4-1-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
REFUSE AND RECYCLING DISPOSAL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Scavenger License Required
4-2-3: Removal Limited
4-2-4: Composting
4-2-5: Dumping And Accumulation Of Garbage Or Refuse
4-2-6: Resident Responsibility
4-2-7: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
PERSON: An individual, corporation, association, partnership or any other legal
entity.
RECYCLABLES: Newspaper; green, brown or clear glass; aluminum and tin cans and
high density polyethylene (HDPE) or polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastic
jugs or bottles.
SWALCO: The solid waste agency of Lake County, Illinois.
SCAVENGER: A commercial entity which collects solid waste, recyclables and yard
waste from individuals and businesses and disposes of the waste by depositing
the waste at a landfill or any other lawful means, including recycling and
incineration.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, trash, metal cans, glass, papers, foodstuffs, vegetable
matters, discarded household goods and any other similar matter.
VILLAGE: The village of Wadsworth, Lake County, Illinois.
YARD WASTE: Grass clippings, branches, mulch, shrubs, sod, trees (not to exceed
6 inches in diameter) or any other similar matter. (Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
4-2-2: SCAVENGER LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   All scavengers who collect solid waste, recyclables and yard waste from
all persons in the village of Wadsworth shall obtain an annual scavenger
license from the village.
   B.   Scavenger licenses will be valid from January 1 through December 31 and
the fee for same will be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually.
   C.   Scavenger licenses will automatically terminate on the day of
commencement of any solid waste, yard waste and recyclables collection
franchise the village enters into in the future.
   D.   All scavengers shall deliver all collected recyclable materials to the
waste management intermediate processing facility ("facility") in Grayslake,
Illinois, or to such other SWALCO designated facility as directed by the
village. The village may terminate the license if the scavenger fails to abide
by the rules and regulations set forth by the facility used for the processing
of collected recyclable materials.
   E.   Scavengers shall prepare and submit to the village and to SWALCO
reports detailing recyclables collection activities for the previous month,
including, without limitation, recycling participation rate, the amount of
recyclables collected and the vendor purchasing or receiving the recyclables.
Reports shall be submitted quarterly no later than thirty (30) days following
the end of the quarter.
   F.   The services to be rendered by the scavengers herein shall be performed
in an orderly, efficient and workmanlike manner with a work force adequate to
accomplish the same on a regular basis despite adverse conditions, equipment
breakdowns or similar hindrances, all to the reasonable satisfaction of the
village. Scavengers shall not litter premises in the process of making
collections, nor allow any solid waste, yard waste or recyclables to blow or
fall or spill from any vehicle used for collections. Scavengers shall replace
lids or covers on all containers immediately after emptying.
   G.   All proceeds from the sale of recyclable materials shall be retained by
the scavengers. Scavengers agree to provide a quarterly accounting statement,
pertaining to the village, detailing the volume of recyclable materials
collected and verifying compliance with all provisions of this section.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, scavengers acknowledge that SWALCO has in effect
a rebate program whereby SWALCO receives certain funds from the facility and
distributes a portion of these funds to its members, including the village, and
that all scavengers must waive any claim to any portion of the funds collected
by SWALCO through this program.
   H.   Scavengers will distribute all solid waste containers (minimum of 95
gallons) and recyclables containers (minimum of 65 gallons) to their customers
in the village.
   I.   Scavengers at their expense shall be required to develop, print and
distribute to all village customers a brochure approved by the village
explaining its recycling programs. The brochure shall be updated and
distributed not less than annually. Whenever there is a change in the service
or programs provided, or as directed by the village, scavengers shall also
print and distribute an updated brochure.
   J.   Scavengers shall be responsible for billing all customers directly and
for collection of all accounts due.
   K.   Scavengers shall provide the village a certificate of insurance that
specifically names the village of Wadsworth as an additional insured. The
village will also require a copy of the policy endorsement certifying that the
village is named additional insured. The certificate of insurance shall contain
at a minimum a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) general liability policy, a
one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) auto/vehicle liability policy, a one million
dollar ($1,000,000.00) workers' compensation policy and an umbrella coverage
policy of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00).
   L.   Scavengers shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the village, its
officials, employees, agents, representatives and attorneys, in both their
official and individual capacities, from and against any and all injuries,
deaths, claims, losses, damages, suits, demands, actions and causes of actions,
expenses, fees, including attorney fees, and costs which may accrue against the
village in consequence of the issuance of a scavenger license or which may
result from or arise out of any action or omission of the scavenger, its
officers, employees, agents or subcontractors, including, without limitation,
any action or omission related to the disposal of any solid waste, yard waste
or recyclables. (Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
   M.   Scavengers shall collect solid waste, recyclables and yard waste from
their customers only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. Scavengers shall not collect solid
waste, recyclables or yard waste from any of their customers on Sundays or on
the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth Of July, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. (Ord. 2014-930, 7-1-2014)
4-2-3: REMOVAL LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for a person other than a licensed scavenger to remove any
solid waste, recyclables or yard waste from any property in the village. (Ord.
2013-905, 8-20-2013)
4-2-4: COMPOSTING:
Village residents are strongly encouraged to maintain their yards in an
ecologically sound manner. They are encouraged to compost yard waste at their
homesites. They are equally encouraged, if they engage landscape contractors,
to require that all yard waste be composted on or off site. It shall be
unlawful to commingle yard waste with other solid waste materials. (Ord. 2013-
905, 8-20-2013)
4-2-5: DUMPING AND ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE:
   A.   Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or to
aid, abet, assist, advise, encourage or permit the dumping or depositing of any
garbage, refuse, junk, residential, commercial or industrial waste or obnoxious
debris upon any land within the village.
   B.   Permitting Accumulation: It shall be unlawful for any owner and also
any person in possession or control of any land in the village to permit or
maintain the existence thereof of the accumulation of any garbage; refuse;
junk; residential, commercial or industrial waste or obnoxious debris or to
permit said land to become or remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to
the public health in any way. (Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
4-2-6: RESIDENT RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Approved Bin: Each resident or customer shall be responsible to place
solid waste, recyclables or yard waste in an approved bin and place the bin at
the edge of the public right of way to facilitate collection by the scavenger
on the scheduled date of collection.
   B.   Approved Scavenger: No person within the village shall permit his/her
solid waste, landscape waste or recyclables to be removed by anyone other than
a scavenger with a valid village license and from only approved containers.
(Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
4-2-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2013-905, 8-20-2013)
CHAPTER 3
TREE REMOVAL REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
CHAPTER 4
MOBILE HOME, HOUSE TRAILER, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Use Prohibited
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
HOUSE TRAILER: As defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-128.
MOBILE HOME: As defined in 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/2.1.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: As defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-169.
(Ord. 2003-640, 10-21-2003)
4-4-2: USE PROHIBITED:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-5-8 and all other applicable
authority, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   To utilize a house trailer, mobile home, or recreational vehicle within
the village for any commercial purpose, including, but not limited to, retail
or wholesale sales of manufactured goods, services or other items or materials.
No house trailer, mobile home, or recreational vehicle may be occupied or
utilized for business purposes within any nonresidential zoning district which
includes the B, CR, OR, LI, LI-1 and PL districts.
   B.   To utilize, occupy, or inhabit (temporarily or otherwise) a house
trailer, mobile home, or recreational vehicle within any residential zoning
district within the village which includes AG, SE, SR, and SD districts.
      1.   Exceptions: This section shall not prohibit the use of a
recreational vehicle which is owned by a nonresident of Wadsworth for no more
than twenty one (21) days in any calendar year by said nonresident while
visiting a Wadsworth resident on the Wadsworth resident's property with the
knowledge and consent of the Wadsworth resident provided that the nonresident
secures a permit therefor from the village at a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) prior thereto and further provided that at the conclusion of said
visit the recreational vehicle shall be removed from the village. Nor shall
this section prohibit the storage of a recreational vehicle which is owned by a
Wadsworth resident on that resident's property provided that it shall not be
located within any setback area and shall not be used for any purpose while
being so stored and shall be stored in conformity with all other provisions of
this code. (Ord. 2003-640, 10-21-2003)
CHAPTER 5
BURNING
SECTION:
4-5-1: Permitted
4-5-2: Restriction
4-5-3: Safety Regulations
4-5-4: No Off-Site Materials May Be Burned
4-5-1: PERMITTED:
Burning of leaves and other landscape waste is permitted in conformity with
this chapter and except as may be prohibited from time to time by the village
of Wadsworth. (Ord. 2000-561, 11-7-2000)
4-5-2: RESTRICTION:
Burning of leaves or other landscape waste is prohibited within one thousand
feet (1,000') of any school when school is in session or pupils are present.
(Ord. 2000-561, 11-7-2000)
4-5-3: SAFETY REGULATIONS:
   A.   No fire shall be left unattended, and no fire shall be allowed to grow
so large as to pose a danger to the safety of any building, structure, or
nearby trees.
   B.   No fire shall be set unless there is a ready source of sufficient water
to extinguish it in the event of an emergency.
   C.   No fire shall be set when the winds are sufficiently powerful to create
a substantial danger of the spread of the fire.
   D.   No fire shall be set within twenty five feet (25') of any building or
other structure.
   E.   The code compliance officer or his designee shall have the right to
require any fire to be extinguished when, in his judgment, a substantial danger
of the fire's spreading exists. (Ord. 2000-561, 11-7-2000)
4-5-4: NO OFF-SITE MATERIALS MAY BE BURNED:
No person shall burn any materials which he has brought or allowed to be
brought onto his property from any other location. (Ord. 2000-561, 11-7-2000)
CHAPTER 6
WEEDS AND GRASSES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Nuisance Declared
4-6-2: Removal Required
4-6-3: Grass Yards
4-6-4: Violation
4-6-5: Removal By Village; Costs
4-6-6: Lien For Removal Costs
4-6-7: Penalties
4-6-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Without in any way limiting the term "noxious weeds" by the enumeration that
follows, all noxious weeds, including, but not limited to, burdock, ragweed
(giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambs quarter,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild
hemp, purple loosestrife, weeds which due to pollination are a menace to
health, and weeds otherwise injurious to public health or welfare, are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2003-631, 8-19-2003)
4-6-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
All such weeds shall be cut, pulled, destroyed or chemically sprayed by the
owner or person in control of said property at least four (4) times each year
as follows:
   A.   Once before May 15.
   B.   Once before June 15.
   C.   Once before July 15.
   D.   Once before August 15. (Ord. 2003-631, 8-19-2003)
4-6-3: GRASS YARDS:
All grass yards shall be cut at least four (4) times each year as follows:
   A.   Once before May 15.
   B.   Once before June 15.
   C.   Once before July 15.
   D.   Once before August 15. (Ord. 2003-631, 8-19-2003)
4-6-4: VIOLATION:
The failure to destroy such weeds or cut grass yards within the designated time
periods as set forth above shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2003-631, 8-19-2003)
4-6-5: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE; COSTS:
When the owner or person in control of any property fails to destroy or spray
weeds growing thereon or cut a grass yard, the village shall destroy or cause
to be destroyed such weeds and/or cut the grass yard and any expense incurred
by the village in so doing shall be a charge against the owner. (Ord. 2003-631,
8-19-2003)
4-6-6: LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS:
The village shall have a lien on the property for the costs incurred and notice
shall be provided in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-
7 and/or such other statutes as may be in effect from time to time. No lien
shall be released unless and until the total amount of the lien is paid
together with a release fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00). (Ord. 2003-631,
8-19-2003)
4-6-7: PENALTIES:
In addition to liability for the cost of destruction of such weeds or cutting
of the grass by the village, the owner or person in control of any such
property, who fails to cut a grass yard or fails to destroy the weeds within
the designated periods of time as herein above provided, shall upon conviction
be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day in which the owner or person in control of any
such property shall fail or refuse to comply with the requirements of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2003-631, 8-19-2003)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Discharge Of Firearms/Hunting   1
Minors   2
Animal Control   3
Illinois Vehicle Code   4
Fireworks   5
Miscellaneous Offenses   6
CHAPTER 1
DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS/HUNTING
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Discharge Prohibited/Hunting
5-1-3: Exception
5-1-4: Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions that appear in the Illinois department of natural resources'
(department) Illinois "Digest Of Hunting And Trapping Regulations", or any
successive department publication regarding hunting and trapping activities,
are hereby adopted by reference.
FIREARM: Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a
projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or
escape of gas; excluding, however:
   A.   Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paintball gun or BB gun which either
expels a single globular projectile not exceeding 0.18 inch in diameter and
which has a maximum muzzle velocity of less than seven hundred feet (700') per
second or breakable paintballs containing washable marking colors.
   B.   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or
recommended by the United States coast guard or the interstate commerce
commission.
   C.   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition.
SLUG: A heavy lead projectile, that may have precut rifling, intended for use
in a shotgun or specialized slug guns and often used to hunt large game animals
for which the use of slugs is lawful. Types of slugs may include Brenneke,
Foster, Saboted, Plumbata or Steel. (Ord. 2010-835, 12-21-2010)
5-1-2: DISCHARGE PROHIBITED/HUNTING:
It is unlawful to discharge a firearm or hunt within nine hundred feet (900')
of an inhabited dwelling without first obtaining written permission of the
owner or tenant of the dwelling. The discharge of a firearm or hunting on
public land or properties owned by utility companies is not permitted. The
discharge of a firearm or hunting activities can only take place on properties
within the AG agriculture and SR suburban residential zoning district that are
at least ten (10) acres in size which are owned by a single owner or on
contiguous properties that are held in common ownership by a single owner.
Rifles, handguns or slugs may not be used for hunting activities; rifles or
slugs may not be used during skeet shooting, target practice or other type of
shooting activity. Projectiles (bullets, arrows, etc.) may not encroach, travel
over or land on adjacent properties, roadways or rights of way. Everyone
present during all hunting activities shall follow and conduct their activities
in accordance with all state of Illinois department of natural resources
guidelines. (Ord. 2010-835, 12-21-2010; Ord. 2020-1094, 10-20-2020)
5-1-3: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to law enforcement officials while
engaged in the operation of their official duties. (Ord. 2010-835, 12-21-2010)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-835, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Vandalism
5-2-2: Curfew
5-2-1: VANDALISM:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
Circuit Court of this State or an appropriate court of any other jurisdiction,
but does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act 1 .
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but has not yet
attained the age of nineteen (19) years.
   PARENT: The natural parents or adopted parent of a minor.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind, including governmental entities.
   PROPERTY: Any real estate, including improvements thereon, tangible and
intangible personalty.
   B.   Vandalism Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for anyone to wilfully or
maliciously injure, deface, destroy or interfere with any property belonging to
the Village, other governmental body, any private person, firm or corporation.
   C.   Parental Or Guardian Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have
committed the following described acts with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or legal guardian, in violation of this Section, upon the occurrence of
the events described in subsection C1 and 2 below:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting the destruction of property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial
sanctions from another governmental agency resulting from an admission of guilt
of violation of this or any other provision of this Code, law or statute which
prohibits wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service with a certificate of personal service return, from the
police department of the arresting governmental body following such
adjudication or nonjudicial sanction and providing further that at any time
within one year following receipt of said notice, said minor is either
adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described
herein or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another governmental
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance or
statute as described herein.
   D.   Damages And Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this
Section shall pay the actual damages resulting therefrom, but not exceeding the
limit provided by section 5 of "An act to authorize recovery of damages from
parents or legal guardians due to the wilful injury of a person or property by
minor children" 1 , and in addition, shall be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Damages shall be cumulative for each
occurrence. When damages result to the personal property of more than one
person, each said person shall be entitled to recover the same as provided for
herein. Each occurrence shall give rise to a separate cause of action. Payments
shall be made within ten (10) days after notification of liability as provided
for herein. Parents and guardians shall be responsible individually and
jointly. (Ord. 118, 10-10-1977; 1996 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 705 ILCS 405/1-1.
1 1. S.H.A. 740 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
5-2-2: CURFEW:
   A.   Established: It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of
seventeen (17) years to be on any public street in the Village between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. from Sunday
through Thursday inclusive and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday unless accompanied
by or in charge of a parent or guardian or other proper companion of the age of
twenty one (21) years or more unless engaged in some occupation or business in
which such child may engage under the laws of this State.
   B.   Parental Responsibility: It is hereby made unlawful for any parent,
guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any person under
seventeen (17) years of age to allow or permit any such child, ward or other
person under such age to go, or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or
public places within the time prohibited or unless accompanied as herein
provided or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor.
   C.   Notice Of Violation: Any child under the age of seventeen (17) years
who violates this Section shall be warned by any police officer forthwith to
comply with such provisions and such officer shall also, without delay, report
such violation to such officer's superior officer, who shall cause a written
notice to be served upon the parent, guardian, custodian or other person in
control or charge of such child, setting forth the manner in which this Section
has been violated. In case any child under the age of seventeen (17) years,
after such warning, shall again violate any of the provisions of this Section,
such child shall be apprehended as a juvenile delinquent and brought before the
Circuit Court of Lake County to be dealt with accordingly.
   D.   Confinement: No child or minor person arrested under the provisions of
this Section shall be placed in confinement until such child has been taken
home to ascertain the parents' wishes and the parents shall have refused to be
held responsible for the observance of this Section.
   E.   Violation After Notice: In case any parent, guardian or person in
control or charge of such child who has received notice as provided herein
shall knowingly permit such child again to violate the provisions of this
Section, such parent, guardian, custodian or person in control or charge of
such child shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this
Section. (Ord. 44, 1-5-1970)
   F.   Penalty: Any violation of this Section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Nuisance Declared
5-3-2: Dogs At Large
5-3-2-1: Dog Leash Required
5-3-3: Rabies Vaccination
5-3-4: Impounding Of Dogs
5-3-5: Biting Of Persons By Dogs Or Other Animals
5-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to suffer, permit or allow any
dog to run at large in the village. (Ord. 34, 4-1-1968)
5-3-2: DOGS AT LARGE:
No owner of a dog shall permit said dog to run at large in the village. Any dog
found running at large contrary to the provisions of this section shall be
impounded by Lake County animal control, who shall then give a seven (7) day
notice to the owner, if known, that said dog has been impounded. Any dog
impounded under the provisions of this section shall be redeemable by the
payment of the room and board provisions of section
5-3-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 34, 4-1-1968)
5-3-2-1: DOG LEASH REQUIRED:
No person shall permit any dog to go on or enter upon any public or private
property other than property which is either owned or occupied by such person
as a tenant unless the dog is on a leash and under the control of such person.
For the purposes of this section, "leash" shall mean a cord, rope, strap, or
chain, not more than eight feet (8') in length, which shall be securely
fastened to the collar or harness of the dog and shall be of sufficient
strength to keep such dog under control. (Ord. 2002-614, 12-3-2002)
5-3-3: RABIES VACCINATION:
Every owner of a dog five (5) months of age or older shall each year, on or
before June 1, cause said dog to be vaccinated for rabies by Lake County animal
control, Lake County animal control deputies or any licensed veterinarian and
provide the dog with a collar or harness and attach the official tag which
shall be worn by the dog at all times. (Ord. 34, 4-1-1968; amd. 1996 Code)
5-3-4: IMPOUNDING OF DOGS:
   A.   Absence Of Collar: Any dog found anywhere in the village not having a
collar upon its neck and a current rabies tag affixed thereto shall be
apprehended as a stray and rabies suspect and impounded as a public nuisance.
   B.   Impoundment: Lake County animal control is hereby authorized to catch
such dogs and deliver them to existing pounds and animal hospitals which are
hereby authorized to receive them and charge the normal daily rate of the
pounds and hospitals for dogs of similar size and like breed for board and
room.
   C.   Payment Of Fees: The owners of dogs so impounded may claim them upon
paying to the pound or hospital the above rate. In addition, the owner must pay
the cost of inoculation of the dog.
   D.   Unclaimed Animals: All stray and rabies suspect dogs not claimed by the
owner within three (3) days may be humanely dispatched or disposed of at the
discretion of Lake County animal control. (Ord. 34, 4-1-1968)
5-3-5: BITING OF PERSONS BY DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS:
Whenever any person has been bitten by a dog or other animal, Lake County
animal control or any village official or appointed officer shall have such
animal confined in the custody of and observed by a licensed veterinarian in
Lake County. Within twenty four (24) hours after the dog or other animal is
confined the veterinarian shall report to Lake County animal control as
required by section 12 of the state rabies control act 1 . Such dog shall be
confined for a period of ten (10) days and Lake County animal control notified
as to the final disposition of said animal. (Ord. 34, 4-1-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 4
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE 1
SECTION:
5-4-1: Adopted
5-4-2: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 6 of this Code.
5-4-1: ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Village by operation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/20-204 and all other applicable authority, the Village
hereby adopts in its entirety the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as heretofore enacted or hereafter amended, and the
same are hereby adopted as ordinance provisions of the Village. (Ord. 99-525,
3-2-1999)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
Any violation of said provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall hereinafter
be considered a violation of this Chapter and each such violation shall subject
the violator thereof to the penalty provisions provided in the Illinois Vehicle
Code. (Ord. 99-525, 3-2-1999)
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Defined
5-5-2: Sale, Use Or Explosion Of Fireworks Prohibited
5-5-3: Permits For Supervised Public Displays Of Fireworks
5-5-4: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINED:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and
any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall
not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known
as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette
loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five
hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion; and toy pistol, paper or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall
be permitted at all times. (Ord. 2000-567, 11-21-2000)
5-5-2: SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or
explode any fireworks. For the purposes of this chapter, "person" shall mean
any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or any other legal
entity. (Ord. 2000-567, 11-21-2000)
5-5-3: PERMITS FOR SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF FIREWORKS:
A permit may be obtained from the village board for a supervised public display
of fireworks subject to the following:
   A.   Every such display shall be handled by a competent individual who has
sufficient expertise and which display is so located, discharged or fired, as
not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
   B.   Application for permits shall be made in writing at least thirty (30)
days in advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on such
application by the village board at the next board meeting occurring after the
permit application is filed with the village clerk.
   C.   After such permit shall have been granted, the possession and use of
fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable. The permit shall be subject to such
conditions as the village board deems fit.
   D.   The permittee shall file with the village clerk a bond in acceptable
form in the amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned
on compliance with the provisions of this chapter, state law, and the
regulations of the State Fire Marshall.
   E.   Such permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display site
by the code compliance officer to determine that such display shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. (Ord. 2000-567, 11-21-
2000)
5-5-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator thereof to the penalty
provisions provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-567, 11-21-2000)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Public Intoxication
5-6-2: Possession And Use Of Cannabis
5-6-3: Weapons
5-6-4: Drug Paraphernalia
5-6-5: Resisting A Police Officer
5-6-6: Obstructing Service Of Process
5-6-7: Obstruction Of Justice
5-6-8: Disturbing Lawful Assemblages
5-6-9: Assault
5-6-10: Battery
5-6-11: Trespassing
5-6-12: Harassment
5-6-13: Theft
5-6-14: Theft By Deception
5-6-15: Retail Theft
5-6-16: Disorderly Conduct
5-6-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person in or upon any public street, alley, or
public place to be under the influence of alcohol to a degree that renders the
person incapable of acting in a normal fashion or the alcohol concentration in
the person's blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition of blood
and breath units in section 11-501.2 of the Illinois motor vehicle code or
under the influence of any drug, substance, or compound resulting from the
unlawful use or consumption of cannabis as listed in the cannabis control act,
a controlled substance as listed in the Illinois controlled substances act, or
an intoxicating compound as listed in the use of intoxicating compounds act.
(Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-2: POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Cannabis Defined. As used in this Section, "cannabis" shall have the
same meaning as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3,
as amended.
   B.   Possession of Cannabis.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess cannabis
while:
         a.   In a school bus;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school;
         c.   In any correctional facility;
         d.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed contained and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
         e.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar service care on the premises.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is twenty-one (21) years of
age or older to possess cannabis in an amount that exceeds the possession
limits under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1, et seq., as
amended.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of
age to knowingly possess cannabis.
   C.   Use of Cannabis.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis while:
         a.   In a school bus;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school;
         c.   In any correctional facility;
         d.   In any motor vehicle;
         e.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar service care on the premises;
         f.   in any public place; as used in this Section, "public place"
means any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by
others. "Public place" includes all parts of buildings owned in whole or in
part, or leased, by the State or a unit of local government, all areas in a
park, recreation area, wildlife area, or playground owned in whole or in part,
leased, or managed by the State or a unit of local government. "Public place"
does not include a private residence unless the private is used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises; or
         g.   Knowingly in close proximity to anyone under twenty-one (21)
years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cannabis in any place
where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate, dispense, grow,
infuse, process, manufacture, deliver, transfer, or sell, with or without
remuneration, any cannabis anywhere in the Village except in compliance with
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act and the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
   E.   Nothing in this Section prohibits the authorized use, possession, or
cultivation of cannabis under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.
   F.   Any person who violates this Section shall be fined as provided in
Section
1-13-7 of this code. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004; amd. Ord. 2020-1080, 2-3-2020)
5-6-3: WEAPONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any concealed weapon in
the village unless said person is duly licensed by the state of Illinois to
carry said concealed weapon.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed on or about his
person a pistol, revolver, blackjack, sand club, metal knuckle, bludgeon, or
other firearm, or carry or conceal the same in any case or package, or have the
same in or about automobile or any other vehicle. This provision does not apply
to police officers.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, conceal, possess, sell,
loan or give to any person any blackjack, sand club, metal knuckles, bludgeon,
knife with a folding, fixed or collapsible handle and a stiff blade in excess
of 3.25 inches (except for common kitchen or filleting knives kept in one's
kitchen or fishing tackle box) or numchucks (being 2 or 3 pieces of wood,
metal, plastic, or rubber, joined together by a chain, tape, or wire), and no
person shall carry or possess, with the intent to use the same unlawfully
against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
switchblade knife or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of
similar character.
   D.   For the purposes of this section, the word "carry" shall include the
following specific meanings:
      1.   To hold in one's hand;
      2.   To have upon one's person;
      3.   To have in one's clothing, jacket or other personal apparel;
      4.   To have in any backpack, luggage, briefcase, sport pack, duffel bag,
satchel or other enclosure held or carried on or about the person;
      5.   To have or permit the same to be located in any unlocked section of
a person's automobile, boat, motorcycle or other vehicle. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-
2004)
5-6-4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the
intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing a controlled
substance into the human body, or in preparing a controlled substance for that
use, is guilty of a violation of this Section. This Section does not apply to a
person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles
under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
   B.   Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers for
any commercial consideration an item of drug paraphernalia, is guilty of a
violation of this Section.
   C.   In determining intent under Subsection A of this Section, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the controlled substances to
drug paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled substance on the drug
paraphernalia.
   D.   For the purpose of this Section, the definitions and exemptions in the
Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, as amended, 720 ILCS 600/2 and 600/4, shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
"Drug paraphernalia" does not include "cannabis paraphernalia" as defined in
Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-10, as
amended.
   E.   Any person who violates this Section shall be fined as provided in
Section
1-13-7 of this code. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004; amd. Ord. 2020-1080, 2-3-2020)
5-6-5: RESISTING A POLICE OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the
performance of a police officer. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-6: OBSTRUCTING SERVICE OF PROCESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the
authorized service or execution of any civil or criminal process or order of
any court. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-7: OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct justice with intent to prevent
the apprehension or obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person, by
knowingly committing any of the following acts:
   A.   Destroys, alters, conceals, or disguises physical evidence, plants
false evidence, furnishes false information; or
   B.   Induces a witness having knowledge material to a criminal investigation
to leave the state or conceal himself to avoid divulging such information; or
   C.   While possessing knowledge material to a criminal investigation, he
leaves the state or conceals himself to avoid divulging such information. (Ord.
2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-8: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the village. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-9: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to, without lawful authority, engage in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
(Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-10: BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means cause bodily harm to an individual; or make
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (Ord.
2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-11: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
   A.   Enter upon, or refuse to leave, any residential property of another,
either where such property has been posted with "No Trespassing" signs, or
where immediately prior to such entry or subsequent thereto, notice is given by
the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that such entry or continued
presence is prohibited.
   B.   Enter upon, or refuse to leave, any public property in violation of
regulations promulgated by the official charged with the security, care, or
maintenance of the property and approved by the governing body of the public
agency owning property where such regulations have been conspicuously posted or
where immediately prior to such entry or subsequent thereto, such regulations
are made known by the officer charged with the security, care, or maintenance
of the property, his agent, or a police officer. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-12: HARASSMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally harass, threaten, stalk,
follow or otherwise act in such a manner as shall reasonably be calculated to
produce fear, trepidation and/or mental or physical anxiety in another person.
(Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-13: THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft when said person knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen and:
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-14: THEFT BY DECEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit theft by deception with intent to
defraud when said person:
   A.   Obtains possession of any goods, property, service, or thing of value
by any false proceedings or by cheating or by fraud of any kind.
   B.   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property,
labor, or services of another he issues or delivers a check or other order upon
a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will
not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with
the depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered is prima
facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the
depository, and that he has the intent to defraud. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-15: RETAIL THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of retail theft when
that person knowingly:
   A.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
   B.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indication
of value, or any other marking which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   C.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   D.   Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
   E.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such cart.
   F.   If any person conceals upon their person or among their or her
belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and removes that merchandise beyond
the last known station for receiving payments for the merchandise in that
retail mercantile establishment, then that person shall be presumed to have
possessed, carried away, or transferred such merchandise with the intention of
retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise.
   G.   Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has
committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a
retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable
length of time for all or any of the following reasons:
      1.   To request identification;
      2.   To verify such identification;
      3.   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his
possession unpurchased merchandised and to make reasonable investigation of the
ownership of such merchandise;
      4.   To inform a police officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a police officer.
      5.   In the case of a minor, to inform a police officer, the parents,
guardian, or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
      6.   A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises
of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
      7.   Detention as permitted in this section does not constitute an arrest
or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person
so detained. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
5-6-16: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of disorderly
conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the fire
department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm
of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
grounds for believing that such fire exists; or
   C.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release would
endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb, explosive or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place; or
   D.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for
believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed; or
   E.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   F.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "collection
agency act" or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting
to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which
is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
   G.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the department
of children and family services under section 4 of the "abused and neglected
child reporting act"; or
   H.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the department
of public health under the nursing home care act; or
   I.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district,
or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable grounds for
believing that such assistance is required; or
   J.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under article II
of "an act in relation to victims of violence and abuse", approved September
16, 1984, as amended; or
   K.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
   L.   Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable grounds for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency.
   M.   Urinates or defecates in plain view of the general public except in a
restroom or other facility such as a portable toilet which is intended for such
bodily activity.
   N.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it. (Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1
Miscellaneous Traffic Provisions   1
Trucks And Restricted Vehicles   2
Snowmobiles   3
Off-Road Motorized Vehicles   4
Abandoned Or Inoperative Motor Vehicles   5
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 5, Chapter 4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Speed Restrictions
6-1-2: Speed Limits On Certain Streets
6-1-3: Reckless And Negligent Driving
6-1-4: Parking Restrictions
6-1-5: Traffic Movement Regulations
6-1-5-1: One-Way Streets
6-1-5-2: No Turns
6-1-6: Stop Streets
6-1-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Generally: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public highway,
road or street in the Village at a speed which:
      1.   Is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway or endangers the safety of any person or
property; or
      2.   Is greater than the applicable maximum speed limit established by
this section.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care. (Ord. 18, 11-14-1963)
   B.   Maximum Speed Limit: The maximum speed limit for all vehicles in the
Village is thirty (30) miles per hour on all streets and roadways but shall not
be applicable to the following streets:
   Delany Road
   Dilleys Road
   Kilbourne Road
   Route 173
   Russell Road
   State Route 41
   Wadsworth Road
   Yorkhouse Road
   21st Street
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 18, 11-14-1963; amd. 1996 Code)
6-1-2: SPEED LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   The speed limit for 21st Street between Delany and Kilbourne Roads is
hereby established at twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   B.   The speed limit for Delany Road (north of Illinois 173) is hereby
established at thirty five (35) miles per hour. (Ord. 2007-742, 9-18-2007)
6-1-3: RECKLESS AND NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
   A.   Offense: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the Village in
a reckless or wanton manner or in a careless manner or in a negligent manner or
as so to unnecessarily endanger life and property. (Ord. 18, 11-14-1963)
   B.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
6-1-4: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Caroline Avenue: Vehicular parking is only permitted on the west side
of Caroline Avenue in designated parking/drive areas from the north side of
Wadsworth Road northerly to a point two hundred forty five feet (245') north of
the intersection of Caroline Avenue and Wadsworth Road.
   B.   McCarthy Road: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any
portion of McCarthy Road.
   C.   Chicago Avenue: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on
Chicago Avenue from Yorkhouse Road and extended northerly for a distance of one
thousand feet (1,000').
   D.   Schlosser Court: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on
Schlosser Court from its western terminus easterly for a distance of two
hundred fifty feet (250'). This prohibition shall not apply to Village
residents who reside on Schlosser Court or their invited guests.
   E.   Southeast District: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on
any improved or unimproved road or right-of-way within that portion of the
Southeast District Neighborhood that is described as follows: Wadsworth Road to
the north, the Union Pacific Railroad to the west, Beach Road to the south; and
Bayonne Avenue to the east. This prohibition shall not apply to Village
residents who reside in said neighborhood or their invited guests. In addition
to the penalties authorized by subsection I of this section, any vehicle parked
in violation of this subsection is declared a nuisance and a hazard to public
safety, and any police officer of the Village is authorized to remove, or
contract for the removal of, the vehicle to a place of storage at the expense
of the owner of the vehicle, not to be released until the actual charges and
costs of towing and storage are paid in full or in accordance with applicable
State law.
   F.   Mulberry Lane: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on
Mulberry Lane from Dilleys Road to Thornapple Lane.
   G.   Hanssen Road: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on Hanssen
Road from U.S. Highway 41 westerly a distance of six hundred feet (600').
   H.   Mill Creek Woodlands Subdivision: It shall be unlawful to park any
motor vehicle on Old Orchard Drive, Cherrywood Lane or Thornmeadow Circle. This
prohibition shall not apply to Village residents who reside in said
neighborhood or their invited guests.
   I.   Red Oak Terrace: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on Red
Oak Terrace. This prohibition shall not apply to village residents who reside
along said street or their invited guests.
   J.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2004-656, 4-20-2004; Ord. 2012-865, 5-1-2012; Ord.
2012-870, 5-15-2012; Ord. 2012-878, 8-21-2012; Ord. 2013-903, 7-16-2013; Ord.
2017-1010, 6-20-2017; Ord. 2019-1074, 10-15-2019)
6-1-5: TRAFFIC MOVEMENT REGULATIONS:
6-1-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The following streets are hereby designated for one-way traffic only:
West Hart Street from one hundred forty feet (140') west of North Bayonne
Avenue to North Bayonne Avenue, eastbound traffic only. (Ord. 2010-823, 9-7-
2010)
6-1-5-2: NO TURNS:
Turns by nonemergency vehicles shall be and are hereby prohibited at the
following intersections, and any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine as established by the annual fee ordinance
for each offense:
Westbound West Hart Street from North Bayonne Avenue. (Ord. 2010-823, 9-7-2010)
6-1-6: STOP STREETS:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After
having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which
has entered the intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so
closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
when the driver is moving across or within the intersection, but said driver
having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
The stop sign intersections are as follows:
   A.   One-Way Stop:
Street Direction Intersecting Street
Street               Direction  Intersecting Street
9th Street           Westbound  Delany Road
Applewood Court      Eastbound  Jonathan Knolls Lane
Birch Lane           Westbound  Cashmore Road
Blackhawk Trail      Southbound Hidden Springs Trail
Boulevard View       Northbound Chaplin Street
                    Southbound Hart Street
Cermak Avenue        Westbound  Mill Creek Road
Chaplin Street       Eastbound  Dale Avenue
Cherrywood Lane      Southbound Old Orchard Lane
Crabapple Drive      Westbound  Cashmore Road
Fox Glove Lane       Eastbound  Goldenrod Lane
                    Westbound  Mill Creek Road
Goldenrod Lane       Southbound Kelly Road
Greenview Drive      Westbound  Forest View Drive
Hart Street          Eastbound  Magnolia Avenue
                    Westbound  Waveland Avenue
Heritage Trail       Eastbound  Delany Road
High Ridge Trail     Eastbound  Blackhawk Trail
Hill Grove Court     Westbound  Orchard Bluff Lane
Jonathan Knolls Lane Westbound  Orchard Bluff Lane
Macintosh Court      Eastbound  Orchard Bluff Lane
Magnolia Avenue      Northbound Chaplin Street
Mill Creek Road      Northbound Tollway (I-94)
Northwestern Avenue  Southbound Chaplin Street
Old Orchard Lane     Eastbound  Mill Creek Road
Old Russell Road     Eastbound  Delany Road
Plaza Lane           Eastbound  Dilleys Road
Prairie View Drive   Southbound Andover Road
Primrose Lane        Eastbound  Chicago Avenue
Reed Court           Northbound Fox Glove Lane
Scenic Court         Westbound  Orchard Bluff Lane
Sedge Court          Eastbound  Goldenrod Lane
Shelly Lane          Northbound Burr Oak Lane
Shenandoah Trail     Northbound Blackhawk Trail
Thorne Meadow Court  Southbound Cherrywood Lane
Timberland Trail     Southbound Greenview Drive
Trillium Court       Northbound Goldenrod Lane
Valley View Road     Northbound Amie Lane and Charolette Drive
Waverly Street       Westbound  Forest View Drive
                    Westbound  Southbound Forest View Drive
Wedgewood Court      Westbound  Prairie View Drive
 
(Ord. 2003-645, 11-4-2003; amd. Ord. 2005-680, 11-1-2005; per correspondence
dated 3-22-2007; Ord. 2007-728, 5-15-2007; Ord. 2007-731, 6-5-2007; Ord. 2008-
760, 6-17-2008; Ord. 2008-771, 11-18-2008)
   B.   Two-Way Stop:
 
Street       Direction                 Intersecting Street
Dale Avenue  Northbound and southbound Pickford Street
Dilleys Road Northbound and southbound Orchard Bluff Lane
Hart Street  Eastbound and westbound   Woodland Avenue
 
(Ord. 2003-645, 11-4-2003; amd. Ord. 2007-728, 5-15-2007; Ord. 2008-760, 6-17-
2008)
   C.   Three-Way Stop:
 
Street          Direction                             Intersecting Street
Country Lane    Westbound, northbound, and southbound Cashmore Road
Hanssen Road    Eastbound, westbound, and southbound  Valley View Road
Oakcrest Lane   Westbound, northbound, and southbound Cashmore Road
Schlosser Court Eastbound, southbound, and northbound Chicago Avenue
 
(Ord. 2003-645, 11-4-2003; amd. Ord. 2007-731, 6-5-2007)
   D.   Four-Way Stop:
 
Street         Direction                             Intersecting Street
Chaplin Street Eastbound, westbound, northbound, and Pine Grove Avenue
               southbound
 
(Ord. 2003-645, 11-4-2003)
CHAPTER 2
TRUCKS AND RESTRICTED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Truck Traffic
6-2-2: Restricted Vehicles
6-2-1: TRUCK TRAFFIC:
   A.   Weight Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to drive any truck (every
motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of
property) with a gross weight, including the vehicle and load, in excess of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or with a class F or heavier license plate on
any road within the village which is within its jurisdiction except as
otherwise permitted.
   B.   Permitted Vehicles: The prohibition in subsection A of this section
shall not apply to fire, police or other emergency vehicles, village owned
vehicles, school buses, public transit vehicles, garbage trucks on scheduled
routes within the village or public utility vehicles. In addition, this
prohibition shall not apply to trucks which exceed the above weight limit
provided that the driver has a valid bill of lading for a delivery or pick up
to a residence, business or construction site within the village and the truck
traverses those village roads which are reasonably necessary for ingress or
egress to that destination and provided that the truck shall use nonvillage
roads whenever practicable. (Ord. 93-384, 3-16-1993)
   C.   Overnight Parking: No truck with a gross weight, including vehicle and
load, in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be parked in view of
the public overnight in any area which is zoned residential within the village.
This prohibition shall apply to all properties that are zoned SD, SE, SR or any
other residential zoning district which may hereafter be created. (Ord. 2002-
612, 10-15-2002, eff. 1-15-2003)
   D.   Limitation Exceptions: The limitations contained in subsection B of
this section shall not apply to truck traffic on Delany Road, Yorkhouse Road,
Kilbourne Road, Wadsworth Road, U.S. Route 41, Dilleys Road south of Wadsworth
Road, Route 173 and that portion of Adams Road perpendicular to and easterly of
Delany Road for a distance of two thousand two hundred (2,200) linear feet. As
to these roads, no person shall drive any motor vehicle with a weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by applicable state law for driving
on improved highways or with its weight distributed in a manner not conforming
with applicable state law. (Ord. 93-384, 3-16-1993)
   E.   Local Class II Truck Routes:
      1.   A class II truck route is hereby established for a distance of point
three (0.3) mile on that portion of Adams Road between Delany Road easterly to,
and westerly of, and not including, the bridge on Adams Road.
      2.   A class II truck route is hereby established on that portion of
Delany Road between Illinois Route 173 to a point one point five (1.5) miles
north of said intersection of Delany Road and Illinois Route 173.
   F.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-709, 10-17-2006)
6-2-2: RESTRICTED VEHICLES:
   A.   Determination By Chairman: Whenever the chairman of the road and bridge
committee of the village board of trustees determines that because of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions, any village street or
road, or portions of any street or road, will be seriously damaged or destroyed
by the use of certain vehicles thereon, the chairman shall file a report of
such determination in the office of the village clerk.
   B.   Filing Of Report: The report of the chairman of the road and bridge
committee shall first identify by accurate description the streets or roads, or
portions of streets or roads, the chairman finds to be in danger of destruction
or damage and, further, the report shall state whether or not said highways or
portions thereof are to be closed to vehicular traffic or restricted in use as
to type of vehicle or as to weight of vehicle and load. The report shall
further state the period of time the restriction shall be in effect; provided,
however, that no such restriction shall be in effect for a period of time
longer than ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
   C.   Erection Of Signs: Within five (5) days after the filing of the report
as provided in subsection A of this section, the chairman of the road and
bridge committee shall cause to be erected and maintained signs at each end of
the street or portions thereof named in such report, which signs shall be so
located in sufficient number to acquaint operators or owners of vehicles using
the said streets or portions thereof of the restrictions on use which shall be
designated on the signs.
   D.   Use Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for
the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any village
street or road in the village any vehicle whose use has been determined to be
damaging to the highway and whose use is prohibited by the signs so erected and
maintained.
   E.   Through Truck Traffic Prohibited: All trucks operated on village
streets constructed of bituminous pavement on a gravel base or upon gravel
streets which are so posted shall be limited to local travel only and through
truck travel on such streets is hereby expressly prohibited. (Ord. 64, 5-7-
1973)
   F.   Penalty: Whenever any vehicle is operating in violation of the
provisions of this section, the owner or driver, or both, of such vehicle shall
be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and the driver
of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person who violates
the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 64, 5-7-1973; amd. 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Regulations
6-3-3: Exceptions
6-3-4: Equipment Required
6-3-5: Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
OPERATE: To control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners. (Ord. 52, 1-9-1971)
6-3-2: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following
circumstances:
   A.   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of said property.
   B.   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational
areas and golf courses without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority.
   C.   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   D.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or the property of any other person.
   E.   Within the right of way of any public street or roadway.
   F.   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. (Ord. 52, 1-9-1971)
6-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
When it becomes necessary to cross a public street or roadway, the operator
shall stop the snowmobile before crossing and shall yield the right of way to
vehicular traffic. (Ord. 52, 1-9-1971)
6-3-4: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
All snowmobiles operated within the Village shall have the following equipment:
   A.   Mufflers: Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating
the vehicle and no person shall use a muffler cutout bypass or similar device
on said vehicle.
   B.   Brakes; Headlight; Taillight: Adequate brakes in good working condition
and at least one headlight and one taillight.
   C.   Dead-Man Throttle: A safety or so-called "dead man" throttle in
operating condition. A safety or "dead man" throttle is defined as a device
which, when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the
motor to be disengaged from driving track. (Ord. 52, 1-9-1971)
6-3-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 4
OFF-ROAD MOTORIZED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Regulations
6-4-3: Exception
6-4-4: Equipment Required
6-4-5: Penalty
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
OFF-ROAD MOTORIZED VEHICLES: A self-propelled, motorized vehicle designed for
travel on natural terrain or on roadways and which are not approved and
licensed for operation on the public highways of the State of Illinois.
OPERATE: To control the operation of an off-road motorized vehicle.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of an off-road
motorized vehicle. (Ord. 197, 7-15-1985)
6-4-2: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road motorized vehicle
under the following circumstances:
   A.   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of said property.
   B.   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational
areas and golf courses without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority.
   C.   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   D.   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or the property of any other person.
   E.   Within the right of way of any public street or roadway.
   F.   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. (Ord. 197, 7-15-1985)
6-4-3: EXCEPTION:
When it becomes necessary to cross a public street or roadway, the operator
shall stop the off-road motorized vehicle before crossing and shall yield the
right of way to vehicular traffic. (Ord. 197, 7-15-1987)
6-4-4: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
All off-road motorized vehicles operated within the Village shall have the
following equipment:
   A.   Mufflers: Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating
the vehicle and no person shall use a muffler cutting bypass or similar device
on said vehicle.
   B.   Brakes: Adequate brakes in good working condition. (Ord. 197, 7-15-
1985)
6-4-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Inoperative Vehicles Declared Nuisance
6-5-2: Prohibited On Any Street Or Way
6-5-3: Unattended For Forty Eight Hours
6-5-4: Parking Following Snowfall
6-5-5: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
6-5-6: Abandonment Of Vehicles Prohibited
6-5-7: Penalty
6-5-1: INOPERATIVE VEHICLES DECLARED NUISANCE:
The outside storage of inoperative vehicles as defined in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-40-3, except on property in a zone in which a junk yard or outer
salvage yard is permitted under the provisions of Title 10 of this Code and
which meets the standards imposed by Title 10, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave
any vehicle on private property in the Village so as to cause a nuisance as
herein defined. (Ord. 150, 3-9-1981)
6-5-2: PROHIBITED ON ANY STREET OR WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any licensed or
unlicensed motor vehicle or part(s) thereof which is in a junked, wrecked,
partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or
not, upon any part of any street or way within the Village at any time. (Ord.
150, 3-9-1981)
6-5-3: UNATTENDED FOR FORTY EIGHT HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any licensed or
unlicensed vehicle on public streets located within the Village for a period of
in excess of forty eight (48) hours. Any vehicle remaining unattended on a
public street continuously for a period of forty eight (48) hours shall be
deemed an abandoned vehicle. (Ord. 150, 3-9-1981)
6-5-4: PARKING FOLLOWING SNOWFALL:
It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle unattended on a public street in the
Village following a snowfall requiring snow removal and any vehicle left
unattended on a public street in the Village following a snowfall requiring
snow removal by the Village shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle. An abandoned
motor vehicle as referred to in this Section shall be deemed a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare and shall be subject to immediate removal by
Village authorities without prior notice and hearing. (Ord. 150, 3-9-1981)
6-5-5: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Declared Nuisance: All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or
private property and in view of the general public, are a nuisance. The failure
of any person to obey a notice received from the Village, which states that
such person is to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles or parts under his
control, and which authorizes its removal by the appropriate law enforcement
agency or its designee of any such inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereafter
seven (7) days from the issuance of the Village notice, shall be a violation of
this Section, and subject the violator to the penalties provided in Section
1-4-1. However, nothing in this Section shall apply to any motor vehicle that
is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over
twenty five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place
of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   B.   Definition: As used in this Section, "inoperable motor vehicle" means
any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the
engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels
or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable
motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations, which are done on a timely
basis. (1996 Code)
6-5-6: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway, road,
or street within the Village is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth
in Section
1-4-1.
   B.   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, street, or road, in view of the general public,
anywhere in the Village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee
of such abandoned vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on
private property shall be authorized for removal, by a law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction, after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more, or may
be removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor
vehicle under section 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. A violation of
this Section is subject to penalties as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   C.   Any such abandoned vehicle shall be removed, stored, sold, and/or
disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq.
(1996 Code)
6-5-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1996 Code)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Street Regulations   1
Construction Of Facilities In The Rights-Of-Way   2
Park Regulations   3
CHAPTER 1
STREET REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Moving Certain Vehicles, Permit Required
7-1-2: Spilling Materials On Streets
7-1-3: Use After Snowfall
7-1-1: MOVING CERTAIN VEHICLES, PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to move a steamroller, Caterpillar tractor, lug vehicle or
any other heavy machinery over the streets of the village shall first obtain a
permit from the village, which permit shall define the route to be traversed.
(Ord. 76, 7-1-1974)
7-1-2: SPILLING MATERIALS ON STREETS:
   A.   Vehicle To Be Tight: Any person engaged in transporting upon any street
material likely to shift, fall or be blown upon the streets shall convey and
carry the same in a tight body.
   B.   Overloading: No person shall cause any vehicle to be loaded so that the
contents can be scattered in any street or any other public place.
   C.   Dirt From Tires: No person shall cause the wheels of any car or vehicle
to become covered or clogged with earth in such a manner that such earth is
scattered on any street or any other public place. It shall be the duty of any
person in control of any such cart or vehicle to gather up and remove such
earth at once. (Ord. 76, 7-1-1974)
   D.   Repair Of Damage: If any person, by violation of the terms of this
section, breaks or otherwise injures any street or causes debris to be
scattered on streets of the village, they shall, within twenty four (24) hours
after being notified by the village of such offense, cause the same to be
repaired, mended and cleaned under the direction and to the satisfaction of the
compliance officer. (Ord. 76, 7-1-1974; amd. 1996 Code)
   E.   Sticky Or Foreign Substance: No person shall drive or move a vehicle in
such a manner to cause any sticky substance or other foreign matter to be
deposited upon or attached to any public street or private property. (Ord.
2004-653, 3-2-2004)
   F.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code; amd. Ord. 2004-653, 3-2-2004)
7-1-3: USE AFTER SNOWFALL:
   A.   Parking: It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle, unattended by a
driver, to be parked upon the public right of way of any street in the village
within a forty eight (48) hour period following a two inch (2") snowfall.
   B.   Snow From Driveways, Etc.: It shall be unlawful for snow removal from
private driveways or public rights of way to be deposited on the paved or
traveled portion of any public street or right of way in the village. (Ord.
193, 2-11-1985)
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose And Scope
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Annual Registration Required
7-2-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-2-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-2-6: Effect Of Permit
7-2-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-2-8: Insurance
7-2-9: Indemnification
7-2-10: Security
7-2-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-2-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-2-13: General Construction Standards
7-2-14: Public Safety And Traffic Control
7-2-15: Location Of Facilities
7-2-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-2-17: Vegetation Control
7-2-18: Removal, Relocation Or Modifications
7-2-19: Clean-Up And Restoration
7-2-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-2-21: Variances
7-2-22: Penalties
7-2-23: Enforcement
7-2-24: Severability
7-2-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by establishing uniform standards to address
issues presented by small wireless facilities and utility facilities, including
without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities including underground drain (field) tiles and of other
utilities lawfully located in rights-of- way or public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the wireless provider or utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may exercise the power described
in section
7-2-21 of this chapter to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements
expressed in this chapter when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall
be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2018-1043,
7-5-2018)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Wadsworth.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Wadsworth.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right- of-way lines of a
right-of-way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer of the Village of Wadsworth or his or her
designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this chapter,
and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the
Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and
principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a
utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way
within the boundaries of the Village, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated
or maintained by the Village.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
 7-2-4 and
7-2-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the Village. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include
any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-2-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended,
or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following),
as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is not
a small wireless facility as defined in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are
used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The Village of Wadsworth.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
"Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility"
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the
Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Village Clerk,
providing the registrant's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf
of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section
7-2-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2018-
1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village
right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Village Clerk and obtaining a permit from the
Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance,
the replacement of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar,
the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the Village at
least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation,
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities
that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in
compliance with applicable Safety Codes. The Village may require a permit to
work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or
that require lane closures.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The
application for a small wireless facility, along with supporting information
and notices, must be submitted to the Village Clerk.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and address and telephone and facsimile
numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless
provider or utility, its telephone, facsimile numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file
with the Village:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-2-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
7-2-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
7-2-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Facilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
facility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by
law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by
the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (or other local or State entities with jurisdiction) have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
      6.   Applications for small wireless facilities must also include the
following:
         a.   Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility
covered by the application;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings;
         c.   A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for
each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or
Municipally- owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the small
wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without
creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also
describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate
that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm to any
residential structure;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application;
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with sections
7-2-13 through
7-2-16 of this chapter; and
         g.   Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment
methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   G.   Application Fees For Small Wireless Facilities: All applications for
the collocation of a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). All applications for the collocation of
more than one small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in said
application. An application for the installation of a small wireless facility
that will require a new utility pole must be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   H.   Consolidated Applications For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications
for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided
they involve the same type of small wireless facility and the same type of
structure. The Village may, at its discretion, remove small wireless facility
collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for
purposes of deeming the application incomplete or denied. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-
2018)
7-2-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Application Deadlines For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications are
deemed complete if the Village does not notify the applicant otherwise within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the application.
If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an
existing utility pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or
denial within ninety (90) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant
within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the
application to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of
a new utility pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or
denial within one hundred twenty (120) days. If the Village fails to notify the
applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved.
   B.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village
Engineer within a reasonable time after filing on a nondiscriminatory basis. If
the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and/or regulations that concern public safety, the Village
Engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor
notifying the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific Code
provisions upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional
application fees.
When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the Village will
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the
Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Village Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction
proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village
Engineer shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility
may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section
7-2-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   D.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued to a utility shall be valid for a period
longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. Collocation of small
wireless facilities must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days
after the issuance of the permit. If collocation is not complete, the permit
will be void. Permits for small wireless facilities are valid for five (5)
years from the time of issuance.
   C.   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: Unless waived in writing by the
Village Engineer, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under
this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction
meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place
designated by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as
the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing
the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or
absence of other facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to
avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   E.   Annual Recurring Rates For Small Wireless Facilities: The Village shall
charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless
facilities on Municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-of-way
equal to either two hundred dollars ($200.00) per utility pole, or the actual,
direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on
the Village utility pole, whichever is greater. If the Village elects to charge
the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on the Municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule
on an annual basis. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section
7-2-21 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as
named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed
in subsection A1 of this section.
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
         d.   Wireless providers must include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy;
         e.   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
         f.   Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to protect
the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies
of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10)
days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Clerk of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.
 
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection
A of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent
of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of
subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure
shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a
"private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider's Or
Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to
the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless
provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction
of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider's or utility's
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting
from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the Village, its
officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-
5-2018)
7-2-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village with a rating of AM Best A+ or better, or an
unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety
bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a
minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer
may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this subsection C for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-
5-2018)
7-2-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to
the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-
of-way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2018-1043,
7-5-2018)
7-2-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right- of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   Flagger's Handbook; and
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-14: PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Public Safety: The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small
wireless facilities located in the Village right-of-way may not interfere with
the frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety
communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with
industry standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna,
wireless facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the
owner must take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference
at its own costs. The Village may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless
facility or small wireless facility based on such interference if the
interference is not corrected.
The Village may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety uses
or for the Village's electric utility uses. This reservation of space may
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the Village
determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   C.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The wireless provider
or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal,
State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's
workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   D.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   E.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to section
7-2-20 of this chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   F.   Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to its attention by the Village. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      6.   Village Not Required To Install Or Maintain Utility Poles: The
Village is not required to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to
continue to install or maintain utility poles in any location if it makes a
non- discriminatory decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a
particular type. For Village utility poles with collocated small wireless
facilities in place when the Village makes a decision to eliminate above-ground
utility poles, the Village will, at its discretion, either maintain the utility
pole or install and maintain an alternative utility pole for the collocation of
the small wireless facility, or offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless
provider.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of- way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   Small Wireless Facilities:
         a.   The Village may not require the placement of a small wireless
facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the
application necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the Village may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed relocated
collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative location will
not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The Village may require any
monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-
of-way to be screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards
described below.
         b.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right- of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
      2.   Other Facilities:
         a.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any monopole,
utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or
modified so that the height of the free standing facility is higher by more
than ten feet (10') or more than ten percent (10%), whichever is greater, than
any other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, measured along the
center line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other
freestanding facilities located within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed facility, the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be
forty five feet (45').
         b.   The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
         c.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right- of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
   F.   Height Restrictions For Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless
facilities are limited to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the utility
pole or wireless structure on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new
or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small
wireless facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of: 1) ten feet
(10') higher than the tallest existing utility pole within three hundred feet
(300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
that is in the same right-of-way; or 2) forty five feet (45') above ground
level. The Village shall designate which intersecting right-of-way within three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure
shall control the height limitation.
   G.   Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or
monopoles is strongly discouraged.
   H.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   I.   Design And Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
      3.   Small wireless facilities:
         a.   Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to
provide discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless
facilities.
            (2)   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each
facility located in a district zoned for residential uses:
               (A)   Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth
techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless
facilities.
               (B)   All new utility poles installed for the purpose of
mounting a facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the
surrounding environment. Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are
presented in figure 1 of this section.
               (C)   Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment
associated with the facility must not emit sound.
               (D)   Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the
pole and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No
exposed cable is allowed.
               (E)   No flashing lights or unnecessary, non- essential stickers
are allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same
color as the pole to which they are attached.
               (F)   In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or
pedestrian pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements
and standards.
               (G)   All newly installed equipment must be painted with
graffiti-resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
               (H)   Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall
be chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
               (I)   Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned
infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
               (J)   Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-
reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend
with surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any
ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in
front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner
of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a
period of one year from planting.
               (K)   All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced
and areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement
landscape is determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation
funds to use elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall
guarantee the restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
               (L)   No facility may display any signage or advertisements
unless expressly allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended
under FCC regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility
shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility
owner and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a
local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations
center. All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or
otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures.
   FIGURE 1
   SAMPLE STEALTH DESIGNS
   FOR SMALL CELL UTILITY POLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1193.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1195.png]
 
         b.   Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
            (1)   Purpose: To protect and promote the Village's unique
character in a manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
            (2)   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to: a) each
area, district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the Village's
Comprehensive Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the
welfare of the community; and b) each redevelopment area designed under the Tax
Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and
Redevelopment Act:
               (A)   Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/
economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance
of established zone.
               (B)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
               (C)   Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so
that it appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time
compatible with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
               (D)   Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the
facility's silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be
virtually indistinguishable from their background.
               (E)   Examples of stealth of camouflage designs are presented in
figure 1 of this section.
         c.   Design Standards In Historic Districts:
            (1)   Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting,
enhancing and encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of
such areas, properties, structures, sites and objects having a special
historical interest or value to the Village and its citizens.
            (2)   Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic
district or on any historic landmark:
               (A)   Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects,
significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or
culture, that are listed, or are eligible for listing, in the National Register
of Historic Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local
landmarked buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so
recognized by an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also
to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
               (B)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
               (C)   Applicant must implement said Village- approved design
concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order
to achieve compliance with historic preservation review.
               (D)   Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant
submits an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant
must meet with the Village to discuss any potential design modifications
appropriate for the installation.
               (E)   When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless
provider must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or
significant architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not
destroy the distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
               (F)   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired
rather than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal,
caulking, limited paint removal and reapplication of paint.
         d.   General Design Standards:
            (1)   Applicability: These design standards apply to all small
wireless facilities:
               (A)   All small wireless facilities not governed by the
preceding design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The
small wireless facility, including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances,
must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or
Municipally- owned infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or
covered with an appropriate cover.
               (B)   The Village may discourage the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
               (C)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners.
               (D)   A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats
any existing concealment elements of the utility pole or Municipally-owned
infrastructure to which it is attached.
               (E)   Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same
radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-
2018)
7-2-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe- line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of- way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village
Engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
 7-2-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Engineer.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above- ground vent pipes shall
be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by Village)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Village Engineer. With the approval of the
Village Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place
of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer. When
such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in subsection
4-1-4F of this Code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. 2018-
1043, 7-5-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-2-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree- trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of- way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Village Engineer that such spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or
upon, the rights-of-way. Wireless providers are required to provide the Village
with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless
facilities. Such notice must include the name and contact information of the
new wireless provider.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities:
      1.   Small Wireless Facilities: As used in this section, a small wireless
facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be considered abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless
facility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned
and the owner of that small wireless facility must remove the small wireless
facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the
Village. The Village may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any
portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines that such removal
will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the
small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice,
the Village may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the
terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for
removal and cost recovery.
      2.   Other Utility Facilities: As used in this section, a facility that
is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way
of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days.
The owner of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90)
days after sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may direct
the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village
Engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of the
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-
2018)
7-2-19: CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer. Such cleanup and repair
may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or
any other requirement to restore the right-of- way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this section may be extended by the Village Engineer
for good cause shown. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer
as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision
of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Engineer shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Village Engineer may authorize
a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of- way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to
the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7)
days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the
appeal. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with section
1-4-1 of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or
other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or
cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility
shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action
is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its
costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or
commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
7-2-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2018-1043, 7-5-2018)
CHAPTER 3
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Title
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Prohibited Activities; Exceptions
7-3-4: Closing Hours
7-3-5: Traffic Regulations
7-3-6: Shelter Capacities
7-3-7: Activities Requiring Permits
7-3-8: Penalty
7-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PARK REGULATIONS. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIAL: The village president or the village
administrative assistant or the village administrator or the chairman of the
parks and village hall committee or the designee of the chairman of the parks
and village hall committee.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Any one or more of the following activities, not done
for charitable, political or religious purposes, by a person on village park
property:
   A.   The sale of, or seeking to obtain orders for, the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuff or services of any kind, character or
description, for any kind of consideration whatever.
   B.   The sale of, or seeking to obtain prospective customers for, any
application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character.
   C.   The sale of, or seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers or any type or kind of publication.
DESIGNATED PUBLIC FORUM: An area on village park property designated by the
village for expressive purposes or activity.
PARADE: Any march or other organized movement of persons from place to place,
or about a place.
PARK: Wadsworth Community Park, Orchard Park, Campanella Field, the Wadsworth
Village Hall and its adjacent grounds and/or all public property owned,
operated, or maintained by the village of Wadsworth, excluding street rights of
way, and including, but not limited to, those properties owned, operated, or
maintained by the village of Wadsworth which are located within Evergreen
Subdivision or adjacent to Jody Lane or Caroline Avenue.
PERMIT: The written authorization issued by or under the authority of the
village to a person or persons to do or engage in a particular act or acts on
village park property, subject to the terms and conditions specified in the
permit.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or any other
legal entity.
POLITICAL SOLICITATION: Means and shall include the handing out of campaign
related materials, soliciting for contributions or votes, soliciting for
signatures on candidate and referenda petitions and recruitment to political
campaigns or organizations, and campaigning for votes or support.
RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION OR CHARITABLE SOLICITATION: The request by a person on
village park property directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that
such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will
be used for a religious or charitable purpose. These words shall also mean and
include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will
be used for a religious or charitable purpose as herein defined:
   A.   Any oral or written request.
   B.   The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any
handbill, written advertisement or publication.
   C.   The public making of any announcement concerning an appeal, assemblage,
athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive,
entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or
social gathering to be held within a village park which the public is requested
to patronize or to which the public requested to make a contribution for any
religious or charitable purpose connected therewith.
   D.   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising
space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise,
subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made
for any religious or charitable purpose, or where the name of any religious or
charitable person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or
reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such
sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any
such sale will go or be donated to any religious or charitable purpose.
TRADITIONAL PUBLIC FORUM: An area of a village park generally used or likely to
be used by the public for purposes of assembly, debate and communicating
thoughts between citizens and discussing public questions. Specific examples
include sidewalks, streets and open park areas.
VEHICLE: Any device or instrumentality used or designed for the transportation
of people, animals, plants or inanimate objects, whether motor powered or not,
including, without limitation, any tractor in tow of any size, kind or
description, except baby carriages, bicycles when properly used on walks, and
vehicles in the service of the village. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010)
7-3-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Advertising, Posting Notices:
      1.   No person shall display any placard or advertisement of any kind in
any park; nor shall any person distribute, cast, throw, or place any handbill,
pamphlet, circular, advertisement, or notice of any kind; nor post, stencil, or
otherwise affix any notice or bills, advertisements, or other papers upon any
structure or thing in or about any park except as herein provided.
      2.   No person shall post or otherwise affix any bills, notices, or other
paper upon any trees or shrubs within any park within the village.
   B.   Birds And Animals: No person shall trap, catch, wound, kill, or treat
cruelly, or attempt to trap, catch, wound, or kill any bird or animal or molest
or rob any nest of any bird or animal in any park.
   C.   Dogs And Cats: No person shall bring a dog or cat within a park unless
on a leash.
   D.   Riding Animals: No person shall lead or allow to be loose upon park
property any horse, pony, or other riding animal except in areas designated for
riding and by written permission of an authorized village official. Any animal
found within a park in violation of this section may be apprehended; removed to
an animal shelter, public pound, or any other place provided for that purpose;
and impounded, all at the expense of the owner.
   E.   Camping: No person shall place, erect, or use any hammock, swing, tent,
or shelter or otherwise camp or sleep in a park except such organizations as
have received written permission from an authorized village official.
   F.   Clothing: No person shall enter or remain in a park unless properly and
decently clothed.
   G.   Disorderly Conduct: No person shall make, aid, countenance, or assist
in making any loud, unusual, or improper noise, threat, fight, disturbance,
nuisance, breach of the peace, or disturbance of the peace and quiet in a park,
or be guilty of any disorderly conduct therein, or collect with other persons,
in bodies or in crowds, for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to the
annoyance, obstruction, or disturbance of other persons or lawful assemblage.
   H.   Excavation: No person shall excavate or take soil, plants, flowers,
shrubs, or other property of any kind from a park, except by written permission
from an authorized village official.
   I.   Fires:
      1.   No person shall light or make use of any fire in a park except at
such places as may be established for such purpose such as fireplaces, stoves,
or fire pits provided for picnics. Personal grills are not permitted. Every
fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person
from the time it is kindled until it is completely extinguished.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to start a fire of any kind in a park without a
permit for the same except for picnics and only for fires to be located in a
fireplace, stove, or fire pit provided for that purpose.
   J.   Games And Sports:
      1.   No person shall engage in any sport, game, or amusement in a park
except at such places and times as may be designated by the park and then only
under such rules as are prescribed. Trampolines, inflatable bouncers/slides/
moonwalks, "Slip 'N Slides", pools, etc., are not permitted. Further, no person
shall walk, remain, or conduct himself upon such portion of a park designated
for any particular game, sport, or amusement in such a way as to interfere with
the use of such portion by persons who are using the same for the particular
sport, game, or amusement for which it has been designated;
      2.   No person shall engage in any activity in a rough or reckless manner
so as to endanger, injure, or damage persons or property in any way.
   K.   Proper Behavior: No person shall use any abusive, threatening, profane,
indecent, or obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of
the peace; induce, commit, or perform any indecent or obscene act or behavior;
or exhibit, possess or transfer indecent or obscene pictures, writings, or
articles of any kind within a park.
   L.   Drugs: No person under the influence of narcotic drugs shall enter, be,
or remain in a park, nor shall any person sell or transfer any narcotic drug in
a park.
   M.   Intoxicating Liquor: Consumption of any alcoholic beverage shall not be
permitted within any park or park facility except that the village board may
approve the consumption of liquor at specific events sponsored by the village.
   N.   Parental Responsibility:
      1.   Parental Responsibility:
         a.   The parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for the care,
supervision, actions and conduct of their unemancipated minor(s).
         b.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility, and such minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to allow an
unemancipated minor to engage in acts in violation of this chapter. Each parent
and legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable.
         d.   The village shall hold parents and legal guardians of an
unemancipated minor who reside with such parent or legal guardian liable for
actual damages for the wilful and malicious acts of such minor which cause
injury to a person on village property or injury to village property, as
provided in the "Illinois parental responsibility act" 1 .
      2.   Parties: Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to
commit, or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be
unlawful, as a principal, agent, or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense,
and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces,
causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision
of this chapter is likewise guilty of such offense.
      3.   Nonexclusivity Of Penalties: The penalties provided for in this
chapter are in addition to and not exclusive of any other remedies available to
the village as provided by applicable law. The penalties provided for in any
section of this chapter may be imposed or assessed in addition to and not
necessarily in lieu of the penalties provided for in other sections of this
chapter.
   O.   Picnics:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble in or upon a park or
the village hall building except according to the rules established by the
village board. No person shall scatter, throw, or deposit any paper, food, or
waste material upon the grounds of the park or in the village hall.
      2.   Picnics requiring fires may only be held in those areas where
fireplaces, stoves, or firepits have been provided for that purpose. Personal
grills are not permitted.
      3.   Individuals or organizations dispensing food, soft drinks, dairy
products and confections, or any products may do so only in the area designated
by an authorized village official. In the event the dispensing of the
aforementioned products is by sale, they may only be sold to the members of the
organization attending the function and not to the general public except by
written permission from an authorized village official. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-
2010)
   P.   Day Camps And Similar Groups: No person or organization shall bring or
cause to be brought into a park any play class, day camp, or other organized
group of any kind organized for profit except with the written permission of
the village board. Not for profit agency day camps, play classes, or organized
groups may use facilities of the park with the written permission of the
village board. Insurance and an indemnification agreement may be required. When
issuing a permit, the village may require permit conditions including, but not
limited to, designated areas of park facility for use by permittee as well as
permitted dates and times for use. The permit fee to use the park facility
shall be set by the village board for the given application; the fee shall
reflect the cost to administer the permit. The permit fee for not for profit
organizations shall be half of what the fee would have been for a for profit
organization. (Ord. 2016-988, 6-7-2016)
   Q.   Protection Of Property: No person shall mark, injure, damage, destroy,
or take in any way park plants or property of any kind, or any property of
others in a park or otherwise interfere with the use of a park by the public.
No person shall bring any plant or portion of a plant onto a park. No person
shall remove, pour, or otherwise discharge any injurious or vile substance of
any kind upon waters, grounds, or property in a park. No person shall climb
upon any plants, fence, structure, or property of any kind in a park, except
such recreational equipment as may be installed by the village for such
purpose. No person shall bang, hammer or drill any stake or any other object
into the park's grounds without written permission of an authorized village
official.
   R.   Refuse And Garbage: No person shall deposit or leave any garbage,
refuse, or other material of any kind within a park. Paper, glass, cans,
garbage, and other refuse of any kind resulting from picnics or other proper
use of a park shall be deposited only in receptacles provided for that purpose,
and no person shall litter, suffer, or cause a park to be littered in any way.
   S.   Skating And Sledding And Swimming And Snowmobiling: No person shall
swim, skate, sled, snowboard, ice skate, toboggan, ski, slide, or carry on any
other similar activity in a park except at such places and times as may be
designated for the respective activity. No person, while engaged in such an
activity, shall conduct himself in such a manner as to annoy others or to
endanger, injure, or damage persons or property in any way. Sleds are not
permitted to go down the south, east and west sides of the sled hill adjacent
to village hall. The creation of "moguls" on or near the sled hill is not
permitted. The use of snowboards, toboggans or snowmobiles on the sled hill is
not permitted. Swimming, ice skating and ice fishing is not permitted in the
pond adjacent to village hall. Use of a park's grounds by snowmobilers shall
require the approval of the village board; insurance and an indemnification
agreement may be required.
   T.   Weapons And Missiles:
      1.   No person shall bring, carry, or use in any way, knives, firearms,
or other weapons of any kind, or any fireworks or other explosive substances of
any kind in a park. No person shall throw, cast, or shoot stones, arrows, or
other missiles of any kind within a park, except at such places and times as
may be designated for such purposes. No person shall carry or transport a
weapon or missile in any vehicle in the park.
      2.   This subsection T shall not apply to police officers or members of
the armed services while performing official business in the park.
   U.   Baseball And Softball Playing:
      1.   No person shall engage in games of softball and baseball except in
those parks which have established diamonds and backstops constructed for that
purpose.
      2.   In those parks having established diamonds, participation in
softball or baseball in areas other than the established diamonds is limited in
accordance with signs or notices posted.
      3.   In those parks having established softball or baseball diamonds, the
type of participation on said diamonds may be regulated in accordance with
posted signs or notices.
   V.   Removal Of Sand, Gravel, And Similar Materials Prohibited: The removal
or taking away of any sand, gravel, clay, earth, soil, stone, or other material
of any kind or nature whatsoever, from a park by any person, either as
principal or agent, for any purpose whatsoever other than for village purposes,
on order of the board of trustees, is forbidden. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 740 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
7-3-4: CLOSING HOURS:
The parks shall be closed between sunset and sunrise. No person or property of
any kind (including vehicles) shall remain in a park when closed unless
permission has been granted by an authorized village official. (Ord. 2010-811,
4-20-2010)
7-3-5: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Other Than On Roadway Prohibited: No person shall drive any
automobile, truck, motorcycle, or motorized vehicle within any park except on
roadways intended for such traffic. Park employees in the performance of their
duties are exempt from this subsection.
   B.   Driving While Intoxicated:
      1.   No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs shall drive any vehicle within a park.
      2.   Upon any trial for such offense, in addition to other evidence,
evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person at the time of the act alleged
as shown by a chemical analysis of his breath, blood, urine, saliva, or other
bodily substances is admissible, and the result of any such analysis shall give
rise to the presumptions set forth in the Illinois vehicle code.
   C.   Reckless Driving: No person shall drive any vehicle with a wilful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
   D.   Negligent Driving: No person shall operate any vehicle upon a parking
lot or roadway in a park negligently, heedlessly, and without due caution or in
a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger any person or property.
   E.   Moving Of Vehicle: No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped,
standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable
safety.
   F.   Backing Vehicle: No person shall back a vehicle unless backing can be
done without interfering with other traffic and with reasonable safety.
   G.   Equipment: No person shall drive, move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, in a park, any motor vehicle which is in such unsafe
condition as to endanger persons or property, which does not contain two (2)
headlights, taillights, brake lights, brakes adequate to control the movement
of and to stop and hold the vehicle, a horn, a muffler to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and annoying smoke, a rearview mirror, windshield wipers, and
such other equipment necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle, all in
good working order and constant operation (except motor bicycles or motor
scooters and only if they meet the other safe driving conditions specified)
unless approved by the president and board of trustees.
   H.   Pedestrians: Every driver of a motor vehicle shall yield the right of
way to a pedestrian at any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at
any intersection; and any pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at any intersection,
shall yield the right of way to vehicles upon the roadway. However, every
driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrians upon any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary, and shall employ proper precautions upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
   I.   Parking:
      1.   No person shall park or place any vehicle or other property of any
kind within a park so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic or travel or
endanger the public safety.
      2.   No person shall park any vehicle in any of the following places,
except where otherwise designated:
         a.   On lawn areas and grounds.
         b.   In front of public or private driveways.
         c.   In any position to block another car legally parked.
         d.   At any place where official signs prohibiting parking or
prohibiting parking for more than a specified period have been posted.
         e.   Basketball courts, volleyball courts, tennis courts, baseball
fields, or specified play areas.
   J.   Impounding Of Vehicles: Any vehicle parked or standing within a park in
violation of any law, ordinance, or rule is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Such vehicle may be removed and impounded and the owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle shall pay all charges and expenses
arising out of any action taken hereunder.
   K.   Unattended Motor Vehicles: No person driving or in charge of a motor
vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, and removing the keys, and when standing upon any
perceptible grade, without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning
the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway.
   L.   Parties To An Offense:
      1.   Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit,
or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herewith to be unlawful,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons, or as
principal, agent, or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense.
      2.   It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle, to request or knowingly permit
operation of such vehicle upon a roadway in a park in any manner contrary to
this chapter or other applicable law.
   M.   Parking Lots: No person shall park any vehicle in parking lots of the
parks between sunset and sunrise unless otherwise given specific permission to
do so by an authorized village official.
   N.   State Traffic Definitions Incorporated By Reference: All terms in this
chapter shall have the same meaning as that set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
   O.   Stop Intersections: The following areas shall be designated as stop
intersections: from any park road or parking lot onto Wadsworth Road,
Northwoods Drive or Kelly Road. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010)
7-3-6: SHELTER CAPACITIES:
It is essential to the health and safety of park visitors and neighboring
residents that the park shelter capacities within Wadsworth Community Park not
be exceeded.
   A.   No more than one hundred (100) persons shall be permitted at the large
(east) shelter and no more than twenty five (25) persons per shelter shall be
permitted at the other shelters that are west of said large (east) shelter.
   B.   In the event that the capacity is exceeded at any given shelter, the
event at that shelter shall be subject to immediate termination by an
authorized village official. All persons at the shelter shall be required to
immediately depart the park. Any reservation pertaining thereto shall be
immediately revoked and all fees and deposits shall be forfeited. (Ord. 2010-
811, 4-20-2010; Ord. 2019-1075, 10-15-2019)
7-3-7: ACTIVITIES REQUIRING PERMITS:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: The village board may, from time to time,
establish reasonable rules and regulations for the use of each facility within
a park. Such rules and regulations shall be based on a due regard for the
purpose for which the facility is established, the safety of those using the
facility, of village employees and of the public, the safety and maintenance of
park property, the need for and the availability of supervisory personnel, and
the maximum number of people who can safely use the facility at one time.
Subject to the foregoing, and except as hereinafter provided, all village
facilities may be used by members of the general public, without permit, for
recreational and athletic purposes not inconsistent with the nature of the
facility and the safety of the public and of park property.
   B.   Solicitations:
      1.   Commercial Solicitation Permit Requirement: Any person engaged in
commercial solicitation, must have a valid permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section. Persons issued permits for commercial solicitation
may only conduct such solicitation in those places within the park considered
traditional public forums or places designated public forums by the village.
These locations shall be identified for the applicant and placed on the permit
at the time of issuance. Permits must be carried on the permittee while
engaging in solicitation. Commercial solicitation may only take place between
the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
      2.   Noncommercial Solicitation: Individuals engaged in solicitation for
religious, charitable or political purposes may do so at those places within
the park considered traditional public forums or places designated public
forums by the village. All noncommercial solicitation must be performed between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. See also 10
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/17-29.
      3.   General Solicitation Restrictions: In order to serve the village's
interests in traffic flow and safety, persons engaging in any solicitation
under this chapter may not: a) stand in any vehicular traffic lane when a
roadway is open for use by vehicles; b) block pedestrian traffic; c) hold signs
in a manner that blocks or interferes with the visibility at or near street
intersections or driveways; d) harass anyone that does not want to be
solicited; or e) engage in the act of peddling. Additionally, persons
displaying signs on public sidewalks must give at least four feet (4') width
clearance for pedestrians to pass by.
   C.   Permit Requirements: A permit shall be required to:
      1.   Conduct a public assembly, parade, picket, picnic, or other event
involving more than ten (10) individuals, however, any use of the village's
large (east) shelter shall require a permit. Private parties or other scheduled
events at all other shelters (not including the large (east) shelter) are not
permitted; said shelters shall be available for use by all visitors of
Wadsworth Park on any given day unless prior use approval has been given by the
Village Board.
      2.   Conduct any exhibit, music or dramatic performance, fair, circus,
concert, play, radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission.
Insurance and an indemnification agreement may be required.
      3.   Exhibit or display any motion picture, television program or similar
event. Insurance and an indemnification agreement may be required.
      4.   Create or emit any amplified sound, except from a radio, recorder or
other device possessed and used by an individual for his own enjoyment and
operated in such a manner so as not to interfere with the use and enjoyment by
any other person.
      5.   Place, station or erect any building, stand, bandstand, stage,
tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum, hammock, swing, tent, shelter,
or other structure or camping equipment.
      6.   Station or use any electrical or electronic device or equipment that
would require outdoor auxiliary power.
      7.   Sell, lease, advertise or offer for sale or lease any goods or
services except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Insurance and an
indemnification agreement may be required.
      8.   Display, post or distribute any placard, handbill, pamphlet,
circular, book or other writing containing commercial advertising matter on
park property except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      9.   Bring, land or cause to ascend or descend or alight on park
property, any airplane, helicopter (flight for life excepted), flying machine,
piloted balloon, parachute, motorized model aircraft, model rocket or other
motorized apparatus for aviation.
      10.   Use park property for day camps, instructional classes or organized
group classes not sponsored by the village. Insurance and an indemnification
agreement may be required.
      11.   Construct, maintain or use any canopy or tent upon park property.
      12.   Use Campanella Field in conjunction with baseball/softball league
game play. Insurance along with an indemnification agreement may be required.
      13.   Use Campanella Field in conjunction with baseball/softball league
practice play.
      14.   Use Campanella Field for a scheduled nonleague "pick up" ball game
or practice.
   D.   Application For Permits:
      1.   Filing Written Application: Any person seeking the issuance of a
permit shall apply for a permit by filing a written application for a permit on
a form that shall be prescribed by the village administrator. Except as
otherwise provided, any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the village with
respect to the activity in question, applications for permits shall be filed
with the village administrator or designated alternate at the village's
administrative offices located at 14155 West Wadsworth Road in Wadsworth,
Illinois. All permit applications and recipients shall be at least twenty one
(21) years of age at the time of application; proof of age shall be required.
(Note: The person making the application need not be present at the scheduled
event, but will be held responsible and liable for any and all activities that
take place in conjunction with said permitted event.) All reservations must be
made in person with only one reservation accepted per person for any particular
day.
      2.   Application Fee: For any activity requiring a permit, the village
board may establish an application fee. If such a fee is established, no permit
may be granted unless the fee is paid at the time of filing the application.
The fee shall be based on and related to the amount it takes to process the
application as determined and set by the village board.
      3.   Indemnification And Reimbursement Agreement: No application for
permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall have executed an agreement
with the park, on a form to be prescribed by the village, in which the
applicant shall promise and covenant to bear all costs of policing, cleaning up
and restoring the park property upon conclusion of the event or activity; to
reimburse the village for any such costs incurred by the village; and to
indemnify the village and hold the village harmless from any liability to any
person resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the
permitted event proximately caused by the action of the permittee, the
sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or agents or any person under
their control insofar as permitted by law.
      4.   Security Deposit: For any activity requiring a permit, no
application for permit shall be granted unless the same shall be accompanied by
the deposit of a sum of money equal to the estimated cost of policing, cleaning
up and restoring the park property upon conclusion of the use or activity, as
set by the schedule of fees set by the village. A security deposit shall not be
required for events wherein the estimated cost thereof is estimated to be less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Promptly after the conclusion of a permit
activity, the village shall inspect the premises and equipment used by the
permittee. If it is determined by such inspection, that the permitted event
proximately caused damage to park property in excess of normal wear and tear
and which requires repairs in excess of routine maintenance or determined that
fines should be assessed against the permittee pursuant to this chapter, the
village shall retain the security deposit or any portion thereof necessary to
pay for the cost of repair or any fines assessed against the permittee. The
village administrator or his designee shall give written notice of the
assessment of damages or fine and retention of the security deposit to the
permittee by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail, with
proper postage prepaid to the name and address set forth in the application for
permit.
      5.   Fees For Use Of Park Facilities: No application for permit shall be
granted unless the same shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the
uniform schedule of fees set by the village.
      6.   Insurance: Applicant, if so required by the village, shall procure
and maintain at all times during its use of park property, insurance in such
amounts and with such coverages as shall reasonably be required by the village
and shall name the village as an additional insured thereunder. The amounts and
type of insurance required shall be determined by the village administrator,
based upon the nature of the activity and the risk involved. The village
administrator shall prepare a uniform schedule of insurance guidelines for
particular types of activities. Applicant shall provide the village with a
certificate from its insurer evidencing such coverage prior to applicant's use
of park property (the village shall be named an additional insured). The
certificate shall also provide that the insurer shall give the village
reasonable advance notice of insurer's intent to cancel the insurance coverage
provided.
      7.   Conflict Of Planned Events: Permit applications shall not be
accepted by the authorized village official when it appears to the authorized
village official that there would be a conflict with any planned community
activity which would require use of the facility or when the prescribed
capacity would be exceeded.
      8.   Refusal Of Permit Application: No permit application shall be made
for any organization known to the authorized village official to discriminate
on the basis of race, creed, sex, skin color, national origin, provided,
however, that this provision shall not prevent a reservation on behalf of a
church league or other religious organization.
      9.   Discrimination Prohibited: No organization or individual shall be
refused the issuance of a permit because of any religious beliefs, race, creed,
sex, skin color or national origin of that individual or the constituent
members of the organization.
      10.   Village Right To Cancellation: The village board reserves the right
to cancel any approved permitted activity. In the event of such cancellation,
the reservation fees and security deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
      11.   Withdrawal Of Issued Permit; Refund: In the event the person or
organization desires to withdraw its issued permit, that person or organization
shall be entitled to a refund of the fee paid on the following basis:
         a.   Thirty (30) days or more prior to the scheduled event: The entire
fee and security deposit shall be refunded.
         b.   Less than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled event: No part
of the fee shall be refunded but the security deposit shall be refunded.
      12.   Use Of Village Hall: It is the policy of the village that the
village hall shall not be used by any entity or group which is a for profit
organization, nor by clubs or private parties. Any use of the village hall
shall be subject to the prior approval of the village board.
   E.   Processing Of Application For Permits:
      1.   Order: Applications for permits shall be processed in order of
receipt; and the use of a particular park or part thereof shall be allocated
preference in order of receipt of fully executed applications.
      2.   Preliminary Approval: Applications for permits for activities or
events which require insurance, approval or permits from other governmental
entities, or compliance with other terms or conditions, will be reviewed and,
if the application otherwise conforms to all other requirements, a preliminary
approval will be issued. If, within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the
preliminary approval, an insurance certificate evidencing the requisite
insurance is not filed with the village administrator, or the approval or
permit of other governmental entities has not been received, or the other terms
and conditions have not been met, the preliminary approval will expire, the
application for permit will be deemed denied and no written notice of denial
will be required; provided, however, for events or activities which involve the
use of special facilities, or activities described in this chapter, all terms
and conditions for issuance of the permit, including securing insurance, must
be completed prior to the event.
      3.   Written Denials: Except for applications for permits for which
preliminary approvals have been issued, applications for permits shall be
deemed approved subject to insurance requirements as provided in this chapter.
If no written denial is issued within fourteen (14) days of the date on which
the application is fully completed, executed and filed with the appropriate
officer or employee, as designated by the village administrator, the village
may extend the period of review for an additional fourteen (14) days by
issuance of a written notice of extension. If, prior to the expiration of the
extended review period, no written denial is issued, the application for permit
shall be deemed approved.
      4.   Notice Of Extended Review Or Denial Or Issuance Of Permit: Written
notice of denial or notice of extension shall be served on the applicant by
personal delivery, or by deposit in United States mail, with proper postage
prepaid, to the name and address set forth on the application for permit.
      5.   Contents Of Notice; Grounds For Denial: Notice of denial of an
application for permit shall clearly set forth the grounds upon which the
permit was denied and, where feasible, shall contain a proposal by the village
for measures by which the applicant may cure any defects in the application for
permit or otherwise procure a permit. Where an application for permit has been
denied because a fully executed prior application for the same time and place
has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to the prior
applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit
multiple occupancy of the particular area, the village shall propose an
alternate place, if available for the same time, or an alternate time, if
available for the same place. The village may deny an application for permit on
any of the following grounds:
         a.   The application for permit is not fully completed and executed.
         b.   The applicant has not timely tendered the application fee, user
fee, indemnification agreement, or security deposit.
         c.   The application for permit contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
         d.   The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be
sued.
         e.   The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for
permit was made has on prior occasions damaged park property and has not paid
in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the
village.
         f.   A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time
and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a
prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit
multiple occupancy of the particular park or part thereof.
         g.   The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with
previously planned programs organized and conducted by the village.
         h.   The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent
with the recognized and accepted uses of the park or part thereof.
         i.   The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an
unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, or other users of
the park, of village employees or of the public.
         j.   The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable
licensure requirements, ordinance or regulation of the village concerning the
sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
         k.   The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by
law, by this chapter or by another ordinance of the village.
         l.   The applicant has not secured the requisite insurance.
         m.   The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for
permit was made has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations
regarding the nature or scope of the event or activity previously permitted or
has violated the terms of prior permits issued to the applicant.
      6.   Amendment Or Revision Of Applications: Any amendment or revision of
an application for permit shall, for purposes of determining the priority of
the application for permit, relate back to the original filing thereof, but the
time in which the village shall grant or deny the application for permit and
serve notice of such granting or denial shall be computed from the date of the
amendment or revision.
   F.   Procedures For Review; Waivers:
      1.   Review By Village Administrator:
         a.   Any applicant who is denied a permit or a permittee who is
assessed damages or a fine pursuant to this chapter may, within seven (7) days
of the service of notice of such determination, file a written appeal from such
determination with the village president.
         b.   The village president shall have seven (7) days from the date on
which the appeal was filed in which to serve upon the applicant a notice that
he has affirmed, modified or reversed the denial.
         c.   Such notice shall be deemed served upon the applicant or
permittee when it is personally delivered or when it is sent by United States
mail, with proper postage prepaid, to the name and address set forth on the
application for permit.
      2.   Form Of Appeals: Any appeals filed pursuant to this chapter shall
state succinctly the grounds upon which it is asserted that the denial should
be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by copies of the application
for permit, the written notice of the determination of the supervisor and/or
the village administrator and any other papers material to the determination.
      3.   Waiver Of Requirements: Any requirements for or limitation upon a
permit or the requirement of a permit may be waived by the village
administrator if the activity is protected by the first amendment of the United
States constitution and the condition would be so financially burdensome that
it would preclude the applicant from using park property for the proposed
activity. Fees for equipment and services may not be waived pursuant to this
subsection. Application for a waiver shall be made on a form prescribed by the
village administrator.
   G.   Fines: The violation by a permittee of the terms of a permit or the
laws and regulations of the village shall subject the permittee to a civil fine
of up to the maximum amount permitted by law. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation. Such fines may be assessed
against any security deposit held by the village on behalf of the permittee
pursuant to this chapter, or may be assessed in an amount in excess of any
security deposit held by the village. The village administrator shall give the
permittee prompt written notice of any fines to be assessed in excess of the
security deposit. Such notice shall be served on the permittee by personal
delivery, or by deposit in the United States mail, with proper postage prepaid
to the name and address set forth on the application for permit. (Ord. 2010-
811, 4-20-2010; Ord. 2019-1075, 10-15-2019)
7-3-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Fines: Any violation of said provisions of this chapter shall subject
the violator thereof to the penalty provisions provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, cancellation of the function and forfeiture of any deposit
and/or fees paid. The fines shall be as specified in section
1-13-7 of this code or shall be not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) if not specified therein.
   B.   Eviction; Expulsion: Any person violating any clause or provision of
any section of this chapter may be evicted or expelled from a park or park
facility by any person empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
specifically including law enforcement personnel from the village of Wadsworth
and an authorized village official.
   C.   Damage; Restitution: Any person violating any clause or provision of
any section of this chapter and having also caused damage to the buildings,
property or equipment of the village shall make restitution in addition to any
other fine or penalty imposed. Restitution shall include all expenses required
to make the village whole, including, but not limited to, contractor fees,
attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Codes   1
Building Permit And Inspection Fees   2
Miscellaneous Building Provisions   3
Construction Of Culverts, Ditches And Swales   4
Street Improvements   5
Mailbox Regulations   6
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
8-1-1: General
8-1-1-1: Surface Drainage Footing Tile Draining System
8-1-1-2: Masonry Veneer Construction
8-1-1-3: Building Inspections
8-1-1-4: Required Toilet Facilities
8-1-1-5: Conveyances
8-1-2: International Building Code Adopted
8-1-2-1: Amendments To International Building Code
8-1-3: International Residential Code Adopted
8-1-3-1: Amendments To International Residential Code
8-1-3-2: Structural Insulated Panels
8-1-4: National Electrical Code Adopted
8-1-4-1: Permit Requirements
8-1-4-2: Amendments To National Electrical Code
8-1-5: Illinois Plumbing Code Adopted
8-1-6: International Mechanical Code Adopted
8-1-6-1: Amendments To Mechanical Code
8-1-7: International Fire Code Adopted
8-1-7-1: Amendments To Fire Code
8-1-8: International Existing Building Codes
8-1-9: Copies Of Codes On File
8-1-10: Penalty
8-1-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Building Permit Procedures:
      1.   Examination Of Application And Plans: To be made within a reasonable
time by or under the direction of the building inspector.
      2.   Action On Permit After Filing And Examination Of Application:
         a.   Permit shall be denied if plans or proposed work do not conform
to requirements of this title or other pertinent laws and ordinances. Denial
with reasons shall be given in writing upon request.
         b.   If proposed work conforms to requirements of this title and other
pertinent laws and ordinances, a permit shall be issued in writing to proceed
with work, returning one set of plans and specifications, endorsed by the
building inspector, to be kept on the job at all times.
         c.   Permit placard is to be furnished with permit or as the permit
itself, which is to remain conspicuously posted on premises during course of
work.
         d.   Permit lapses if a substantial start is not made in six (6)
months, if substantial progress is not made in a one year period and after two
(2) years, unless extended. Permits for demolition shall lapse ninety (90) days
after date of issuance.
         e.   A certificate of occupancy, which must be secured before a
building is permanently occupied, is to be issued by the building inspector
when an inspection following the completion of the work shows that all
construction is in compliance with this title and permit.
         f.   Temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a building or
portion thereof if it is found that the condition of the building and the
lighting, heating, water supply, sewage disposal and other sanitary facilities
available to the occupant provide a reasonable degree of safety. Evidence or
assurance of reasonably prompt completion shall be furnished. Permit may be
removed if work to complete is not diligently pursued. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-
2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
      3.   Damage To Public Roads; Road Bond; Site Bond: Contractors receiving
building permits shall be responsible for the damage caused to village roads
and other public property by the contractor's construction traffic, including
the contractor's subcontractors and material suppliers. Contractors are also
responsible to complete construction in accordance with the approved grading
plan. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the contractor applying for a
building permit shall deposit a road and site bond in the amount of three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00) in addition to all other building permit fees, to
stand as security for the repair of village roads or other public property for
damage caused by construction traffic and to ensure the site is improved in
accordance with the approved grading plan. No occupancy certificate shall be
issued unless and until the village engineer shall certify that all necessary
repairs have been made to the village roads or other public property. No final
occupancy certificate shall be issued unless and until the village engineer
shall certify that the site conforms to the approved grading plan. If the
contractor fails to promptly correct any damage to the road or public property
or fails to make the site conform to the approved grading plan, the village may
use the bond to have the corrective work done. Any remaining bond funds shall
be returned to the contractor after the engineer has certified that all
necessary repairs have been made to the village roads or other public property
and that the site conforms to the approved grading plan. This subsection,
however, shall not limit the liability of the contractor to repair village
roads or other public property or to make the site conform to the approved
grading plan pursuant to the terms of this section. All sites must conform
(including stabilization, driveway installation, etc.) to the approved grading
plan within one year from the date of issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
Any unreturned road and site bond remaining after one year from the date of
issuance of any certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited to the village and
credited to its general corporate fund account. (Ord. 2014-939, 12-2-2014)
   B.   Fees: The building permit fees shall be as established by resolution or
ordinance adopted by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff.
10-1-2007)
8-1-1-1: SURFACE DRAINAGE FOOTING TILE DRAINING SYSTEM:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein or set forth in
the preceding adopted codes, footing drains shall be installed on the exterior
of all basement footings and around the outside perimeter of crawl spaces in
accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Footing drains shall be bedded on two inches (2") of washed gravel
and all muck, silt or other materials removed, prior to placing the gravel.
      2.   Footing drains shall be placed on the side of the footing. The top
of the drain tile shall be installed below the top of the footing.
      3.   The minimum inside diameter of footing drain conduit shall be not
less than four inches (4"). The conduit shall be rigid plastic perforated pipe,
SDR 35, ASTMD F8403034. The perforated portion of the footing drain tile shall
be installed facing downward to ensure that the perforations do not get clogged
with dirt and thereafter the drain tile fails to function properly. Conduits
shall be installed using the approved elbows, couplings, and fittings.
      4.   The drain tile shall be covered with a minimum of twelve inches
(12") of washed gravel, one-half inch (1/2") to three- fourths inch (3/4")
diameter, to a level three inches (3") or more above the top of the footing.
Foundation waterproofing shall not cover the required gravel. Install paper
cover over stone.
      5.   Window wells shall be provided with four inch (4") nonperforated
schedule 40 rigid plastic riser pipe, connected to the footing drain by means
of an approved rigid plastic eighth bend and tee, or be connected directly to a
storm sewer. The bell end of the riser shall terminate three inches (3") below
the bottom of the window frame and shall be provided with a plastic grate. The
riser pipe shall be securely fastened to the wall with two (2) straps, one at
the top of the riser pipe, and one near the bottom. Coarse stone shall be used
to fill the window well to a level adequate to cover the grate.
      6.   All window well drainpipes shall be plugged with manufactured plugs
or other approved methods prior to backfilling.
      7.   When footing heights in basement are below the main footing of the
house, like for walk out basements, the sump jet must be lowered to drain the
lower footing area. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-1-2: MASONRY VENEER CONSTRUCTION:
For all walls to be constructed of masonry veneer such as brick or stone, the
veneer ties shall be preapplied to the adjacent inner wall or structure prior
to the installation of the masonry veneer wall. The ties shall be preapplied to
a height of at least five feet (5') above the first course of brick or stone,
or to the next level of the scaffold to be used in conjunction with the
installation of the veneer, whichever is higher. Any masonry veneer wall which
is constructed without the preapplication of the veneer ties shall be deemed
defective and must be removed and reinstalled. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff.
10-1-2007)
8-1-1-3: BUILDING INSPECTIONS:
After a building permit is issued and during the course of construction, the
building department makes periodic inspections to ensure compliance with the
applicable building code provisions. At the time of each such inspection, it
shall be the responsibility of the permittee to have an individual on site who
can communicate in the English language with village inspectors and is well
versed with the work which is the subject of the inspection to answer any
questions and provide any necessary information. If a permittee fails to abide
by this requirement, the property shall be red tagged and no further
construction shall occur until the permittee pays the reinspection fee and
obtains a reinspection in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-1-4: REQUIRED TOILET FACILITIES:
Unless or until workers will be accommodated by existing toilet facilities on a
construction site, a portable toilet shall be provided upon commencement of
construction activities and maintained until the completion of the construction
activities. The location of the portable toilet shall be set back a minimum of
ten feet (10') from all property lines. All portable toilets shall be emptied,
cleaned, and restocked as needed in compliance with all local, State and
Federal laws and regulations. For the purpose of this section, the term
"construction activities" shall include all new residential construction, all
new nonresidential construction and construction that takes place in
conjunction with the establishment of new residential subdivisions and planned
unit developments (applicable only when workers do not have access to toilet
facilities within the subdivision's/PUD's boundaries). In the event that a
toilet facility is not provided or accessible to workers in the case of
residential and nonresidential building additions, then in the opinion of the
Code official, a portable toilet facility must be provided on the construction
site. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-1-5: CONVEYANCES:
All conveyances (any elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, moving sidewalk, platform
lift, stairway chairlift or automated people mover 1 ) within the Village shall
be designed, installed, constructed, operated, inspected, tested, maintained,
altered or repaired in accordance with the standards and recommended practices
as adopted by the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal. (Ord. 2012-881,
11-7-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 312/15.
8-1-2: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The 2021 edition of the International Building Code is hereby adopted by
reference excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and for the
Building Code of the Village for all construction not subject to section
8-1-3 of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between the terms thereof and
any provision set forth in this title, the more stringent provision shall
govern, provided however, in the event of a conflict between the terms thereof
and any provision set forth in the Illinois Plumbing Code, the provisions of
the Illinois Plumbing Code shall govern, and provided further in the event of a
conflict between the terms thereof and any provision set forth in the NFPA 70:
National Electrical Code, the provisions of the NFPA 70: National Electrical
Code shall govern. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-
1164, 12-3-2024)
8-1-2-1: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the building code of the
village of Wadsworth, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
113.1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official related to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals. The board of appeals shall consist of the Corporate Authorities of the
Village of Wadsworth. The board of appeals shall operate under the rules of
procedure adopted by the Corporate Authorities for meetings of the Village
Board of Trustees. The chairman of the board of appeals shall be the president
of the Village of Wadsworth.
113.2 Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board
of appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. In
granting any appeal, the board of appeals shall prescribe any conditions that
it deems to be necessary or desirable. The board of appeals shall affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the building official by a majority vote.
113.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of the Corporate
Authorities of the Village of Wadsworth.
(Ord. 2018-1034, 4-12-2018)
1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas. To establish flood hazard areas,
the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The
flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as
identified by the federal emergency management agency in an engineering report
entitled "flood insurance study, volumes 1 through 3 of 3, Lake County,
Illinois and incorporated areas", dated November 16, 2006, as amended or
revised with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and the flood
boundary and floodway map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any
revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. Further, appendix
B - SMC regulatory floodplain maps and profiles from the Lake Country watershed
development ordinance effective January 10, 2006 as amended or revised is
hereby adopted by reference as part of the provisions of this code.
3115. Shipping Containers.
Delete this section.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-1164, 12-3-2024)
8-1-3: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2021 edition of the international residential code for one- and two-family
dwellings is hereby adopted by reference excluding any penalty provisions
contained therein as and for the residential code for one- and two-family
dwellings of the village. In the event of a conflict between the terms thereof
and any provision set forth in this title, the more stringent provision shall
govern, provided however, in the event of a conflict between the terms thereof
and any provision set forth in the Illinois plumbing code, the provisions of
the Illinois plumbing code shall govern, and provided further in the event of a
conflict between the terms thereof and any provision set forth in the NFPA 70:
national electrical code, the provisions of the NFPA 70: national electrical
code shall govern. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-
1164, 12-3-2024)
8-1-3-1: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code for one-
and two-family dwellings of the village of Wadsworth, Illinois, and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit.
Building:
Items 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are hereby deleted from the text of this code.
R109.1.5.3 Wood Trusses. Where wood trusses are used, it shall be the duty of
the permit holder or their agent to furnish the building inspector with design
drawings certified by an Illinois engineer at the time of rough inspection.
R311.7.8 Handrails. Handrails shall be provided on at least one (1) side of
each continuous run of treads or flight with three (3) or more risers.
R311.7.8.7 Other Handrail Requirements. A center handrail must be provided on
all stairways over sixty (60) inches (1524 mm) in width. Said stairways are
required to have guards that are in accordance with section R312.
R312.1 Guards. Porches, balconies or raised surfaces located more than twelve
(12) inches (304.8 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards not
less than thirty-six (36) inches (914.4 mm) in height. Open sides of stairs
with a total rise of more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above the floor or
grade below shall have guards not less than thirty-four (34) inches (863.6 mm)
in height measured vertically from the nosing of the treads. Porches and decks
which are enclosed with insect screening shall be provided with guards where
the walking surface is located more than twelve (12) inches (304.8 mm) above
the floor or grade below.
Sections R312.1.1 and R312.1.2.
Delete these sections.
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
Delete this section.
R402.1 Wood Foundations. Wood foundations are prohibited.
R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or
fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, or other approved structural
systems that shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according
to section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the
limitations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be
supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. Concrete footings
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of section
R403 or in accordance with ACI 332. Trenched footings are prohibited. Footings
for frame construction with one (1) floor must be a minimum of eight (8) inches
(203.2 mm) thick and eighteen (18) inches (457.2 mm) wide. Footings for masonry
construction must be a minimum of ten (10) inches (254 mm) thick and twenty
(20) inches (508 mm) wide. All footings must be keyed in four (4) inches (101.6
mm) into undisturbed soil. All other footings must have the approval of the
building inspector, at his discretion.
Table R403.1(1) Minimum Width and Thickness and Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction (inches)
Load bearing value of soil (psf) of 1,500 or 2,000 (all construction): The code
official shall require a written recommendation from the architect; said
recommendation must be approved by the code official.
Load bearing value of soil (psf) of 3,000 or >= 4,000 (1 and 2 story;
conventional light-frame construction): 8 x 16 is required.
Load bearing value of soil (psf) of 3,000 or >= 4,000 (1 and 2 story; 4-inch
brick veneer over light frame or 8-inch hollow concrete masonry): 10 x 24 is
required.
Load bearing value of soil (psf) of 3,000 or >= 4,000 (1 and 2 story; 8-inch
solid or fully grouted masonry): 12 x 24 is required.
Load bearing value of soil (psf) of 3,000 or >= 4,000 (3 story; all
construction): The code official shall require a written recommendation from
the architect; said recommendation must be approved by the code official.
Table R403.1(2) Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings for Light-
Frame Construction with Brick Veneer.
Delete this table.
Table R403.1(3) Minimum Width and Thickness for Concrete Footings with Cast-
In-Place Concrete or Partially Grouted Masonry Wall Construction.
Delete this table.
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls. Wood foundation walls are prohibited.
R501.2 Requirements. (Note: The following shall be added to this section) All
wood beams and laminated beams must conform to the nailing instructions
provided by the manufacturer.
R501.3 Metal Studs. The use of metal studs is prohibited.
Table 503.1 Minimum Thickness of Lumber Floor Sheathing.
The minimum floor sheathing will be three-quarters (3/4) inches (19.05 mm)
tongue and groove plywood; nailed and glued.
R504.1 General. Pressure preservative-treated wood floors on ground are
prohibited.
R505.1 Cold-Formed Steel Floor Framing. Steel floor framing is prohibited.
R507.05 Decks and Porches General. Concrete piers supporting woods decks must
be not less than eight (8) inches (203.2 mm) in diameter and forty-two (42)
inches (1066.8 mm) deep. The enclosure or screening of decks or porches with a
roof that is in conformance with the provisions of this code is permitted.
Decks and porches are only permitted to be enclosed or screened using insect
screening. The use of translucent plastic, transparent plastic, glass or other
materials to enclose or screen decks and porches is prohibited.
R601.2 Requirements. (Note: The following shall be added to this section) All
wood beams and laminated beams must conform to the nailing instructions
provided by the manufacturer.
R601.3 Framing Members. Walls constructed with two (2) inch by three (3) inch
(2" x 3"; 50.8 x 76.2 mm) framing members are prohibited. All framing members
must be at a minimum two (2) inches by four (4) inches (2" x 4"; 50.8 x 101.6
mm) and must not be spaced more than sixteen (16) inches (406.4 mm) apart,
center to center.
R601.4 Metal Studs. The use of metal studs is prohibited. However, the building
inspector may authorize the use of metal studs in the basement on non-load
bearing walls, at his discretion.
R602.3 Design And Construction. (Note: The following shall be added to this
section) All corner posts must contain three (3) studs.
R602.10 Wall Bracing. (Note: The following shall be added to this section) All
corner bracing must be metal or plywood. If plywood is used, it must be at a
minimum one-half (.5) inches (12.7 mm) in width. Oriented strand board (OSB) or
particle board corner bracing is prohibited.
R608.1 General. Insulating concrete form walls are permitted only to the top of
the basement wall.
R801.2 Requirements. (Note: The following shall be added to this section) When
trusses on twenty-four (24) inch (609.6 mm) centers are used, center clips must
be installed. All wood beams and laminated beams must conform to the nailing
instructions provided by the manufacturer.
R803.05 General. Roof sheathing must be a minimum of seven-sixteenths (7/16)
inches (11.11 mm) oriented strand board (OSB).
M1401.6 Stand Pipe (Drain). A stand pipe (drain) must be installed within
twenty- four (24) inches (609.6 mm) of a furnace. PVC material may be used for
said pipe, where it must be a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) inches (38.1
mm) in diameter and must flow to the sump pump.
M1401.7 Furnace Room. Furnaces that are installed in a living space or attic
must be enclosed within an insulated room which must be finished with five-
eighths (5/8) inch (15.9 mm) fire code drywall. The room must be provided with
a smoke detector, lighting and an electrical outlet. Outside combustion air
must be provided, if required by code. The furnace must be installed in a pan;
said pan must contain at a minimum a one and one-half (1.5) inch (38.1 mm) PVC
drain pipe that connects to the sump drainage system.
M1601.1 Duct Design. (Note: The following shall be added to this section) All
trunk lines, plenums, heat runs and cold air returns must be metal ducts or an
approved insulated pipe. Further, "panning" is prohibited.
P2603.5.1 Sewer Depth. The provisions contained in this paragraph shall be
governed by the Lake County department of health.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-1164, 12-3-2024)
8-1-3-2: STRUCTURAL INSULATED PANELS:
   A.   Structural insulated panels (SIP) are hereby permitted for single-
family residence home construction subject to the following:
      1.   SIP shall be limited to roof construction in timber frame
construction homes only.
      2.   The SIP material and application shall be approved by an Illinois
licensed architect or structural engineer.
      3.   The SIP material and application must conform with all applicable
criteria and conditions in the 1999 edition of the BOCA national building code
or such later edition as the village may from time to time adopt by reference
and must be specifically approved by BOCA or have an approved national
evaluation report by National Evaluation Service, Inc., or such other entity
which is specifically approved and recognized by BOCA.
      4.   The SIP material and application must strictly conform with all
conditions of use set forth in said evaluation report. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-
2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-4: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2005 edition of NFPA 70: national electrical code is hereby adopted by
reference excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and for the
electrical code of the village for all structures. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007,
eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-4-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: All persons shall, before beginning any installation,
alteration or change of electrical wiring or equipment in the village, obtain a
permit for such work. Permits for the installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment shall be issued upon receipt of an application therefor
made out on a printed form to be furnished by the electrical department.
   B.   Permit Fees; Permit Cards: The fee to be paid in advance is hereinafter
provided for. Permit cards will be posted in plain view, inside of the
building, near the entrance switch or inside of the service switch when
installed.
   C.   Application For Permit: The application for such permit shall contain
the name of the owner or user of the electrical equipment to be installed,
altered or changed, and the location of such work be correct address, street
and number, also, name and address of person making the installation.
   D.   Term Of Permits: Permits shall be valid for the balance of the fiscal
year in which they are issued and no permit shall be granted for less than the
current fiscal year and no refunds shall be made on any such permits.
   E.   Monies To Clerk; List Of Contractors: The monies received for such
permit shall be turned over to the clerk together with the list of all
qualified contractors for whom such permits are issued. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-
2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
This section contains village amendments to the 2005 edition of NFPA 70:
national electrical code along with article references to said code. In
general, the amendments are intended to be in addition to or enhance the code
provisions that are indicated in the original text of the code. However, in the
event of a conflict between the village's amendments to the code and the
original text of the code, the terms and provisions of the village's amendments
shall prevail.
90.1 Purpose. All electrical work in the village of Wadsworth shall be done in
a neat and workmanlike manner, and, except as modified herein, shall be in
accordance with the adopted editions of NFPA 70: national electrical code.
110.8 Wiring Methods. Where there is a question as to methods or material to be
used, the ruling of the village electrical inspector shall govern.
110.21 Marking. Blank covers installed on all junction boxes shall be legibly
marked giving the circuit number and panel designation of the wiring contained
in the junction box. This may be done with a permanent ink marker. The
provisions of this article only apply to non-residential buildings only.
110.26 Spaces About Electrical Equipment. Required access and working
clearances about electrical equipment shall be provided and maintained at all
times.
210.52 (G) Basements And Garages. In basements, outlets shall not be less than
fourteen (14) inches after finished floor. In garages, outlets shall not be
less than forty-two (42) inches after finished floor.
225.1 Scope. Overhead branch circuits and feeders are discouraged. Overhead
wiring will be considered on a case by case basis; however, underground wiring
is the preferred method.
225.10 Wiring On Buildings. Wiring on the outside of buildings shall be
installed in an approved raceway. Open wiring is not permitted.
230.9 Clearances On Buildings. All windows shall be considered as being
designed to be opened; clearances shall be three (3) feet from doors and
windows.
230.42 (A) General. Service entrance conductors shall be of sufficient size to
carry the loads as computed in accordance with article 220. But shall not be
less than the ampacity required by 230.79, herein.
230.43 Wiring Methods For 600 Volts, Nominal, Or Less. Service entrance
conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of
the code covering rigid metal conduct (article 346) or intermediate metal
conduit (article 345). The only approved raceway for the exterior of a building
is rigid metal conduit, rigid aluminum conduit or intermediate metal conduit.
230.50 Protection Of Open Conductors And Cables Against Damage - Above Ground.
Service entrance conductors installed above ground shall be protected against
physical damage as specified in 230.43 above. This protection shall extend to
not less than ten (10) feet above final grade level.
230.79(C) One-Family Dwelling. Electric services for residences in the village
of Wadsworth shall be as follows: the wire size for a 200 AMP service shall be
3/0 copper AWG in a minimum forty (40) circuit panel.
230.79 Rating Of Service Disconnecting Means. The rating of the meter socket
for C/T cabinet shall determine the size and number of conductors supplying the
C/T or meter.
250.52(A)(5) Rod And Pipe Electrodes. Electrodes shall be eight (8) feet in
length and copper only. Connection to the supplemental ground rod shall be made
with an "acorn" style clamp listed and approved for the application.
250.53(B) Electrode Spacing. Two (2) ground rods required where village water
service is not available.
250.62 Grounding Electrode Conductor Material. The grounding electrode
conductor shall be copper.
250.66(A) Connections To Rod, Pipe, Or Plate Electrodes. Size of grounding
electrode conductors shall not be less than #4 AWG.
300.1 (A) All Wiring Installations. All new wiring installations or any changes
or additions to electrical systems previously constructed shall be with rigid
metal conduit (RMC), intermediate metal conduit (IMC) or electrical metallic
tubing (EMT). Exception: Where necessary to fish through existing partitions,
flexible metal conduit (GREENFIELD) may be used.
300.4(A)(1) Bored Holes. Bored holes: In both exposed and concealed locations,
holes bored through joists, rafters, studs or other wood members shall be bored
so that the bored hole is not less than one (1) inch from the edge of the wood
member. Holes bored through wood members shall in no case be greater than 150%
of the conduit diameter.
300.4(A)(2) Notches In Wood. Wood members shall not be notched for raceway or
boxes without prior approval of the building inspector and the electrical
inspector.
300.6 Protection Against Corrosion And Deterioration. Metal raceways, boxes,
fittings, supports and support hardware shall be of materials suitable for the
environment in which they are installed. Metal raceways installed exposed to
the weather, on or below grade, encased in concrete or in a wet location shall
be galvanized rigid, rigid aluminum or galvanized intermediate conduit. All 90
degrees underground shall be rigid steel material.
310.2(A) Insulated. All line voltage conductors shall be insulated.
310.2(B) Conductor Material. All conductors shall be copper unless special
permission is given for an alternate material.
314.1 Scope. The smallest box allowed to be installed with be a four (4) inch
square or 1900 box.
314.3 Nonmetallic Boxes. Nonmetallic boxes shall not be used except for low
voltage.
314.27 (D) Boxes At Ceiling-Suspended (Paddle) Fan Outlets. In residential
occupancies, new construction or remodeling, outlet boxes installed, four (4)
feet (1.22 m) or more horizontally from the nearest wall, for ceiling mounted
fixtures in habitable rooms (bedrooms, dens, family rooms, living rooms, bonus
rooms, etc.) shall be acceptable for fan support.
320.1 Scope. Type AC cable (BX) shall not be used without prior written
approval. Where approval is granted, type AC cable (BX) shall be installed in
strict compliance with the provisions of article 320 of NFPA 70: national
electrical code.
330.1 Scope. Metal clad cable shall not be used without prior approval.
334.1 Scope. Nonmetallic-sheathed cable (commonly known as "ROM EX") shall not
be used.
338.1 Scope. Type SE cable shall not be used.
340.1 Scope. Type UF cable may be used only for approved applications and
locations. UF cable shall not be installed where subject to physical damage
without adequate protection. Further, type UF cable shall not be used for
interior wiring.
344.30(B)(5) Supports. All straps and hangers used exposed to the weather or to
a corrosive atmosphere shall be required to be of malleable metal with back
straps where required.
348.1 Scope. Flexible metallic conduit shall not be used without prior
approval.
352.10 Uses Permitted. Rigid non-metallic conduit may be used for underground
and under slab installations, but must transition to rigid or intermediate
metal conduit at the last bend before exiting the underground or under slab
location. 90 degree bends shall be of rigid metallic conduit.
356.1 Scope. Liquidtight flexible non-metallic conduit shall not be used.
378.1 Scope. Nonmetallic wireways shall not be used.
410.8(B)(1) A recessed incandescent fixture with a completely enclosed lamp.
410.8(B)(2) A surface mounted or recessed fluorescent fixture with completely
enclosed tube(s).
410.8(C) Luminaire (Fixture) Types Not Permitted. Surface mounted incandescent
fixtures with enclosed, partially enclosed, or open bulbs, pendant style
fixtures and lamp holders. Exception: Walk-in closets of large area where no
storage exists within eighteen (18) inches in any direction of a vertical line
extending from floor to ceiling, away from any wall, incandescent fixtures with
totally enclosed bulb(s) may be used.
680.21 (A)(1) General. Branch circuits for pool motors shall be installed in
rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit.
Article 761 Smoke detector regulations is hereby created.
760.1 General. Smoke detectors are required in all buildings used for
residential and non-residential purposes and must be installed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the Illinois smoke detector act (425 ILCS 60) which
may be amended from time to time. Further, the following are also required:
(A) Single-family residential dwelling units shall have at least one (1)
detector installed (more if required) on each living level including the
basement. Further, smoke detectors are required within fifteen (15) feet of
bedrooms in hallways and within three (3) feet of doorways in rooms used for
sleeping purposes.
(B) Smoke detectors shall be required in attics and crawl spaces when those
areas contain heat-producing equipment(s).
(C) Devices shall receive primary power from the building electrical (A.C.)
system. Devices shall have battery back-up power to provide operation of the
alarm upon failure of the A.C. primary power.
(D) The alarm circuit shall be connected to an individual dedicated branch
circuit.
(E) Existing dwelling units may have battery only powered devices installed.
However, existing units, which are reconstructed, substantially remodeled, or
added onto shall be required to install approved devices.
(F) Devices shall be interconnected such that the operation of any device shall
cause all other devices within the living unit to also sound an alarm.
(G) Smoke detectors in rooms with sloped ceilings shall be located at the high
point of the room.
(H) Smoke detectors shall be located such that no detector is more than fifteen
(15) feet from any rooms used for sleeping purposes.
(I) Smoke detectors installed in basements shall be located in close proximity
to the furnace.
(J) Smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling, not less than eight (8)
inches from any wall. Where ceiling mounting is not possible, detector may be
mounted on the wall, with the top edge of the detector not less than four (4)
inches nor more than eight (8) inches from the ceiling. Detectors mounted on
the wall shall also be not less than twelve (12) inches from an adjoining wall.
(K) Smoke detectors shall not be located in kitchens, garages, or spaces where
temperatures can fall below 32 degrees or exceed 100 degrees.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-5: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code is hereby adopted by reference
excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and for the plumbing code
of the village for all structures. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-6: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2006 edition of the international mechanical code is hereby adopted by
reference excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and for the
mechanical code of the village for all structures. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007,
eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-6-1: AMENDMENTS TO MECHANICAL CODE:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the
village of Wadsworth, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be in accordance with
the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.
106.5.3 Fee Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy.
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Insert $100.00 where [AMOUNT] is first indicated and
insert $750.00 where [AMOUNT] is indicated for the second time.
603.6.2.1 Connector Length. Flexible air connectors shall be limited in length
to 8 feet (2438.4 mm) extending from the main rigid supply line. Following the
eight foot allowance, the air connector shall be a rigid metallic pipe.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007)
8-1-7: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The 2009 edition of the International Fire Code is hereby adopted by reference
excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and for the Fire Code of
the Village for all structures. (Ord. 2013-888, 1-15-2013)
8-1-7-1: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
This section contains amendments to the 2009 International Fire Code.
Chapter 1 - Scope and Administration
100.1 Village of Wadsworth Policy Directives
Add as an additional section:
 
The following are policy directives approved by the Wadsworth Village President
and Board of Trustees regarding the enforcement, implementation and
administration of this adopted Code. In the event of a conflict regarding the
rules and regulations as they appear in the Code with the following policy
directives, the terms and conditions of these policy directives shall govern
concerning the enforcement, implementation and administration of this adopted
Code.
(Ord. 2017-1026, 11-21-2017)
      1.   All new non-residential structures are required to contain an
approved wireless fire alarm system;
      2.   All new non-residential structures, including new commercial horse
stable facilities, which meet the installation thresholds as defined in the
2009 international fire code, are required to contain a sprinkler system;
      3.   All approved fire alarm systems in non-residential structures shall
be wireless and be connected directly to its applicable fire protection
district's dispatch center;
      4.   In all buildings that contain a sprinkler system, both residential
and non-residential, there shall be at least one (1) domestic sprinkler head in
the building's furnace room(s);
      5.   All non-residential buildings must have a knox box (a.k.a. key box);
(Ord. 2013-888, 1-15-2013)
      6.   By January 1, 20189, all existing non-residential structures,
including commercial horse stable facilities, shall contain an approved
wireless fire alarm system. By July 1, 2018, all existing hotel and motel
facilities shall contain an approved wireless fire alarm system.
(Ord. 2017-1026, 11-21-2017)
      7.   All existing non-sprinklered, non-residential structures (single
family and two family residential dwellings do not apply) that undergoes any
work or renovations that requires a building permit and is improved through
renovation, enlargement, modification or alterations that equals 50% or more of
the current building area (square footage) shall be required to add an approved
fire sprinkler system. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems, in new
buildings or structures or structures/buildings that enlarge, renovate, change
use or occupancy, modify or perform alterations, shall be provided and
installed as required by section 903 of the 2009 international fire code.
      8.   There shall be no knox box mandate or requirement for any property
used for residential purposes that contains an alarm system, however, use of
same is strongly recommended;
      9.   There shall be no sprinkler/alarm mandate or requirement for any
property used for residential purposes constructed under the international
residential code, however, any sprinkler installation where done voluntarily
must comply with NFPA standards and a knox box installation will be required;
      10.   Residential alarms are permitted, though not required, to be
connected directly to the applicable fire protection district's dispatch
center; connection to a central station (Brinks, ADT, etc.) shall be permitted;
      11.   Open burning activities is permitted within the jurisdictional
limits of the village of Wadsworth and must be done in accordance with title 4,
chapter 5 of the Wadsworth village code;
      12.   The display of fireworks must be conducted in accordance with this
code, the state of Illinois code and pursuant to title 5, chapter 5 of the
Wadsworth village code.
Section 101 - Scope And Administration
101.1 Title
Delete this section and insert the following:
These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the village of Wadsworth,
hereafter referred to as "this code."
101.6 Definitions
Add as an additional section:
      1.   "Village Code Official" shall mean village engineer, village
building inspector, village electrical inspector, village plumbing inspector or
another agent or entity appointed by the village president.
      2.   "Building Official" shall mean the village code official.
      3.   "Code Official Or Fire Code Official" shall mean either the village
code official or the fire chief of the applicable fire protection district or
his designee.
      4.   "Non-Residential" and "Non-Residential Structures" shall mean all,
buildings, structures and occupancies that fall within the scope of the
international building code and are not within the scope of the international
residential code.
      5.   "Residential" and "Residential Structures" shall mean all buildings,
structures and occupancies that fall within the scope of the international
residential code, other than one and two family dwellings two stories or less
from grade (existing grade before construction) which are exempt.
Section 102 - Applicability
102.7 Referenced Codes And Standards
Delete this section and insert the following:
The codes and standards referenced in this code, listed in chapter 47 as well
as all of the most current NFPA standards are hereby incorporated into the
village of Wadsworth fire code and shall be considered part of the requirements
of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences
occur between the provisions of this code and referenced standards, the more
restrictive standard shall apply. The most current edition of the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) standards, except NFPA 1 and NFPA 5000, are
hereby adopted outright and in whole and if differences occur between this code
and the standards then the most restrictive shall apply.
Section 103 - Department Of Fire Prevention
103.1 General
Delete this section and insert the following:
A fire prevention bureau is hereby established within the village of Wadsworth
under the direction of the village code official and fire marshal of the
applicable fire protection district. The function of the fire prevention bureau
shall include, but not be limited to the implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code along with other duties deemed
necessary by the village code official and fire chief of the applicable fire
protection district in the interest of public safety.
103.2 Appointment
Delete this section and insert the following:
The chief of the applicable fire protection district shall, by reason of said
position, appoint personnel of the applicable fire protection district to
assist in enforcing this ordinance along with the village code official. Such
appointments shall include, but be not limited to a fire marshal, and as many
inspectors, investigators, and public safety educators as may be needed.
Section 104 - General Authority And Responsibilities
104.8 Modifications
Delete this section and insert the following:
The village code official or his designee may grant a variance regarding any of
the provisions of this code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee
of the building or structure, or their duly authorized agent, where there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
code, provided that the spirit of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. If the
village code official or his designee decides to grant a variance, he may place
conditions thereon. The decision of the village code official or his designee
in either granting or denying the variance shall be in writing and entered in
the records of the village of Wadsworth. A signed copy of the village code
official's or his designee's decision shall be furnished to the applicant.
104.10.2 Reporting Hazardous Locations
Add as an additional section:
Any person discovering the evidence of spontaneous heating or other abnormal
heating of any kind in any building, marine vessel, appliance, apparatus, tank,
or open stack or pile, or any person upon discovering or being apprised of an
uncontrolled hazardous gas leak or hazardous material or flammable and/or
combustible liquid spill, shall immediately notify the village code official
and/or the applicable fire protection district.
Section 105 - Permits
105.6 Required
Add wording in this section and insert the following:
Permits shall be obtained from the applicable fire protection district as
required in other sections of this code. These permits may be in addition to
any permits or additional requirements required by the village of Wadsworth.
Permits shall be valid only for the calendar year they were issued for, or
until the expiration date on the permit for temporary permits. A new permit
along with the fee set forth in section 105.8 shall be required each calendar
year. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all
times and shall be readily available for inspection by the village code
official and the applicable fire protection district.
105.8 Operational Permit Fees (Annual Permit Fee Or Event)
Add as an additional section:
The following fees are established for any operational permits required by this
code, and shall be submitted along with the permit application:
Aerosol products, flammable and combustible                          $75.00
Air-supported structures, temporary                                  $75.00
Amusement buildings or events (outdoors) per event                   $75.00
Automotive service station and repair garages                        $75.00
Aviation facilities                                                  $100.00
Battery systems                                                      $75.00
Bowling establishment                                                $75.00
Calcium carbide storage                                              $75.00
Carnivals and fairs                                                  $75.00
Cellulose nitrate film                                               $100.00
Combustible dust-producing operations                                $75.00
Combustible fibers, except agricultural storage                      $75.00
Compressed gases                                                     $75.00
Corrosives                                                           $75.00
Covered mall buildings                                               $75.00
Cryogenic liquids                                                    $75.00
Cutting and welding, calcium carbide and acetylene generators        $75.00
Day care centers                                                     $100.00
Dry cleaning plants                                                  $75.00
Dust producing materials, explosion hazards                          $100.00
Education use groups (for profit)                                    $75.00
Education use groups (not for profit)                                n/c
Exhibits and trade shows                                             $75.00
Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents                           $100.00
Fire hydrants and valves (private)                                   $50.00
Fireworks (pyrotechnic display - per job)                            $250.00
Flammable and combustible liquids                                    $100.00
Flammable solids                                                     $100.00
Floor finishing                                                      $75.00
Fruit and crop ripening                                              $75.00
Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging (per event)              $50.00
Hazardous materials, storage and handling                            $100.00
Hazardous production material facilities                             $100.00
Health hazard materials, storage and handling                        $100.00
High piled storage                                                   $75.00
Hot work operations                                                  $75.00
Industrial ovens                                                     $75.00
LP-gas, storage, use and handling                                    $100.00
Licensed group homes                                                 $100.00
Liquefied/gas fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings     $50.00
Lumber and woodworking plants with more than 100,000 board ft.       $100.00
Lumber yard and woodworking plants with more than 100,000 board ft.  $100.00
Magnesium                                                            $100.00
Marine service and repair garages                                    $75.00
Matches, manufacture or storage of                                   $100.00
Material storage facilities                                          $75.00
Miscellaneous combustible storage                                    $75.00
Oil and gas production                                               $100.00
Open burning (except recreational fires)                             $75.00
Open flames and candles - torches for removing paint, candles, etc.  $75.00
Organic coatings, process                                            $75.00
Ovens and furnaces, industrial type processes                        $75.00
Oxidizers, liquid and solid                                          $100.00
Pesticides, storage and handling                                     $100.00
Places of assembly and education for profit                          $100.00
Places of assembly and education not for profit                      n/c
Pyroxylin plastics                                                   $75.00
Radioactive materials                                                $100.00
Recreational and sport vehicle service and repair                    $75.00
Refrigeration equipment                                              $50.00
Rooftop heliport                                                     $100.00
Storage of scrap tires and tire by-products                          $100.00
Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies                    $50.00
Toxic solids and liquids                                             $100.00
Unstable (reactive) chemicals, storage and handling                  $100.00
Waste handling                                                       $75.00
Water material handling facilities                                   $75.00
Water-reactive materials, storage and handling                       $100.00
Welding and cutting operations, electric or gas                      $75.00
Wood products                                                        $75.00
 
Add as additional sections:
105.9 Site Development And Construction Plan Review
Each applicant for a building permit involving new construction, additions and/
or alterations, subdivision improvements, planned unit developments (PUD's),
fire detection/suppression systems or any other item that will affect the
applicable fire protection district's operation, where applicable, as
determined by the village code official, shall submit to the applicable fire
protection district, for review and approval, three (3) sets of all required
plans, documents and a complete description of work to be performed. Only site
development and sprinkler system plans and documents will be required for all
single family residences (only in instances where such installations are done
either voluntarily or under the international building code). The applicable
fire protection district shall, within ten (10) business days, examine said
plans and documents to determine compliance with the applicable codes,
standards, ordinances and good fire safety practices. If said plans are
approved, the applicable fire protection district shall endorse said plans
accordingly, and deliver said plans to the applicant and village code official.
If said plans are found to be unsatisfactory, then said plans shall be returned
to the applicant and village code official with a memorandum listing the
specified deficiencies found. A copy of the list of deficiencies shall be
delivered to the applicant and village code official with a recommendation to
reject said plans until corrected.
105.9.1 Plan Review And Site Inspection Fee Schedule
Each applicant shall pay the following plan review and site inspection fees for
review and site inspection by the applicable fire protection district fire
prevention bureau. No part of said fees shall be refundable. Plan review fees
shall include re-reviews, along with preliminary site visits up to a total of
three (3) inspections for each category. Contact the applicable fire protection
district for the plan review and site inspection fee schedule. Submit three (3)
sets of fire sprinkler shop drawings and construction documents for plan
review.
Site plan review - new development                               $450.00
New construction and/or large scale remodel > 15,000 sq. ft.      
   Life and fire safety review: $.008 cents per sq. ft., minim$250.00
Small scale tenant finish or remodel < 15,000 sq. ft.             
   Life safety review:                                        $250.00
Automatic fire-extinguishing systems                              
                                                                 $200.00 plus
   NFPA 13 or 13R:                                            $3.00 per
                                                                 sprinkler
   NFPA 13D (single family residences):                       $200.00
   Small scale tenant remodel of sprinkler system:            $150.00
   Combination pre-action/clean agent:                        $450.00
   Other fire suppression systems (wet chemical, clean agent, $250.00
etc.)
Standpipes                                                       $400.00
Fire pumps and related equipment                                 $250.00
                                                                 $100.00 plus
Fire alarm systems & related equipment                           $5.00 per
                                                                 device
Small scale tenant fire alarm & automatic fire- extinguishing    $150.00
systems
Fire alarm panel replacement                                     $250.00
Compressed gases                                                 $100.00
Flammable and combustible liquids                                $100.00
Hazardous materials                                              $100.00
Industrial ovens                                                 $100.00
LP - gas                                                         $100.00
Private fire hydrants                                            $100.00
Spraying or dipping                                              $100.00
Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies                $100.00
 
Note: The above plan review and site inspection fee schedule pertain to those
projects that require the involvement and purview of the applicable fire
protection district. Additional plan review and site inspection fees payable to
the village of Wadsworth may also be applicable. Further, in addition to the
review fees listed, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of any
permit, the actual costs and expenses incurred by the village and applicable
fire protection district for extraordinary reviews of plans or specifications
beyond the review customarily involved in the usual course of such plan
reviews. Such costs and expenses shall include actual review fees by
consultants or outside contractors or time spent by village/the applicable fire
protection district staff. Village/the applicable fire protection district
staff time shall be billed at an hourly rate of seventy-five dollars ($75) per
hour.
Section 108 - Board Of Appeals
108.1 Board Of Appeals Established
Delete this section and insert the following:
Whenever the village code official or applicable fire protection district shall
disapprove an application, or refuse to grant permission or when it is claimed
that the true intent and meaning of the ordinance have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the applicant or person affected may appeal the decision
of the village code official or applicable fire protection district to the
chief of the applicable fire protection district and village president by
written notice filed in the village clerk's office and applicable fire
protection district chief's office within ten (10) days from the date of the
decision being appealed. The said chief and village president shall call a
hearing on said appeal within sixty (60) days of said notice of appeal filing,
and shall render a decision within (10) days after completing such hearings.
Nothing herein shall restrict the village code official or applicable fire
protection district from seeking immediate enforcement of the regulation of
this ordinance in court where the hazard involved requires such action.
108.1.1 Court Of Jurisdiction
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the village or applicable fire protection
district, may apply to the appropriate court of jurisdiction. Application for
review shall be made to the proper court within fifteen (15) days after the
filing of the village's or applicable fire protection district's decision in
the office of the village clerk and chief of the applicable fire protection
district.
Section 109 - Violations
109.3 Violation Penalties
Delete this section and insert the following:
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive from the village code official or applicable fire protection
district, or of a permit or certificate of occupancy issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to the penalty provisions as
specified under section
1-4-1 of the Wadsworth village code. Each day the violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111 - Stop Work Order
111.4 Failure To Comply
Delete and insert the following:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100.00 dollars or more than $750.00 dollars for each offense payable to the
village.
Chapter 3 - General Precautions Against Fire
Section 301 - General
301.3 Items Not Specifically Covered
Add as an additional section:
Whenever or wherever a condition is found in any building, lot, or premises,
that in the opinion of the code official is not specifically covered by the
provisions of this chapter, but that requires correction or removal for the
protection of the occupants or the public, the code official shall order such
conditions be corrected or removed and the owner or occupant of such buildings,
lots, or premises shall comply with such orders.
Section 305 - Ignition Sources
Add as additional sections:
305.1.1 Fuel Burning Appliances Located In Garages
Any fuel burning appliance located in a garage area of any occupancy mounted
less than six feet above the floor shall be enclosed with a one-hour fire rated
enclosure with makeup air taken from the exterior, not the garage area.
Exception: Any fuel burning appliance that is American Gas Association
certified, with a safe, sealed combustion chamber (no open flame) designed with
an intermittent ignition device and make-up air taken from the exterior not the
garage.
305.5 Portable Heaters
Portable heaters shall be designed and located so that they cannot be easily
overturned, and heaters shall be designed to shut off if overturned. The code
official may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations
in which such use or operation would present an undue danger to the life or
property of others.
305.6 Heating And Lighting Apparatus
Proper clearance (a minimum of 36 inches) shall be maintained between lighting
and heat producing equipment and combustibles so that continuous operation at
full capacity will not increase the temperature of the surrounding combustibles
to their flash point or ignition temperature.
Section 307 - Open Burning, Recreational Fires And Portable Outdoor Fireplaces
Open burning is permitted within the jurisdictional limits of the village,
provided it complies with this code and title 4, chapter 5 of the Wadsworth
village code.
307.4.3 Portable Outdoor Fireplaces
Delete the exception
307.4.3.1 - Portable Outdoor Fireplaces
Add as additional section:
Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used only on noncombustible surfaces. Fuel
for an outdoor fireplace shall consist of only seasoned, dry firewood and shall
be ignited with a small quantity of paper.
307.6 Spread Of Fire
Add as additional section:
No person shall knowingly permit any fire to spread so as to endanger the life
or property of another or use or operate any device which may be a source of
ignition, unless proper removal of flammable material surrounding the operation
is accomplished, or such other reasonable precautions are taken to ensure
against the starting or spreading of unfriendly fires.
Section 308 - Open Flames
Section 315 - Miscellaneous Combustible Material Storage
315.3 Outside Storage
Add the following wording to the end of the sentence:
"and within fifteen (15) feet to any structure."
Add new section 317 - Electric Disconnect
317.1 Electric Disconnect
All new non-residential structures shall have an approved shunt trip switch on
the exterior of the building, in a location approved by the fire code official,
so that the electric power to the building can be disconnected in the event of
an emergency. This disconnection would accept power company vaults and
emergency generator or back up power systems. The shut off for these systems
shall be readily identifiable for emergency purposes.
Existing non-residential structures that enlarge, change use, change electrical
service or perform substantial renovations shall install an approved electric
shunt trip switch on the exterior of the building, in a location approved by
the fire code official, so that the electric power to the building can be
disconnected in the event of an emergency.
Chapter 5 - Fire Service Features
Section 502 - Definitions
Key Box. Also known as "knox box." A secure device with a lock operable only by
a fire department master key, and containing building entry keys and other keys
that may be required for access in an emergency.
Section 503 - Fire Apparatus Access Roads
503.1.1 Buildings And Facilities
Delete exception 1 (renumber paragraphs no. 2 and 3)
503.1.4 Approval
Add as additional section:
The location and requirement of the fire apparatus roads or fire lanes shall be
reviewed and approved by the applicable fire protection district.
503.2.1 Dimensions
Delete this section and insert the following:
Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than
twenty (20) feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in
accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not
less than fifteen (15) feet.
503.2.3 Surfaces
Delete this section and insert the following:
Fire apparatus access roads or fire lanes shall have an approved (by the fire
code official) surface capable of supporting the appropriate fire apparatus.
Fire apparatus roads shall be pitched in such a manner as to allow the runoff
of water and eliminate the potential of standing water. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain the surface in a usable
condition at all times, including the removal of snow.
Section 506 - Key Boxes
Delete this section and insert the following:
506.1 When Required
When access to, or within a structure, or an area unduly difficult because of
secured openings, or to gain access to fire protection controls, and where
immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire fighting purposes, the
code official shall require a minimum of one key lock box to be installed at a
height not to exceed six (6) feet, in an accessible location. All buildings
with automatic fire alarm systems and/or automatic fire suppression sprinkler
systems shall have installed an approved key lock box for access by the
applicable fire protection district, except that a key lock box shall not be
required for any property used for residential purposes but shall be strongly
recommended. In addition, all non-residential buildings must have a key lock
box. The key lock box shall be of an approved type (approved by the fire code
official) and shall contain keys to gain access as required by the fire code
official of the applicable fire protection district.
506.1.1 Locks
Delete this section and insert the following:
The code official shall first approve any lock installed on gates or similar
barriers.
506.2 Key Lock Box Maintenance
Delete this section and insert the following:
The operator of the building shall immediately notify the applicable fire
protection district and provide the new key when a lock is changed or re-keyed.
The key to such lock shall be secured in the key lock box. The users shall be
responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of such key lock boxes,
at their expense, and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the applicable
fire protection district and the village, and their officers, employees and
agents from any liability with respect to such key lock boxes.
Add as additional requirements to this section:
506.3 Key Lock Box Availability
The chief of the applicable fire protection district is authorized to make
available key lock boxes to all owners or lessees of buildings or structures or
their duly authorized agents.
506.4 Stock Of Key Boxes
The applicable fire protection district shall purchase such key lock boxes (of
a type to be approved by the applicable fire protection district fire chief) in
reasonable quantities and provide them to users for cost plus a reasonable
handling charge.
Section 507 - Fire Protection Water Supplies
507.1 Required Water Supply
Add as additional requirements to this section:
507.1.1 General
All water distribution facilities including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves,
devices, well pumps, and other needful appurtenances shall be subject to
approval of the fire code official and shall be installed according to the
standards herein adopted. A water supply system shall be capable of supplying
the hydrants prior to the construction of structures. It shall be unlawful to
erect, alter, use or occupy any structure that has been deemed to have
inadequate water supply.
507.1.2 Water Supply Demand Changes
Area water supplies shall be studied whenever additional demands will be placed
on the water supply by new construction, change in use, or changes in hazard or
contents. Standard fire flow calculation methods will be used to make
determinations. Upon determination by the code official that inadequate water
supplies exist, the code official shall reject any applicable plans and provide
the property owner, the water utility, and the building official with a
memorandum listing said deficiencies.
507.1.3 Rural Water Supply Requirements (Dry Hydrants)
In any subdivision/development, where an adequate water distribution system is
not provided, the fire code official shall require the sub-divider, developer,
builder and/or the owner to modify storm water control devices, so as to
provide a pond within a maximum distance of 2,000 feet of all buildings within
the development. It shall conform to the standard of NFPA 1142. The pond must
be a minimum depth of five (5) feet and provide a minimum of 500,000 gallons of
available water or that which is required for the development. (See appendix B
for additional rural water supply requirements).
507.3 Fire Flow
Add as additional requirement to this section:
507.3.1 Minimum Flow Requirements
Each fire hydrant shall be provided with an adequate water supply so as to
develop a minimum individual supply of not less than one thousand (1,000)
gallons per minute (gpm) flow with not less than 20 pounds per square inch
residual pressure for a municipal public water supply system. Non public
municipal water supply system the minimum fire flow shall be 500 hundred (500)
gallons per minute (gpm) with not less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi).
507.3.2 Adopt Appendix B - Fire Flow For Buildings
507.5 Fire Hydrant Systems
507.5.1 Where Required
Delete this section and insert the following:
The maximum hydrant spacing shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet from the
furthest point of any building or structure as measured by an approved access
route around the exterior of the facility or building unless otherwise approved
by the fire code official. Where the configuration of lots, distances between
buildings and lot lines or public utility easements, accessibility to buildings
for fire suppression requirements dictate, the code official shall increase or
decrease hydrant spacing and appropriate supply mains as deemed necessary.
Add the following sections:
507.5.1.1 Adopt IFC Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations And Distribution
507.5.1.1 General
Additional fire hydrants shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any fire
department connection (FDC). Hydrants shall not be installed on a water main
less than eight (8) inches in diameter. Dead end water mains shall not exceed
one hundred (100) feet of six (6) inch pipe and six hundred (600) feet of eight
(8) inch pipe. It is recommended that a looped water main system with a minimum
pipe diameter of eight (8) inches be required for each structure or group of
structures.
507.5.7 Identification
Add as additional requirements to this section:
All fire hydrants public or private shall be marked with a number, hydrant flag
and painted a color approved by the fire code official. At dry fire hydrants,
provide signs with the wording "No Parking" with arrows and fire hydrant
symbol.
507.5.8 Apartment And Cluster Type Housing
In areas where apartment buildings, town/row houses, condominium buildings, or
other types of cluster-type housing are located, the area along the roadway
within seven and one-half feet on either side of the fire hydrant shall be
designated as "No Parking" and either the curb shall be painted yellow or "No
Parking" signs shall be installed (or both).
507.5.9 Unauthorized Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any device such as a fire
hydrant, drafting hydrant, dry hydrant, or other water supply appurtenances
designed for fire suppression operations without the express permission of the
fire code official.
Add the following section:
507.7 Adopt IFC Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Section 511 - Elevators
511.1 When Required
Add as additional requirements to this section:
Provide elevator service for new multi-level buildings that exceed 1,000 square
feet of floor area in accordance with state of Illinois accessibility code
requirements for elevators.
Exception: One and two-family residences, unless covered elsewhere in this
code.
511.2 Elevator Car Requirements
Elevator cars are to accommodate the ambulance stretcher. In the buildings two
stories in height or more, at least one elevator shall be of such a size and
arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch ambulance stretcher in the
horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol
for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less
than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist way
doorframe. The inside hand rail shall be set at the maximum thirty six (36)
inch height allowed under ADA standards to better accommodate the stretcher.
The cab size is to be minimum a 5' x 7' platform and minimum 2,500 lb. capacity
with a 42" side slide door.
Chapter 6 - Building Services And Systems
Section 609 - Commercial Kitchen Hoods
Add as additional sections:
609.4 Required Kitchen Hood Fire Suppression Systems
All required commercial or other occupancy kitchen exhaust hood and duct system
shall be protected with an approved wet chemical fire suppression system
installed and maintained per NFPA 17, and UL 300 standard. Every required
automatic fire suppression system, when activated shall transmit a fire alarm
signal to the applicable fire protection district's main dispatch center via an
approved fire alarm system.
609.5 Maintenance
Commercial kitchen exhaust systems shall be cleaned to remove deposits of
residue and grease in the system at intervals specified in the cleaning
schedule required to be submitted in accordance with the mechanical code listed
in chapter 47. Thorough cleaning of ducts, hoods and fans shall require
scraping, brushing or other positive cleaning methods.
609.6 Cleaning Schedule
Where a cleaning schedule is not on file, the code official shall require a
schedule to be submitted, indicating the method of cleaning and the time
intervals between cleanings.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems
Section 903 - Automatic Sprinkler Systems
903.2 Where Required - New Structures
Delete this section and insert the following:
All new non-residential structures, including new commercial horse stable
facilities, are required to contain an approved sprinkler system only in
instances where required by the installation thresholds under the 2009
international fire code. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in
accordance with applicable NFPA standards, manufacturer's recommendations, UL
listings, and good fire safety practices. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
maintained in full operating condition at all times. The use of dry sidewall or
pendant sprinklers is allowed. The area of coverage and placement shall be
approved by the fire code official of the applicable fire protection district.
There shall be no sprinkler requirement for residential structures constructed
under the international residential code; however, any sprinkler system
installation where done voluntarily must comply with NFPA standards.
Exception No. 1: Detached accessory structures which comply with all of the
following do not require automatic fire sprinkler protection.
      1.   Less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area
      2.   Single story
      3.   Not used as a dwelling
      4.   Not a high hazard use group
      5.   Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage
      6.   No basement level
      7.   Minimum 20 feet separation between buildings
Note: Accessory structures which are accessory to buildings used for solely
residential purposes are fully exempt from any of the above requirements.
Exception No. 2: Real estate sales and construction trailers utilized during
the development of property when approved by the code official, agriculture
storage buildings less than 8,000 square feet and private (non- commercial)
horse stables.
903.2.1 Through 903.2.11.6 Where Required
Delete these sections in their entirety and renumber section 903.2.12 as
903.2.1
 
Add as additional requirements to this section:
903.2.1 Existing Structures
An automatic fire sprinkler system, approved by the fire code official, shall
be installed in existing non- residential structures when any of the following
conditions are present or occur:
         a.   All existing non-sprinklered, non-residential structures (other
than one and two family residential dwellings) that undergoes any work or
renovations that requires a building permit and is improved through renovation,
enlargement, modification or alterations that equals 50% or more of the current
building area (square footage) shall be required to add an approved fire
sprinkler system. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems, in new buildings
or structures or structures/buildings that enlarge, renovate, change use or
occupancy, modify or perform alterations, shall be provided and installed as
required by section 903 of the 2009 international fire code.
         b.   A change of occupancy or use takes place in an existing building
and the fire code official in conjunction with the fire chief shall determine
if fire and life safety have been affected to the degree to necessitate an
approved fire sprinkler system; or,
         c.   Where there are mixed occupancy uses the requirements for the
more restrictive use shall apply. If an existing building is converted to a
mixed use or is enlarged to include a mixed use then the whole building shall
have a fire sprinkler system installed or the new use or enlarged area shall
have fire sprinklers installed and shall be separated from the existing use
with at least a 3 hour U.L. listed masonry fire wall; or,
         d.   There is an addition or additions to any structure or alterations
to any structure that increases the existing fire area of the structure or
creates a new fire area or creates an increase in fire or life safety hazard in
the building by reason of construction means and methods or occupancy or use
group.
         e.   All fire sprinkler systems shall be connected to an NFPA 72
approved fire alarm system. The system shall be designed, installed, and
maintained in accordance with the most current edition of NFPA 72 and any local
codes and ordinances. The system shall include an approved addressable fire
alarm panel, manual pull stations, audio visual fire alarm warning devices,
smoke detection at the fire alarm panel and connection to the applicable fire
protection district fire communications center by a type approved by the fire
code official.
Exception: Buildings used for one and two family residential purposes unless
they already have an existing fire sprinkler system then it must be expanded to
include any additions or changes.
903.3.1.4 Warehouse And Storage Buildings
Unknown specification use and occupancy for new warehouse buildings (use groups
S or F) with a ceiling roof height of 25 feet or greater to be protected with
ESFR (early suppression fast response) fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically
calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage calculated to the
greatest storage height. All sprinkler systems shall be electronically
supervised by a fire alarm system.
903.3 Installation Requirements
Add as additional requirement to this section:
903.3.8 Sprinkler Valve/Fire Pump Room
All fire sprinkler valve rooms and fire pump rooms shall be provided with
minimum one hour U. L. listed fire separation enclosure from adjacent uses and
shall have an exterior access door or an interior access door on the level of
fire department access.
903.3.9 Furnace Room
In all buildings that contain a sprinkler system, both residential and non-
residential, there shall be at least one (1) domestic sprinkler head in the
building's furnace room(s).
903.4.1 Monitoring
Add as additional requirements to this section:
903.4.1.1 Reporting Directly To The Fire District Communication Center
Where required by the fire code official to protect from hazards to life and
property, the fire alarm system shall connect directly to the applicable fire
protection district's communication center. The method of connection shall be
of a type approved by the applicable fire protection district's fire chief.
903.4.2 Alarms
Add as additional requirements to this section:
Where Required:
All new non-residential structures are required to contain an approved wireless
fire alarm system. By January 1, 2018, all existing non-residential structures,
including commercial horse facilities, shall contain an approved wireless fire
alarm system. All approved fire alarm systems in non-residential structures
shall be wireless and connected directly to the applicable fire protection
district's dispatch center.
There shall be no fire alarm requirement for residential structures constructed
under the international residential code; however, any fire alarm installation
where done voluntarily must comply with NFPA standards. Any alarm installed for
residential structure is permitted, but is not required, to connect directly to
the applicable fire district's dispatch center, or alternatively to a central
station (Brinks, ADT, etc.).
903.4.2.1 Strobe Lights
A strobe light shall be installed on the exterior of all occupancies protected
by a fire sprinkler system. The strobe light shall be located directly over the
fire department connection and next to the 10-inch exterior bell or in a
location approved by the fire code official. In a new multi-occupancy
structure, an additional strobe light (color as approved by the fire code
official) shall be installed at an approved exterior location for each unit.
These devices shall activate on a water flow only. The strobe light shall be
clearly visible from the fire department's normal access route and shall be
labeled as "water flow". The type, number of appliances and location of the
strobe lights and bells shall be approved by the fire code official.
903.4.2.1.1 Alarm Notification Appliance For All New NFPA 13D Fire Sprinkler
Systems For One And Two Family Dwellings
 
A weatherproof horn/strobe light shall be installed on the exterior of new one
and two family dwellings for activation of water flow, only in instances of a
new installation at a one or two family dwelling. A minimum of one 10 inch
water flow alarm bell shall be installed on the interior of new one and two
family dwellings (on the return air supply duct). The type, number of
appliances and location of strobe lights and bells shall be approved by the
fire code official of the applicable fire protection district.
903.4.2.2 Building Notification
Alarm indicating appliances audio visual devices shall be provided, seen and
heard in all areas of every building per NFPA 72. All sprinklered buildings
shall be provided with occupant notification devices. This will provide full
building notification per NFPA 72.
903.4.2.3 Inspector's Test Valve Accessibility And Identification
Fire sprinkler system inspector's test valves shall be accessible at all times
and located no more than 6 feet above the finished floor unless approved
otherwise by the fire code official. On multiple riser systems, test valves
shall be marked as to which riser and area it tests.
903.4.3 Floor Control Valves
Delete this section and insert the following:
In multi story buildings, approved supervised indicating floor control valves
with water flow switches shall be provided for each floor at the point of
connection to the riser. In large multi tenant buildings, approved control
valves with water flow switches shall be provided for each tenant. This will
make it easier for the fire department personnel to locate the fire and will
eliminate birdcage sprinkler systems where the alarm is for the whole building.
903.4.3.1 Sprinkler Control Valves
All new and existing sprinkler control valves shall be equipped with electronic
supervision (tamper switches) in accordance with NFPA 72. All new tamper
switches installed shall have the capability to self restore. All supervisory
signals shall be transmitted directly to the applicable fire protection
district's main dispatch communication center.
903.7 Automatic Sprinklers
Where automatic sprinkler provide protection to an area with an approved flow
switch interconnected to the fire alarm system, and is easily identifiable as
to the location, additional automatic detectors are not required. When a
building has numerous rooms protected by the zone sprinkler system, the fire
code official may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to
identify the location of smoke or fire.
903.8 Hydraulic Nameplate
By each hydraulically calculated area, on each drawing, provide a copy of the
hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to check the hydraulics of the
sprinkler system for future building or storage changes.
903.9 References To NFPA Standards
All listed references to NFPA standards are to be considered part of this code.
This will require sprinkler system installations to be installed per NFPA
requirements and NFPA recommendations for good engineering practices and
installations. The appendixes of all NFPA standards are to be considered as
part of each standard and are considered a "shall" requirement and not "should"
information. This will require sprinkler system installations to be installed
per NFPA requirements and NFPA recommendations for good engineering practices
and installations.
903.10 Fire Pump Test Header
Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations. An OS&Y control
valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers.
903.11 Sprinkler Riser And/Or Fire Pump Room Access Door
Provide an outside access door to the sprinkler riser room and/or fire pump
room or an interior access door at the level of fire department access. The
door shall be labeled with minimum 4 inch letters.
903.12 Separation Of Sprinkler Riser And/Or Fire Pump Room
Provide a minimum one hour fire separation for the sprinkler riser room and/or
the fire pump room from the remainder of the building.
903.13 Hydraulic Calculations
Provide a minimum 5 psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection system
hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be 5 psi minimum below the
seasonal low water flow test supply. The safety factor will allow for low
pressures in the water supply. By each hydraulic calculated area, on each
drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to
check the hydraulics of the sprinkler system for future building or storage
changes.
903.14 Fire Hose Valves - Warehouse And/Or Storage Fire Areas
In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 10,000 square feet, and where storage
exceeds twelve (12) feet high, provide inside 21/2" fire hose valves with 11/2"
reducer to a 11/2" connection. Locate the valves at each door entrance to the
warehouse and/or storage area. Provide additional 21/2" fire hose valves so
that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is more than 120' maximum
travel distance to a fire hose valve. Show the location of all obstructions
and/or racks on the drawing.
Fire hose valves system piping shall be:
      1.   A separate riser piping system or system as approved by the fire
code official.
      2.   The 21/2" valves shall be supplied by a minimum of 4" with 21/2"
drops to each valve.
      3.   Where system pressures exceed 100 psi, provide Potter reduced
pressure field adjustable type valves.
903.15 Large Warehouse System Check Valves
Provide a check valve in each sprinkler riser on large warehouse systems. This
will prevent multiple sprinkler system riser flow switches from activating
(backwards) when large volumes of water are flowing through another riser.
Section 905 - Standpipe Systems
905.3 Required Installations
Add the following paragraph to section 905.3:
All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The
supply riser shall be hydraulically designed to supply 21/2" hose drops. The
riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch.
The standpipe shall be a 21/2" gated connection with a 11/2" reducer and all
locations shall be approved by the code official. All standpipe and sprinkler
risers shall have separate control valves and flow switches per floor.
905.3.1 Building Height
Delete this section except for the exceptions and insert the following:
Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings or
structures (1) in all newly constructed buildings so that all areas in excess
of 100 feet from the nearest point of entry to the building shall be covered by
a standpipe; (2) in all areas of existing structures which have been remodeled
or added to in such a manner that those areas are located in excess of 100 feet
from the nearest point of entry to the building; (3) in all newly constructed
buildings or structures more than one (1) story in height or is one (1) story
or more below the highest level of fire department vehicle access so that all
areas on those floors are within 100 feet of a standpipe; and (4) in all
buildings or structures more than one (1) story in height or is one (1) story
or more below the highest level of fire department vehicle access which have
been remodeled or added to in such a manner so that those areas are located in
excess of 100 feet from the nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided
with a 21/2" to 11/2" reducer and cap with no fire hose. There shall be an
approved fire department connection at grade and hose connections located at
each floor level.
Exceptions 1 through 5 shall remain
Add as additional sections: 905.12 through 905.14
905.12 Piping Design
The riser piping, supply piping and the water service piping shall be sized to
maintain a residual pressure of at least 65 psi (448 kPa) at the topmost outlet
of each riser. The piping size shall be based on the capacity of the automatic
water supply system or, where as automatic water supply is neither required nor
provided to maintain the residual pressure of 65 psi, the pipe size shall be on
a pressure of 150 psi available at the fire department connection.
Exception: The residual pressure of 65 psi is not required in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
section 903.3 and where the highest floor level is not more than 150 feet above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
905.13 Riser Sizing
The riser size shall be based on the hydraulic calculations for a minimum flow
of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.).
Exceptions:
      1.   Where only 11/2" valves are provided, the riser(s) shall be sized to
provide a minimum flow of 100 gpm (378 L/min.).
      2.   In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with
water from a common standpipe riser, the riser shall be sized to satisfy total
demand.
      3.   For occupancies use group B, I, R-1, or R-2 in buildings that are
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
section 903.3, each riser shall be sized for a minimum flow of 250 gpm (945 L/
min.).
      4.   Risers that are sized in accordance with the pipe schedule
requirements of NFPA 14 listed in chapter 35 are not subject to this
requirement.
905.14 System Pipe Sizing
The system piping, including the horizontal or common feeder lines, shall be
sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.). Where more than one
standpipe riser is required or provided, all common system piping shall be
sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) for the first riser plus 250
gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall not be required
to exceed 1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
Exceptions:
      1.   Where only 11/2" valves are provided, the supply piping shall be
sized for a minimum flow of 100 gpm (378 L/min.) for each riser, and the total
shall not be required to exceed 500 gpm (1892 L/min.).
      2.   In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with
water from a common standpipe riser, the supply piping shall be sized for a
minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) plus the sprinkler demand for first
riser, plus 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall
be required to exceed 1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
      3.   For occupancies in use group B, I, R-1, or R-2 in buildings that are
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
section 903.3, all common supply piping shall be sized for a minimum flow of
250 gpm (945 L/min.) for the first riser plus 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for each
additional riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed 750 gpm (2838
L/min.).
Section 906 - Portable Fire Extinguishers
906.1 Where Required
Delete the exception in paragraph 1
Add the following paragraphs:
      1.   Where deemed necessary by the fire code official based on plan
reviewing, inspections of occupancies, or protection of processes and/or
activities and at a minimum at each exit door and within seventy five foot (75)
travel distance from anywhere in the space.
      2.   Fire extinguishers shall be a minimum 10 pound (4A:40-B: C) ABC dry
chemical type unless approved otherwise by the fire code official. All fire
extinguishers shall have location signs and current services tags.
Section 907 - Fire Alarm And Detection Systems
907.1.3 Equipment
Add the following language to the existing section:
New fire alarm control panels shall be addressable unless otherwise approved by
the code official. The equipment shall be capable of having the audio signal
silence without resetting the fire alarm control panel. All fire alarm control
panels shall have an approved method of placing the system in trouble mode at
the location of the alarm panel.
907.2 Where Required - New Buildings And Structures
Delete wording and insert the following:
An approved manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall
be provided in all use groups of new buildings and structures in accordance
with sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23. Fire alarm systems shall be maintained
in full operating condition at all times. All fire alarm control panels or full
function annunciator panels shall be installed within 10 feet of the main
entrance, or in a location approved by the fire code official. Occupant
notification shall be in accordance with section 907.6, unless other
requirements are provided by another section of this code. Where automatic
sprinkler protection is installed in accordance with this or any other code or
ordinance is provided and connected to the building fire alarm system,
automatic heat detection required by this section shall not be required. An
approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all use groups,
not provided with an automatic sprinkler system, in accordance with the
provisions of this code and NFPA 72. Devices, combinations of devices,
appliances and equipment shall comply with section 907.1.2.
The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved
alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms
where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in
sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke detector.
Exception: One and two family residences which fall under the jurisdiction of
the international residential code, unless specified elsewhere in this code.
907.2.1 Group A
Delete the wording and section and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in group A
occupancies.
907.2.1.1 Group A-2
Delete the wording and section and insert the following:
An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed in accordance with
NFPA 72 in group A-2 occupancies that have an occupant load of 50 or more
persons.
907.2.2 Group B
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all use group B occupancies.
907.2.3 Group E
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all group E occupancies. When
automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems
shall be connected to the building fire alarm system.
907.2.4 Group F
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all use group F occupancies.
907.2.5 Group H
Delete this section and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in group H occupancies. An
automatic detection system shall be installed for highly toxic gasses, organic
peroxides and oxidizers in accordance with chapters 37, 39 and 40 respectively.
907.2.6 Group I
A manual fire alarm system shall be provided in all group I occupancies.
907.2.7 Group M
Delete this section and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be provided in all group M occupancies.
907.2.11 Single And Multiple Station Smoke Alarms
Add the following wording after NFPA 72:
", the current state of Illinois smoke detector act (425 ILCS 60/1, et. seq.)
and all the rules and regulations of the Illinois state fire marshal".
907.2.11.1.1 Group R-1
Add the following location requirements for smoke detector placement:
      4.   Within 15 feet outside of any sleeping area
      5.   At the top of every stair
      6.   Within 15 feet of any furnace
      7.   As required by any law of the state of Illinois
907.2.11.1.2 Group R-2, R-3, R-4 And I-I
Add the following location requirements for smoke detector placement:
      4.   Within 15 feet outside of any sleeping area
      5.   At the top of every stair
      6.   Within 15 feet of any furnace
      7.   As required by any law of the state of Illinois
907.2.11.4 Power Source
Add the following as exception 2 and 3:
Add the no. 1 to the existing exception
 
      2.   Group R-3 smoke alarms are to be 120 volt with a battery backup.
      3.   Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup in
group R-1 where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
Add as additional sections:
907.3.1 Single And Multiple Station Smoke Alarms
Listed single-and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this code and the household fire warning
equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
When a system is installed within a dwelling unit it shall comply with UL 217.
907.3.2 Where Required In Existing One And Two Family dwellings
All existing one and two family residences shall have installed therein smoke
detectors in accordance with Illinois smoke detector act. Every single-family
residence shall have at least one smoke detector installed on every story,
including basements, but not including unoccupied attics. Smoke detectors shall
be installed in each room used for sleeping purposes and within fifteen (15)
feet of the entrances of all rooms used for sleeping purposes. The signal shall
be clearly audible within each room used for sleeping purposes over background
noise levels with all intervening doors closed. In single-family residences
with split-levels, a smoke detector installed on the upper level shall suffice
for the adjacent lower level if the lower level is less than one full story
below the upper level. However, if there is an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke detector shall be installed on each level.
907.3.3 Alterations, Repairs, And Additions
When interior alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or
when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the
individual dwelling unit shall be provided with smoke alarms located as
required for new dwellings; the smoke alarms shall be interconnected and hard-
wired.
Exceptions:
      1.   Smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required to be
interconnected and hard-wired where the alterations or repairs do not result in
the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space, or basement available which could provide
access for hard wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior
finishes.
      2.   Repairs to the exterior surfaces of dwellings are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
907.3.4 Mounting Of Detectors
All smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling at least six (6)" from the
wall, or on the wall six (6) to twelve (12)" from the ceiling, except that all
smoke detectors in interior common stairwells shall be on the uppermost
ceiling.
907.3.5 Responsibility For Installation
In single family and two family residences, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the building or structure to supply and install all required smoke
detectors. The owner shall be responsible for making reasonable efforts to test
and maintain smoke detectors in interior common stairwells.
907.3.6 Maintenance Of Detectors
It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to test and provide general
maintenance for the smoke detectors within the tenant's dwelling unit and to
notify the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, in writing, of any
deficiencies, which the tenant cannot correct. The owner shall be responsible
for providing the tenant with written information regarding smoke detector
testing and maintenance.
907.3.7 Battery Replacement
The tenant shall be responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the smoke detectors in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner shall
ensure that such batteries are in operating condition at the time the tenant
takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the owner or
the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to correct
any deficiencies in the smoke detector(s), which have been reported in writing
to the owner or authorized agent of the owner.
907.3.8 Low-Voltage System
At the option of the owner of the building or structure, a low-voltage,
standard central smoke detection system may be installed in a single-family
residence or two- family residence in lieu of battery-powered smoke detectors
or hard-wired smoke detectors, provided that such low-voltage standard central
smoke detection system meets the requirements for such a system set forth in
the ordinance codified in this chapter or is otherwise approved by the code
official.
907.3.9 Existing Multi-Family (Three Or More Dwelling Units) Buildings
All multi-family buildings whether existing or constructed hereafter, shall
have installed therein hard-wired smoke detectors as provided in this
subsection.
907.3.9.1 Smoke Detector Locations
      1.   Each room used for sleeping purposes.
Exception: Existing multi-family buildings and structures have the option to
install battery powered smoke detectors in lieu of hard-wired in sleeping
areas. Hard-wire smoke detectors with battery back up is preferred.
      2.   In the immediate vicinity (minimum of 15 feet) of all entrances to
rooms used for sleeping purposes.
      3.   Within 15 feet of any furnace.
      4.   A smoke detector shall be installed in each interior common
stairwell (at the top of the stairs).
      5.   A smoke detector shall be installed in each interior common corridor
or hallway at intervals of not more than thirty (30) feet.
      6.   A smoke detector shall be installed within each laundry room,
boiler, electrical and other service room, and each tenant and building
maintenance storage room. The code official is authorized to require an
approved alternative type of detector be installed where, during normal
operation, products or combustion or other conditions are present in sufficient
quantity to actuate a smoke detector.
907.3.9.2 Access For Maintenance
The tenant shall provide the owner or authorized agent of the owner with access
to the dwelling unit to check, clean, test, maintain, repair and replace all
smoke detectors therein.
907.3.9.3 Low Voltage Standard Smoke Detection System Locations
The low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system shall be installed in
all interior common stairwells, interior common corridors or hallways, laundry
rooms, boiler, electrical and other service rooms, and tenant and building
maintenance and storage rooms. The smoke detection devices connected to the
low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system shall be located as
provided in 907.3.9.1.
907.3.9.4 Hard Wired Smoke Detector Locations
A hard-wired smoke detector with battery back-up shall be installed in each
room used for sleeping purposes. When more than one smoke detector is
installed, all smoke detectors shall be so wired so that the actuation of one
detector shall activate all the detectors in the dwelling unit.
907.3.9.5 Annunciator And Panel Control Box
Each smoke detection device connected to the low- voltage, standard central
smoke detection system shall be connected to an annunciator and a panel control
box.
      1.   The annunciator shall have a visual indicator of alarm location and
be installed in the entrance or on the exterior of each building or structure
at the entrance, in a waterproof enclosure, as directed by the fire code
official.
      2.   There shall be American with disability act (ADA) compliant horn/
strobes installed in the interior common corridors, hallways, and stairwells
leading to the dwelling units, which are clearly audible within such dwelling
units over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
907.3.9.6 Fire Alarm Supervision
All new low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system installations
shall be connected directly to the applicable fire protection district's
dispatch communication center via a two-way radio transmitter at the time the
system is placed into operation.
907.3.9.7 Responsibility Maintenance
In multi-family buildings or structures it shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the building or structure or authorized agent of the owner thereof to
install, maintain, repair, and replace, if necessary, the low- voltage,
standard central smoke detection system required hereby.
907.3.9.8 Maintenance And Testing
The owner or authorized agent of the owner shall also be responsible for the
continuous maintenance of such system through no less than an annual inspection
and testing thereof performed under a written maintenance agreement with a
reliable firm actively engaged in the servicing of such systems. A copy of each
maintenance agreement shall be accompanied by a written report and a copy of
such report shall be promptly delivered to the applicable fire protection
district. Further, the current maintenance agreement and latest report shall be
made available at all reasonable times for inspection by duly authorized
personnel of the applicable fire protection district bureau of fire prevention.
907.3.9.9 Power Source For Existing Multifamily Buildings
Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are
connected to an emergency electrical system.
907.3.9.10 Heat Detection Device
Where a heat detection device or combination heat and smoke detection device
will be more effective than a smoke detector as a result of conditions within
the area in which the device is located, the heat detection device or
combination heat and smoke detection device shall be installed in place of a
smoke detector at the direction of the code official. The combination heat and
smoke detection device shall bear the testing label of a nationally recognized,
independent testing laboratory and shall meet the requirements of NFPA 72.
907.5.2 Manual Fire Alarm Boxes
Add the following wording to this section:
Manual fire alarm boxes shall be installed in each use group described in this
code; they shall be installed in accordance with these amendments and the 2009
international fire code.
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in group E occupancies
where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system, the notification appliances will activate on sprinkler water flow and
manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location.
907.5.2.6 Separate Zones
Add as an additional section:
Manual fire alarm boxes, audio/visual devices and detectors are to be on
separate zones per floor unless approved otherwise by the fire code official.
907.6.2.3.5 Multi-Tenant Use Group M, F And S Buildings
Add as an additional section:
Multi-tenant use group M, F and S buildings will be "ring by tenant" activated
by a fire sprinkler system flow switch for that space or automatic fire
detection and shall include a weatherproof clear outside strobe over the
entrance to each tenant space as directed by the fire code official. All
outside strobes shall be 75 candela minimum.
907.7.5 Monitoring
Delete this section and insert the following:
All required fire protective signaling systems located within the village of
Wadsworth, with the exception of residential systems in buildings, structures
and uses that fall under the international residential code (unless done
voluntarily), shall transmit alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals directly
to the main dispatch communication center for the applicable fire protection
district. This connection shall be made with a two-way radio transmitter
installed at each location. All required fire protective signaling systems
shall report directly to the applicable fire protection district's main
dispatch communication center via a two- way radio transmitter. Future methods
of connection shall be determined by the chief.
Exceptions:
      1.   Single- and multi-station smoke detectors are required by section
907.2.10.
      2.   Smoke detectors in buildings of use group I-3 occupancies.
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Add the following sections:
907.10 False Fire Alarm Activation
False fire alarm: Any alarm signal which indicates the existence of an
emergency situation, when in fact no such emergency exists, and shall include
any alarm signal generated by any fire protection system by whatever means, but
shall not include alarms from the following causes.
      1.   Fire which causes structural damage to the protected premises.
      2.   Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises.
      3.   Tornado winds causing structural damage to the protected premises.
      4.   Flooding to the protected premises due to overflow of natural
drainage.
      5.   Lightning causing physical damage to the protected premises.
      6.   Telephone line malfunction verified in writing by an authorized
telephone company supervisor within seven calendar days of the occurrence.
      7.   Electrical service interruption verified in writing by an authorized
local power company supervisor within seven calendar days of the occurrence.
907.10.1 False Fire Alarm Service Charge
For false fire alarms, an alarm user shall be charged a service charge of
$100.00 for each false alarm in excess of three (3) in any calendar year. All
false fire alarm service charges shall be remitted to the applicable fire
protection district by the alarm user upon receipt of the statement for such
service charge.
907.10.2 Newly Installed Fire Alarm Allowance
Special consideration will be given to fire alarm users should false fire
alarms occur during the first three months after the user's alarm service was
commenced.
907.10.3 Local Government Allowance
Units of local government such as schools and park districts may receive
special consideration for alarms caused by circumstances listed in section
907.10.
907.10.4 Liability
The village and the applicable fire protection district assumes no liability
for:
      1.   Any defects in the operation of an alarm system.
      2.   Any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm.
      3.   Any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the
installation, operation, or maintenance of any alarm system.
      4.   The transmission of alarm signals, prerecorded alarm messages, or
the relaying of such signals and messages.
907.10.5 Intentional False Alarms
No person shall intentionally turn in a fire alarm when, in fact, such person
knows that no fire exists. No person shall activate any fire alarm system or
any fire suppression system for purposes other than emergency, maintenance, or
prescribed testing.
907.10.6 Penalties
Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 907 shall be subject
to the penalty provisions as outlined in section
1-4-1 of the Wadsworth village code. Each day that the violation exists shall
be considered a separate violation. Such fines shall be in addition to any
other fee or charge authorized pursuant to the terms of the ordinance codified
in this chapter.
Section 912 - Fire Department Connections
912.7
Add as an additional section:
All fire department connections shall be a 21/2" x 21/2" x 21/2" siamese NST
connection or as approved by the fire code official.
Chapter 10 - Means Of Egress
Section 1005 - Egress Width
1006.6.3 Illumination Emergency Power
Add new paragraph no. 6:
      6.   All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler riser(s), fire pump
(s) and fire alarm control panel(s) shall be provided with approved emergency
lighting.
Chapter 33 - Explosives And Fireworks
Section 3302 - Definitions
Add wording to the fireworks definition section 3302.1:
The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter and as
stated elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein.
Fireworks: The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive
composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and
shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, sky-rockets, roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks
of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or
any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects, provided, however, that the
term "fireworks" shall not include trick noise makers known as "party poppers",
"booby traps", and "snappers"; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths of
grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion; and toy pistol, paper or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
Note: Devices such as sparklers, snake or glow worm pellets, trick matches,
etc. that require an open flame, such as a match or lighter, to ignite are not
permitted.
Section 3304 - Explosive Materials Storage And Handling
Delete this section and insert the following:
3304.1 Explosive Materials Storage And Handling
The storage of explosive materials is prohibited within the village of
Wadsworth.
Delete sections 3304.2 through 3304.10.7
Section 3305 - Manufacture, Assembly And Testing Of Explosives, Explosive
Materials And Fireworks
3305.1 General
Delete this section and insert the following:
The manufacturing, assembly and testing of explosives, ammunition, blasting
agents and fireworks is prohibited in the village of Wadsworth.
Delete sections 3305.2 through 3305.9
Section 3308 - Fireworks Display
3308.2 Permit Application
Delete this section and insert the following:
The display of fireworks must be conducted in accordance with this code, the
state of Illinois code, and pursuant to title 5, chapter 5 of the Wadsworth
village code. A permit shall be required for the possession, display or
discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical displays. The permit application shall
include the applicant's name, address, and age; the date and place of the
proposed discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical display; the nature and
quantities of fireworks to be discharged or displayed; and the applicant's
experience, if any, in discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical displays. Also
included shall be plans for the display, inspections of the display site, and
demonstrations of the display operation. Such permit shall be applied for a
minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the proposed date of display. Applicant
is also required to comply with any and all applicable state of Illinois laws
and regulations.
Upon receipt of the application, the code official, or designee, shall inspect
the location of the proposed discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical display.
If, in the judgment of the code official, or designee it would not be hazardous
to any property or persons to allow such discharge of fireworks or
pyrotechnical displays, given the resources of the fire department available
for the requested date, the code official shall approve the application and
issue a permit for the discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical display. Fees in
accordance with section 105.8 shall apply.
A representative of the applicable fire protection district shall stand by on
site from the time fireworks product arrives on site through the post display
final safety check. In addition, a fire engine with a crew of two (2)
firefighters will be required for standby at the display. Standby personnel
shall be reimbursed at a rate of $50.00 per hour per person and the vehicle
cost is $135 per hour per vehicle. The fire vehicle and standby personnel will
be reimbursed a minimum of two (2) hours. Payment is due at the time the permit
is issued.
A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall any such permit
be extended beyond the dates set out therein.
Add as additional section:
Section 3311 - Fireworks Violations
3311.1 General
A person shall not possess, manufacture, store, offer or expose for sale, sell
at retail or discharge any fireworks within the village.
Exception: Where approved for the supervised display of fireworks in accordance
with section 3308 of this code.
3311.2 Bond For Display
The permit holder shall furnish a bond in an amount approved by the code
official for the payment of all potential damage caused either to the person or
property due to the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permit
holder or agent of the permit holder. In lieu of a bond, the permit holder may
provide a certificate of insurance, in an amount acceptable to the code
official as an additional insured and execute an agreement holding the village
of Wadsworth and the applicable fire protection district harmless from any
damage to persons or property caused by the permitted display.
3311.3 Fines For Violations
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation found violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall subject to the penalty provisions as
specified in section
1-4-1 of the Wadsworth village code for each day that the violation exists. All
fines shall be paid to the village.
Chapter 47 - Referenced Standards
Delete ICC electric code and insert 2005 national electric code-NFPA 70.
Delete international plumbing code and insert the Illinois state plumbing code.
Delete the international sewage disposal code and insert Illinois state
plumbing code.
Delete IBC-09 and insert IBC-06 and any and all correlating sections as
indicated notwithstanding anything printed to the contrary.
Delete IFGC-09 and insert IFGC-06 and any and all correlating sections as
indicated notwithstanding anything printed to the contrary.
Delete IMC-09 and insert IMC-06 and any and all correlating sections as
indicated notwithstanding anything printed to the contrary.
Delete IPMC-09 and insert IPMCC-06 and any and all correlating sections as
indicated notwithstanding anything printed to the contrary.
Delete IRC-09 and insert IRC-06 and any and all correlating sections as
indicated notwithstanding anything printed to the contrary.
NFPA The most current edition of all the NFPA standards, except/deleting NFPA 1
and NFPA 5000, are adopted by reference and also in whole.
Appendix B Of This Code Is Pages 426-426 Of 2009 International Fire Code:
"Appendix B Fire-Flow Requirements For Buildings"
Appendix B
Section B-103 - Modifications
Add as additional sections:
B-103.4 Dry hydrants
 
In any subdivision/development, where a water distribution system is not
provided, the village may require the owner to modify storm water control
devices, so as to provide a pond with a minimum depth of five (5) feet and to
install a dry hydrant that conforms to the standard of NFPA 1142 and with the
approval of the code official with a suction pipe from the middle of the pond.
The dry hydrant shall be installed on the right of way of a street proposed to
be installed within the subdivision/development and shall meet the standards
established by the applicable fire protection district. Where a pond is not
practical, a tank system with adequate water storage capacity will be required.
It shall be unlawful to erect any structure in any subdivision/development
prior to completion of any required water supply equipment as required by this
ordinance.
B-103.4.1: Where the configuration of lots, distance between buildings and lot
lines or public utility easements, accessibility to building or fire
suppression requirements dictate, the code official shall require additional
hydrants as deemed necessary.
B-103.4.2: The total gallons per minute, which dry hydrants shall be required
to produce, shall be determined by the structure being served by the hydrant.
In no case shall the hydrant produce less than 1,000 gallons per minute.
B-103.4.3: The precise location of and specifications for dry hydrant(s) shall
be subject to the review and approval by the code official prior to the
installation of the system.
B-103.4.4: The dry hydrant plan submitted for review may be subject to review
by an outside engineer or code consultant. The submitted party will incur all
associated costs.
B-103.4.5: It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any device such as
drafting pits, dry hydrants or other water supply appurtenances designed for
fire fighting operations without the express permission of the applicable fire
protection district.
B-103.4.6: All dry hydrants shall be maintained free from obstructions. The
access to any area surrounding the dry hydrant shall be properly cleared of
obstacles, which may hide or impede the use of the dry hydrant. Furthermore,
the hydrant shall be maintained in working order at all times, capable of
delivering the minimum required flow. Responsibility of maintaining, repairing,
replacing and/or dredging all hydrants within a subdivision shall be the
responsibility of the appropriate homeowner's association. In the absence of a
homeowners association, each dry hydrant will be addressed on an individual
basis.
B-103.4.7: The applicable fire protection district may require the property
owner or his agent to install "No Parking - Fire Hydrant", or other signs as
needed.
B-105.1: Delete the exception
B-105.2: Delete the exception
Appendix C Of This Code Is Pages 427 Of 2009 International Fire Code: "Appendix
C Fire Hydrant Locations And Distribution"
Appendix D Of This Code Is Pages 429-431 Of 2009 International Fire Code:
"Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads"
(Ord. 2013-888, 1-15-2013)
8-1-8: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODES:
The 2021 edition of the International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted
by reference excluding any penalty provisions contained therein as and set for
the building code of the village for all structures. (Ord. 2024-1164, 12-3-
2024)
8-1-9: COPIES OF CODES ON FILE:
One (1) copy of the codes adopted in sections
8-1-2 through
8-1-8 of this chapter shall be kept on file in the village clerk's office.
(Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-1164, 12-3-2024)
8-1-10: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-737, 8-21-2007, eff. 10-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-
1164, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Building Permit And Inspection Fee Schedule
8-2-2: Lapse Of Permit; Replacement Permits
8-2-3: Inspections; Fees
8-2-4: Penalty
8-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE:
Building permit fee (unless otherwise     1% of cost; minimum of $35.00; plus
specified; jobs up to $200,000.00)        required inspections
Building permit fee (unless otherwise     First $200,000.00 calculated at 1%;
specified; jobs $200,000.00 to            from $200,000.00 to $500,000.00,
$500,000.00)                              monies calculated at 0.75%; plus
                                          required inspections
Building permit fee (unless otherwise     Same as above except monies from
specified; jobs $500,000.00 to            $500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00
$1,000,000.00)                            calculated at 0.5%; plus required
                                          inspections
Building permit fee (unless otherwise     Same as above except monies above
specified; jobs greater than              $1,000,000.00 calculated at 0.25%;
$1,000,000.00)                            plus required inspections
Reinspection and miscellaneous inspection $40.00 per inspector per inspection
fees
After hours, weekend or holiday           $80.00 per inspector per inspection
inspection fees
Note: Interior fences (not parallel to property lines) will require Lake County
Health Department permit.
Plan review fees (applicable if job cost
is greater than $1,000.00; fee may be
imposed or waived in the discretion of
the building official depending on nature  
of job. For non-ordinary projects,
applicant shall be charged $50.00 per
hour for residential and $75.00 per hour
for non-residential):
 Minimum fee, residential                $50.00
 Cursory reviews, residential            25.00
 New homes                               10% of permit fee/minimum $250.00
 Residential additions                   10% of permit fee/minimum $100.00
 Residential alterations and accessory   10% of permit fee/minimum $50.00
  structures
 Minimum fee, nonresidential             10% of permit fee/minimum $75.00
 New nonresidential                      10% of permit fee/minimum $400.00
 Nonresidential additions                10% of permit fee/minimum $200.00
 Nonresidential alterations and          10% of permit fee/minimum $75.00
  accessory structures
Certificate of occupancy certificate      $100.00
Replacement certificate of occupancy      5.00
certificate
Temporary certificate of occupancy:        
 Residential                             50.00
 Nonresidential                          150.00
Change of use permits (land or building):  
 Residential                             35.00
 Nonresidential                          50.00
Demolition permits:                        
 Primary building                        250.00
 Accessory building                      125.00
                                          Permittee will be responsible to pay
                                          for any and all costs incurred by the
Elevator and other similar equipment      Village from contracted elevator
inspections                               inspection company or other
                                          inspection/plan review professional
                                          (s)
Phase permits - per phase:                 
 Residential                             $100.00
 Nonresidential                          200.00
Temporary structure permit                50.00
New culvert permit                        200.00
Culvert replacement permit                100.00
Driveway approach (new or reconstructed)  200.00
Driveway replacement (no expansion)       35.00
Driveway replacement (with expansion;     50.00
LCHD permit required)
                                          $1.00 per square foot; $50.00
Sign permit                               minimum; square footage based upon 1
                                          side
Site plan permits:                         
 Residential:                             
  Top dressing due to subsidence        $150.00
  0 - 1,500 square feet of disturbance  200.00
  1,501 - 15,000 square feet of         350.00
    disturbance
  15,001 - 1 acre of disturbance        600.00
  1 acre to 5 acres of disturbance      1,000.00
  Over 5 acres of disturbance           2,000.00
    Note: On projects over 1 acre of disturbance, applicant shall also pay all
  professional fees incurred by Village. Fees only apply if Village is
    involved with project review/oversight in lieu of or in addition to, the
    Lake County Stormwater Management Commission.
 Nonresidential                          $250.00
    Note: Applicant shall also pay all professional fees incurred by Village.
  Fees only apply if Village is involved with project review/oversight in
    lieu of or in addition to, the Lake County Stormwater Management
    Commission.
Temporary use permits (Building Code      $50.00
portion)
Watershed development permit (single-     600.00
family residential)
  Note: Fee only applies if Village of Wadsworth, not the Lake County
 Stormwater Management Commission, retains permitting authority for new home
  project.
 
(Ord. 2016-985, 5-3-2016; amd. Ord. 2018-1042, 6-19-2018)
8-2-2: LAPSE OF PERMIT; REPLACEMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Term Of Permit: All building permits shall lapse and be of no further
force and effect two (2) years from date of issuance.
   B.   Replacement Permit; Fee:
      1.   Replacement Permit Required: In the event that the construction for
which the permit had been issued has not been completed and an occupancy
permit, if required, issued within the two (2) year period, the permittee shall
apply for and secure a replacement permit.
      2.   Fee: The fee for the replacement permit shall be equal to the fee
paid for the original permit. For good cause shown, such as circumstances not
reasonably within the control of the permittee, and if substantial progress has
been done on the construction, the Building Commissioner may reduce the fee for
the first replacement permit to fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the original
permit fee.
      3.   Term: The replacement permit shall lapse and be of no further force
and effect one year from date of issuance.
   C.   Additional Replacement Permits; Fee:
      1.   Additional Replacement Permit Required: In the event the
construction for which the replacement permit had been issued has not been
completed and an occupancy permit, if required, issued within the one year
period, successive one year replacement permits shall be secured until the work
is completed and an occupancy permit, if required, shall have been issued.
      2.   Fee: The fee for replacement permits, other than the first
replacement permit, shall be equal to twice the permit fee for the original
permit.
   D.   Existing Building Permit: Any existing building permit which was issued
more than two (2) years prior to the adoption of this section for construction
which has not yet been completed, and an occupancy permit, if required, issued,
shall lapse and be of no further force and effect six (6) months from the date
of adoption of this section. (Ord. 96-436, 2-20-1996)
8-2-3: INSPECTIONS; FEES:
   A.   Inspections Required: The village charges a fee for building permits
for all construction activities in the village. During the course of the
project, the improvements must be periodically inspected to ensure conformity
with the applicable adopted ordinances and codes of the village. As such, the
individual(s) performing the inspections on behalf of the village must be
compensated for the inspections. Therefore, the village building official shall
also charge forty dollars ($40.00) per inspector per inspection for the
permitted project (in addition to the permit fee for the project), pursuant to
an inspection schedule that is established and as may be amended from time to
time for the different types of projects that may be permitted by the village.
   B.   Reinspection: Whenever construction has to be reinspected due to faulty
or incomplete construction or any other reason attributable to the building
permit applicant, the building permit applicant shall be charged a reinspection
fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) per inspector per inspection or
such other amount as established from time to time by the village.
   C.   Miscellaneous Inspections: Miscellaneous inspections shall be charged
at a rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per inspector per inspection. This fee
shall be paid before any inspection can be made.
   D.   Outside Consultant: If it is necessary for the village to utilize an
outside consultant to perform a necessary inspection, the permittee shall be
responsible for payment of said fee prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
   E.   Construction Before Application For Permit: Any construction work
started without first applying for a permit shall be subject to a permit fee
double the amount of the usual fee to cover extra plan reviews and inspections.
   F.   Extra Costs: Following the payment of any applicable permit, plan
review or inspection fees, if the cost to provide services to the applicant
exceeds the amount of paid fees for the given project, applicant shall pay any
and all incremental costs incurred by the village.
   G.   Escrow Deposit: For all projects permitted by the village, the village
may require, depending upon the nature of the job, an escrow deposit of at
least five hundred dollars ($500.00) to pay for any costs incurred by the
village, outside of inspection and plan review fees, from the entity providing
plan review, inspection, permit and code consultation to the village for the
permitted project. The permittee shall replenish said escrow account from time
to time should the initial deposit or subsequent deposit monies become depleted
during the course of the permitted project. Should monies remain within the
escrow fund following completion of the permitted project, said monies shall be
refunded to the permittee. (Ord. 2016-985, 5-3-2016)
8-2-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-985, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Satellite Earth Station Or Dish Antennas
8-3-2: Silt Fences
8-3-3: Driveway Approaches
8-3-1: SATELLITE EARTH STATION OR DISH ANTENNAS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful to install satellite earth
stations or dish antennas (hereinafter referred to as satellite antennas)
without a permit from the building inspector of the village. The permit fee is
hereby established at ten dollars ($10.00).
   B.   Permit Regulations: No permit for installation of a satellite antenna
shall be issued unless the installation is in compliance with the following
regulations:
      1.   Location: Satellite antennas shall be installed only in the rear
yards of lots as defined in title 10 of this code.
      2.   Setbacks: The satellite antennas shall be installed within the lot
lines established by title 10 of this code.
      3.   Size Limitation: No satellite antenna shall exceed twelve feet (12')
in diameter and exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Not more than one
satellite antenna shall be installed on any residential zoned lot in the
village.
      4.   Screening: Satellite antennas installed in residential zoned lots or
on lots adjoining residential zoned properties shall be screened from view of
adjacent landowners by fencing, plant material or earth berms not less than six
feet (6') in height. (Ord. 85-196, 7-8-1985)
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of this section shall subject the violator to
the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code)
8-3-2: SILT FENCES:
It is imperative that silt fences be erected and duly maintained to prevent
erosion and silting of drainage structures during or incidental to construction
or change in grade of property. Whenever a silt fence is required by this code
or other applicable governmental law or regulation or by the village engineer
or building inspector, it shall be the duty of the contractor and property
owner, jointly and severally, to erect and thereafter maintain in good repair a
silt fence in the location as directed by a village official subject to the
following standards and conditions: (Ord. 2005-673, 5-3-2005)
   A.   Bond: A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) silt fence bond shall be paid
prior to the commencement of construction. The bond shall be refunded to the
person depositing the funds at such time as construction has been completed and
the village has determined that a silt fence is no longer required less the sum
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the village determines
the silt fence has not been erected or suitably maintained. Any unreturned silt
fence bond remaining after one year from the date of issuance of any
certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited to the village and credited to its
general corporate fund account. (Ord. 2014-939, 12-2-2014)
   B.   Fee: The property owner and contractor shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the
village determines the fence has not been duly erected or maintained. The fees
shall be deducted from the above described bond and in the event the bond is
insufficient the property owner and contractor shall be jointly and severally
responsible to promptly pay the remaining fee balance within three (3) days of
written notice from the village.
   C.   Applicability: This section shall apply to all existing and subsequent
construction activities or changes in property grade.
   D.   Professional Expenses: In the event that the village incurs
professional expenses as a result of the failure to erect or suitably maintain
the required silt fences, the property owner and contractor shall be jointly
and severally responsible and promptly reimburse the village within three (3)
days of written notice from the village for all professional expenses incurred
by the village such as, but not limited to, engineering fees.
   E.   Penalty: Separate and apart from and in addition to the daily fees and
bond prescribed herein, any person who violates the terms of this section
governing silt fences shall be subject to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day a violation occurs or continues.
   F.   Occupancy Permit: No occupancy permit shall be issued unless and until
all fees, fines, and related professional expenses have been paid in full.
   G.   Maintenance: Silt fences and filter barriers shall be inspected
immediately after each rainfall and at least daily during prolonged rainfall.
Any required repairs shall be made immediately. Should the fabric on a silt
fence or filter barrier decompose or become ineffective, the fabric shall be
replaced promptly. Sediment deposits must be removed when deposits reach
approximately one-half (1/2) the height of the barrier. Any sediment deposits
remaining in place after the silt fence or filter barrier is no longer required
shall be shaped to conform with the existing grade and be seeded.
   H.   Standards: The height of a silt fence shall not exceed thirty six
inches (36"). The filter fabric shall be purchased in a continuous roll and cut
to the length of the barrier to avoid the use of joints. When joints are
necessary, filter cloth shall be spliced together only at a support post, with
a minimum six inch (6") overlap, and securely sealed. Posts shall be twisted
together to form a continuous barrier. No spaces shall exist. Posts shall be
spaced a maximum of six feet (6') apart at the barrier location and driven
securely into the ground (minimum of 12 inches). When standard strength filter
fabric is used, wire mesh support fence shall be fastened securely to the
downslope side of the posts using heavy duty staples at least one inch (1")
long, tie wires or hog rings. The wire shall extend into the trench a minimum
of two inches (2") and shall not extend more than thirty six inches (36") above
the original ground surface. Lathe must be stapled to the up slope side of the
post to help secure the filter fabric to the post. The standard strength filter
fabric shall be stapled or wired to the fences, and eight inches (8") of the
fabric shall be extended into the trench. The fabric shall not extend more than
thirty six inches (36") above the original ground surface. Filter fabric shall
not be stapled to existing trees. Lathe must be stapled to the up slope side of
the post to help secure the filter fabric to the post. When extra strength
filter fabric and closer post spacing are used, the wire mesh support fence may
be eliminated. In such a case, the filter fabric is stapled or wired directly
to the posts. Each silt fence shall meet the following additional standards and
be constructed as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1197.png]
 
(Ord. 2005-673, 5-3-2005)
8-3-3: DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
   A.   Construction Permit Required: Any person owning lands abutting any
street who may desire to construct, build, establish or alter a driveway
approach from the edge of pavement or curb line to the lot may do so only on
written permit from the village. The provisions of this section only apply to
new construction activities (which require access to a village roadway) and the
complete reconstruction of an existing driveway approach. In either instance,
culverts shall also be installed pursuant to the provisions of section
8-4-4 of this title.
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy: Prior to the issuance of any (temporary,
partial, final, etc.) occupancy permit, the driveway culvert(s) must be
installed and the approach(es) shall be paved. The minimum construction
standards for driveway approach pavements are indicated in subsection D of this
section.
   C.   Definitions:
   DRIVEWAY: A private road used for vehicular access to a parcel of land, and
is owned and maintained by the individual property owner.
   DRIVEWAY APPROACH: That portion of the driveway within the public right of
way and is maintained by the individual property owner.
   D.   Standards: All materials and workmanship used shall conform to the
latest edition of the IDOT "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction". Driveway approaches shall be constructed of asphalt pavement.
Asphalt pavement shall be constructed with two inches (2") of hot mix asphalt
surface course, mix "C", N50, compacted thickness (95 percent density) over at
least six inches (6") of aggregate base course (CA-6 material limited to
crushed stone, crushed gravel or crushed concrete) compacted to a minimum
density of ninety five percent (95%). The driveway shall be located to allow
safe sight distance and its location must be approved by the village engineer.
No portion of the driveway approach shall be less than twelve feet (12') in
width nor more than twenty five feet (25') in width measured at the right of
way line. All driveway approaches require a minimum of two feet (2') and a
maximum five foot (5') flare or radius on each side where it meets the edge of
the street or curb. Driveway approaches located within the side yard of the lot
shall be set back from the property line at least five feet (5'). Not more than
one driveway per lot is permitted on the bulb of a cul-de-sac. The existing
road edge shall be saw cut prior to installing the new driveway. The minimum
slope for driveway shall be two percent (2%) (0.02 foot/foot) and the maximum
slope shall be 8.0 percent (0.08 foot/foot). Each approach shall meet driveway
approach standards in accordance with figure 1 of this section. (Ord. 2009-801,
12-15-2009)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1199.png]
 
(Ord. 2008-764, 7-15-2008)
   E.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the terms of subsections A through D of
this section, or figure 1 of this section, brick, concrete, cement and other
impervious materials may be permitted on driveway approaches provided that the
property owner signs a waiver with the village acknowledging that the village
is not responsible for any damage that may occur to any nonasphalt portion of
the driveway approach that is on public right of way. Furthermore, the property
owner shall also acknowledge that in the event that the village, by its own
undertaking or through the issuance of a right of way utility or other
construction permit, does work within the village right of way that results in
a partial or total reconstruction of one's driveway approach, that asphalt will
be used as part of any driveway approach restoration effort; the affected
property owner will be responsible for any incremental costs to restore the
driveway with nonasphalt materials if so desired by said owner. Waiver forms
are to be supplied by the village and will be recorded against the affected
property; property owners shall pay for any and all recording costs associated
with any waiver that is granted under this section.
   F.   Farm Access: Any "farm access" permitted by the village that is
established under this section may not be paved with asphalt or any other type
impervious material; gravel farm accesses are specifically permitted. (Ord.
2009-801, 12-15-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-1158, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 4
CONSTRUCTION OF CULVERTS, DITCHES AND SWALES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Permit; Application; Fee
8-4-2: Public Liability Insurance; Bond
8-4-3: Inspections; Refund Of Bond
8-4-4: Installation Of Culvert Specifications
8-4-5: Ditches And Swales Installation Specification
8-4-6: Drainage Ditch Enclosure Specifications
8-4-7: Violations
8-4-8: Penalty
8-4-1: PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall hereafter construct, build, establish,
maintain or repair any culvert, ditch, swale or drainageway or change or cause
to be changed the existing elevation of real estate in the village which shall
interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct any street, right of way,
sidewalk, alley, ditch, culvert or drainageway on public or private property
without first obtaining a construction permit from the village authorizing the
work. Applications shall be submitted on forms supplied by the building
department of the village.
   B.   Applications: Applications for work/building permits on initial
installation of culverts and/or changes of existing elevations of real estate
in the village which shall interfere with, change the volume, rate of flow or
location of stormwater runoff, obstruct or tend to obstruct any street, right
of way, sidewalk, alley, ditch, culvert or driveway shall be made in writing
upon forms supplied by the building department of the village. Said application
shall contain the name and address of the contractor or person who is to
construct said driveway, culvert, ditch or swale and accompanying the
application there shall be a site development plan or construction plan drawn
or approved by a professional engineer, architect or land surveyor licensed by
the state showing:
      1.   Location of all existing and proposed buildings or structures on the
property.
      2.   Location of all existing and proposed streets, roadways, driveways,
easements and rights of way.
      3.   Location of all existing and proposed utilities such as sanitary
sewers, water mains and gas, telephone and electric lines.
      4.   Location of all existing and proposed drainage including sump pump
discharge to ditch or swale and gutter discharge to swale or ditch line from
and across the site location of intermittent and permanent springs, if any, and
culverts and other drainage structures.
      5.   Enough information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the site
to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect or
be affected by the proposed construction or development.
      6.   Name and address of the party preparing the plan along with
certification and seal attesting to its accuracy. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
   C.   Repair Or Replacement: Application for work/building permits for repair
or replacement of existing culverts shall be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the village. The application shall be accompanied by a drawing
suitable for review by the village. In the event repair or replacement is not
completed in compliance with the permit issued, the village may proceed to
complete the repair or replacement. The cost incurred by the village shall be
assessed to the owner and the village shall have the right to file a lien
against the owner's property for the cost thereof. At a minimum, existing
culverts that are replaced shall be replaced in kind; the downsizing of an
existing culvert that is replaced is not permitted.
   D.   Fee: Before any work is started, the constructor or permittee shall be
required to pay the village a permit and inspection fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for culverts that are replaced; provided, however, no permit fee is
required for repairing a culvert under an existing driveway. (Ord. 2009-801,
12-15-2009)
8-4-2: PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE; BOND:
   A.   Insurance: Before issuance of any such permit, the contractor or person
proposing to construct any such driveway, culvert, ditch, swale or drainageway
or change or cause to be changed the existing elevation of real estate in the
village which should interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct any street
right of way, sidewalk, alley, ditch, culvert or drainageway on public or
private property shall file with the village clerk, on a form acceptable to the
village, evidence that such contractor carries public liability and property
damage insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00),
naming the village harmless and its elective and appointive boards,
commissions, officers, agents and employees as additional insured to cover
claims which may arise out of performance of the work by the applicant. All
such bonds shall be continuing until terminated by notice in writing to the
village given thirty (30) days in advance. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
   B.   Bond: Before issuance of a permit, the applicant shall be required to
post a cash bond or other security with the village in a form satisfactory to
the village, such security to be to the benefit of the village. Such security
shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
determined cost of construction of the proposed improvement or improvements and
shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance of this chapter, the permit
issued and any plans accompanying the permit. In lieu thereof, the village, in
its sole discretion, may require a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) cash
security deposit for minor improvements. Said deposit shall be refunded
following inspection and approval of the improvement by the village. In cases
where an occupancy permit is required, the village may, in its sole discretion,
retain the security required by this subsection and withhold issuance of an
occupancy permit until inspection and approval of the project by the village.
No cash bond shall be required if a contractor has deposited a road and site
bond in accordance with subsection
 8-1-1A3 of this title. (Ord. 2004-663, 8-3-2004; amd. Ord. 2008-754, 6-3-2008)
8-4-3: INSPECTIONS; REFUND OF BOND:
   A.   Written Request: After all sections of this chapter have been fully
complied with and restoration completed, a request for inspection and refund of
bond money shall be made in writing on a form provided by the village.
Inspections shall be made by the village upon receipt of the written request.
The village engineer may be used for consultation on inspections made by the
village. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
   B.   Inspection Report: A written inspection report shall be furnished by
the village site inspector approving the installation or construction or an
itemization of the details if any portion of the construction is found to be
improper or unsatisfactory. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988; amd. 1996 Code)
   C.   Village Approval: If the building inspector or chairman of the road and
bridge committee of the village board approves the performance of the
construction, they shall forthwith submit in writing to the village clerk their
approval and direction to cause a refund of the cash bond.
   D.   Unsatisfactory Installations: Unsatisfactory installations shall be
corrected within thirty (30) days of any written notice from the village. If
unsatisfactory installations have not been corrected within thirty (30) days of
written notice, the board of trustees of the village may cause the replacement
or completion of unfinished or unsatisfactory work to be done and cause the
repair of any damage done to public property by the contractor in performance
of the work for which the permit was issued and such cost shall be deducted
from the cash bond or other security on deposit with the village and the
balance thereof shall be returned, upon application by the depositor, after
inspection and approval of the work by the village officers charged with such
duty. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
8-4-4: INSTALLATION OF CULVERT SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Elevation: Culverts shall be installed for each driveway crossing an
open existing or proposed ditch. The culvert pipe shall be laid with the invert
elevation thereof at the normal or proposed flow line of the ditch. (Ord. 88-
240, 2-8-1988)
   B.   Size: Culvert size shall be of the diameter specified by the village
but shall not be less than fifteen inches (15") internal diameter. (Ord. 88-
240, 2-8-1988; amd. per correspondence dated 7-19-2006)
   C.   Side Extensions: The culvert shall extend a minimum of four feet (4')
for each foot of depth on each side of the completed driveway and there shall
be adequate side slope between the edge of the driveway and the end of the
culvert pipe to prevent the entrance or obstruction of dirt or fill material.
This requirement may be waived in instances where a concrete, stone or wood
retaining wall is approved by the village.
   D.   Side Slope Protection: Culvert pipes shall be bedded in gravel. Where
the invert elevation of the culvert pipe is three feet (3') or more, the side
slope protection shall be of bituminous material or concrete. Pipe culverts
shall consist of the following materials: corrugated metal pipe or ductile iron
pipe.
   E.   Bent Or Damaged Ends: Bent or damaged ends of pipe culverts shall be
repaired, straightened or trimmed prior to the bond refund. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-
1988)
   F.   Exception: In situations where the driveway approach is reconstructed
and the installation of the new culvert to a village standard sized culvert may
be impracticable due to the existing slope, pitch, driveway height or other
considerations of the location in question, the village engineer may permit a
replacement culvert of a size less than what is required under this section if
and only if the integrity of the drainage ditch, the natural flow of water and
other safety considerations are not compromised in the absence of a culvert
that meets the specifications as specified in this section. (Ord. 2009-801, 12-
15-2009)
8-4-5: DITCHES AND SWALES INSTALLATION SPECIFICATION:
   A.   Installation: Installation of ditches and swales shall be in
conformance with the site development drawing. Bottoms and side slopes shall be
graded, seeded, sodded or any other approved means of erosion protection as
approved by the village.
   B.   Easements: When, in the opinion and sole discretion of the village, it
appears desirable that any rear, side or cross yard drainage ditches or swales
should be located within a public legal easement for said purpose, then such
easement shall be furnished by the owner in an easement document approved by
the village attorney.
   C.   Grading: All ditches and swales, whether located in private or public
property, shall be graded with due regard to the existing surrounding terrain
so as to follow its grade to permit the normal flow of water and to assure best
possible drainage. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the property to
remove all obstructions from a ditch located on owner's property or adjacent
public right of way and to keep the same at all times clean and free flowing.
   D.   Lien: In the event the owner of the property does not remove all
obstructions and debris from any ditches located on owner's property or
adjacent public right of way or keep it clean at all times and free flowing,
then the village shall have the right to clear said ditch and charge the owner
for the costs thereof. The village shall have the right to file a lien against
the property in the event the owner does not pay the costs incurred by the
village within thirty (30) days from the date the village sends the owner a
statement for the cost of said work. (Ord. 93-389, 12-7-1993)
8-4-6: DRAINAGE DITCH ENCLOSURE SPECIFICATIONS:
The enclosure of any open existing or proposed drainage ditch or swale shall be
in conformance with the site development drawing. The drainage enclosure pipe
and drainage structures shall be constructed in conformance with the following
specifications:
   A.   Drainage ditch enclosure shall only be permitted where the existing or
proposed ditch bottom is greater than twenty four inches (24") below the edge
of the pavement.
   B.   The pipe shall be constructed with the invert elevation thereof at the
normal or proposed flow line of the ditch or as recommended by the village.
   C.   Pipe size shall be of the diameter specified by the village but no less
than twelve inches (12") internal diameter.
   D.   Pipe shall be constructed of the following materials:
      1.   ABS sewer pipe or PVC sewer pipe ASTM D2751 (SDR35) or ASTM D3034
(SDR35). Drill holes at two foot (2') centers.
      2.   PVC underdrain pipe ASTM D2729 (SDR35).
   E.   The pipe shall be bedded in a three-fourths inch (3/4") washed gravel
(CA5) to a minimum thickness of four inches (4") on all sides.
   F.   The washed gravel bedding shall be encircled with an approved
geotechnical (soils) filter fabric.
   G.   A surface drainage swale shall be constructed over the proposed
enclosure pipe to allow for surface drainage water to flow away from the edge
of pavement unobstructed. The surface drainage shall be constructed a minimum
of five feet (5') away from and nine inches (9") below the edge of payment. The
swale shall be maintained in accordance with section
8-4-5 of this chapter.
   H.   A precast reinforced concrete inlet shall be constructed in accordance
with the following specifications:
      1.   The inlet shall be of the diameter specified by the village
engineer, but not less than two feet (2') internal diameter.
      2.   An inlet shall be constructed at all low points, changes in pipe
size and where designated by the village engineer.
      3.   All inlets shall have an "open grate" frame, type to be approved by
the village. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
   I.   All sump discharges are to be connected to the drainage enclosure pipe
unless otherwise directed by the village engineer. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988; amd.
1996 Code)
   J.   Drainage enclosure pipes installed or repaired pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be inspected by the village and any damaged or
obstructed pipes shall be repaired prior to covering with the washed gravel
bedding and geotechnical (soils) filter fabric. The village shall also conduct
an inspection of the completed project prior to bond refund. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-
1988)
8-4-7: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Hedges And Trees: Where any hedges or trees have been planted along the
margin of a highway, in the culvert or right of way, the village may contract
with the owner for their destruction and they shall be destroyed. The planting
of such hedges or trees hereafter on the margin of highway is declared to be a
public nuisance and in violation of this chapter. The cost incurred by the
village shall be assessed to the owner and the village shall have the right to
file a lien against owner's property for the cost thereof.
   B.   Inspection; Removal Of Obstructions: The village authorities shall,
from time to time, inspect the bridges and culverts on the public highways and
streets under their respective jurisdiction which span streams and watercourses
and shall remove driftwood and other materials accumulated within the right of
way at such structures which obstruct the free flow of either low or high
water.
   C.   Injury To Or Obstruction Of Public Right Of Way: It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person to injure or obstruct a public highway
right of way by placing or leaving any object or obstruction thereon, or
encroaching upon the same with any fence, or by plowing or digging any ditch or
other opening thereon, or by turning a current of water so as to saturate, wash
or damage the same, or by plowing in or across or on the slopes of the side
gutters or ditches, or by placing any material in such ditches, or in any way
interfering with the free flow of water therein or leaving the cuttings of any
hedge thereon. The placing of culverts or the change of drainage flow within
the public highway right of way shall be unlawful without first obtaining
written approval and a permit from the village building inspector.
   D.   Debris: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
deposit in or on the public right of way any weeds, trash, garbage, broken
bottles, glass or boards containing projecting nails or other debris.
   E.   Sewage: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm,
corporation or institution, public or private, to discharge or empty any type
of sewage, including the effluent from septic tanks or other sewage treatment
devices, or any other domestic, commercial or industrial waste, or any
putrescible liquids, or cause the same to be discharged or emptied in any
manner into open ditches along any public street or highway right of way, site
or cross yard drainage ditches or swales or into any drainage structure
installed for street or highway drainage purposes.
   F.   Signs, Billboards Or Advertising: It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to place or cause to be placed any sign or billboard or
any advertising of any kind of description upon or within any public highway or
street right of way within the corporate limits of the village, except as may
be required by 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., the Illinois
vehicle code 1  or of any other provision of this code. (Ord. 88-240, 2-8-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
8-4-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code)
CHAPTER 5
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Applicability
8-5-3: Improvements Required
8-5-4: Village Standards And Supervision
8-5-5: Guarantee
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
There are certain areas within the village where property does not have access
through a public street constructed to village standards. It is the intention
of this chapter to establish a procedure whereby all properties shall be served
by a public street improved to current village standards. It is further the
intent to ensure that the cost of construction of public streets be borne by
the benefited property owners, not by the village. (Ord. 2004-660, 6-1-2004)
8-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all property within the village of Wadsworth which is
dependent for access upon and abuts a dedicated street which has not been
installed, which is gravel, or which otherwise does not meet current village
standards. This chapter does not apply to property which is located within a
subdivision or planned unit development where the village has a sufficient
guarantee such as a letter of credit or other acceptable surety to ensure that
the public improvements, including the public streets, shall be completed in
accordance with village standards within the time frame established by this
code. (Ord. 2004-660, 6-1-2004)
8-5-3: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Adjacent To Paved Street: If the street which provides access to the
applicant's parcel is paved but not paved along the frontage of the applicant's
parcel, as a condition of issuance of a building permit for a single-family
residence or other principal structure, the permit applicant shall improve to
current village standards the street adjacent to the front side of his parcel,
as determined by the front of the proposed house or other principal structure
to be built on the parcel, for the entire length of the frontage of his parcel
to the closest paved portion of the street to thereby create a continuous paved
street surface up to and along said parcel.
   B.   Adjacent To Gravel Street: If the street which provides access to the
applicant's parcel is gravel but not gravel along the frontage of the
applicant's parcel, as a condition of issuance of a building permit for a
single-family residence or other principal structure, the permit applicant
shall improve to current village standards the street adjacent to the front
side of his parcel, as determined by the front of the proposed house or other
principal structure to be built on the parcel, for the entire length of the
frontage of his parcel to the closest gravel portion of the street to thereby
create a continuous gravel street surface up to and along said parcel.
   C.   Adjacent To Undeveloped Street: If the street which provides access to
the applicant's parcel has not been installed, or is not gravel, or is not
paved to village standards, and the street is not paved or gravel along the
frontage of the applicant's parcel, as a condition of issuance of a building
permit for a single-family residence or other principal structure, the permit
applicant shall improve to current village standards the street adjacent to the
front side of his parcel, as determined by the front of the proposed house or
other principal structure to be built on the parcel, for the entire length of
the frontage of his parcel to the closest street intersection to thereby create
a continuous gravel street surface up to and along said parcel. (Ord. 2004-660,
6-1-2004)
8-5-4: VILLAGE STANDARDS AND SUPERVISION:
Each street or portion thereof shall be constructed by the permit applicant to
village standards under the supervision of the village engineer and must be
approved by the village engineer prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the single-family residence or other principal structure. (Ord.
2004-660, 6-1-2004)
8-5-5: GUARANTEE:
At the time of building permit application, the applicant shall post a cash
bond or letter of credit in village approved format with the village equal to
one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of constructing
said street improvement, as determined by the village engineer, to guarantee
the completion of the improvement. Once the street is completed and accepted by
the village, the cash bond or letter of credit shall be returned to the
applicant. (Ord. 2004-660, 6-1-2004)
CHAPTER 6
MAILBOX REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Materials
8-6-2: Mailbox Construction/Post Installation
8-6-3: Address Labeling
8-6-4: Reparation
8-6-1: MATERIALS:
The mailbox should be a standard U.S. postal service approved type and securely
attached to the post. A treated wood four inch by four inch (4" x 4") post is
recommended, or a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") to a maximum of three
inch (3") diameter light gauge galvanized steel hollow pipe. Prior to
installation, property owner must call JULIE at least forty eight (48) hours
beforehand so underground utilities can be located. (Ord. 2007-721, 3-20-2007)
8-6-2: MAILBOX CONSTRUCTION/POST INSTALLATION:
Mailbox shall be mounted on a support structure and installed per the following
guidelines: The mailbox front shall be installed a minimum of eight inches (8")
and a maximum of ten inches (10") set back from the edge of the asphalt, gravel
or back of the curb. The height of the mailbox should be installed a minimum of
forty one inches (41") and a maximum of forty five inches (45") from the
asphalt, gravel or bottom of the curb to the bottom of the mailbox. (Ord. 2007-
721, 3-20-2007)
8-6-3: ADDRESS LABELING:
The residence address number should be installed with two inch (2") reflective
numbers on the side of the mailbox. Names are optional. (Ord. 2007-721, 3-20-
2007)
8-6-4: REPARATION:
The mailbox and/or support structure will not be repaired, replaced or
reimbursed except in the case of a properly maintained mailbox and support
structure that was damaged by the village's snow removal contractor. If damaged
by the snow removal contractor, the village will make an inspection. If a
mailbox is determined to be properly maintained, the village's snow plowing
contractor will repair, replace, or reimburse at a cost not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Nonconforming mailboxes and/or nonconforming mailbox
support structures previously in existence upon the effective date hereof,
which are damaged by direct contact by village's snow plowing contractor, shall
likewise be entitled to reparations for a cost not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2007-721, 3-20-2007)
TITLE 9
FLOOD CONTROL
Flood Hazard Areas   1
Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance   2
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Short Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Definitions
9-1-4: Provisions For Accomplishing The Purpose
9-1-5: Other Regulations
9-1-6: Source Of Information
9-1-7: Preventing Increased Damages
9-1-8: Protecting Buildings
9-1-9: Other Development Requirements
9-1-10: Development Permit
9-1-11: Variances
9-1-12: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
9-1-13: Disclosure Statement
9-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-1-15: Interpretation
9-1-16: Penalty
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the WADSWORTH FLOOD HAZARD
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
This Title is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village by
Illinois Compiled Statutes 1 , in order to accomplish the following purposes:
Mans' activities on flood plains are subject to periodic inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare. It is the purpose of
these regulations to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
restricting damageable potential elsewhere. More specifically, these flood
plain regulations have been established to:
   A.   Protect adjacent, upstream and downstream, private and public
landowners from increases in flood heights and velocities and resulting
increases in flood damages.
   B.   Minimize extraordinary direct and indirect costs to the Village and
other governmental units caused by developments within flood plains for streets
and other roadways, sewer and water, flood control works, flood relief and
emergency services.
   C.   Reduce public health and safety risks, prevent blighting and prevent
economic losses which detract from the general well-being and tax base of the
Village.
   D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
   E.   Prevent water pollution, nuisances resulting from floating structures
and debris.
   F.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the
Village.
   G.   Comply with the guidelines of the Regular National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP-24, CFR section 1909-1910) and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA 44, CFR section 59-60), as amended or revised. (Ord. 257, 7-11-
1988)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2 and 11-31-2.
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
BASE FLOOD: A flood magnitude with a one percent (1%) statistical chance of
being equalled or exceeded during any year; however, the occurrence of such an
event does not diminish the chance of its recurring again at any time.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home
or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated volume of storage within the
base flood area used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when
artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The
uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site
floodwater elevations and flows.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition
to a building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
   B.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   C.   Installing utilities, construction of roads or similar projects;
   D.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, bridges or culverts;
   E.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
   F.   Storage of materials; or
   G.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or velocity
of flood or surface waters.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities
such as reroofing; resurfacing roads or gardening, plowing and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of
levees.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A separate permit which is required by the provisions of
this Title for any development activity (as defined above) that is proposed in
a special flood hazard area.
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIA: Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOOD: A temporary increase in normal water level (surface water elevation)
that results in water inundating areas adjacent or near to the usual channel or
lake or the inundation of other depressional areas.
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION, REGULATORY: The elevation of the water level having a one
percent (1%) probability of being equalled or exceed in any given year, also
known as the 100-year flood elevation. The flood base elevation at any location
is as defined in Section
9-1-6 of this Chapter.
FLOOD FRINGE, REGULATORY: That portion of the regulatory flood plain which is
immediately adjacent to the floodway. Although this area is prone to flooding,
it is not used to transport flood water flows. The highest elevation of the
regulatory flood fringe is coterminous to the highest elevation of the flood
plain.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of the Village, issued or
approved by the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration, on which
the areas having special flood hazard have been drawn and designated as Zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the FIA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD PLAIN, REGULATORY: The continuous SFHA adjacent to a lake, stream or
stream bed, the elevation of which is greater than the normal water level
(surface water elevation) or pool elevation, but equal to or lower than the
flood base elevation. Natural depressions and storm water retention or
detention areas which periodically are inundated by storm water shall be
considered regulatory flood plain. Also, any land of higher elevation than the
flood base elevation, but having an area less than the minimum lot size
established for the zone in which it is located and surrounded by lands having
an elevation equal to or less than the flood base elevation shall be considered
flood plain. The flood plain comprises both the regulatory floodway and the
regulatory flood fringe.
FLOOD PROFILE GRAPHIC: A representation of the elevations of the water surface
of the 100-year flood along the water courses of the Village.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation of two feet (2') above the
regulatory flood base elevation which provides free-board protection against
ice jams, waves and debris in the event of periodic flooding.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the SFHA required to store and convey the base flood.
The floodway for the SFHAs of the Des Plaines River and Mill Creek shall be as
delineated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated August 4, 1980. The floodway for each of
the remaining SFHAs of the Village shall be according to the best data
available to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lateral boundaries of the floodway which
separate it from the flood fringes.
FLOODWAY, REGULATORY: That portion of the regulatory flood plain immediately
adjacent to a lake, stream or stream bed which conveys base flood water flows
when channel capacities are exceeded without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one-tenth of a foot (0.1'). Channel capacities are
exceeded when storm water results in a water elevation greater than the surface
water elevation.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries),
stream, creek or brook.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
Village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of the
Village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Village prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated August 4,
1980. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Lake County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into
the Village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for Lake County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
February 4, 1981.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, erected or placed which required location in
or on the ground or is attached to anything in or on the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
The term does not however, include either:
   C.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   D.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: That official or employee of the Village charged with the
administration of the Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of this Code, as
provided therein.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the
Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance, Title 10 of this Code, and as appointed by the
Village President pursuant to the regulations therein. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-4: PROVISIONS FOR ACCOMPLISHING THE PURPOSE:
All development proposals in the special flood hazard areas shall be reviewed
by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator's review is to ensure
that the use and development of and within a regulatory flood plain, comprising
both the regulatory floodway and the regulatory flood fringe, shall be allowed
in any zoning district subject to compliance with the following, as well as
with the other provisions of this Title and other applicable provisions of this
Code.
   A.   Regulatory Floodway: Nothing shall be constructed in a regulatory
floodway which results in increased flood heights or velocities, or causes
pollution, erosion, sedimentation, fire hazards, other hazards or nuisances.
Development or use of these low-lying lands is severely limited by these
regulations and is first subject to approval by the State of Illinois
Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, and the Village
Zoning Administrator. In no instance, however, shall development approval
negate the petitioner's responsibility to prevent the impediment of flood
water.
   B.   Regulatory Flood Fringe: The development or use of a flood fringe may
be allowed if in accordance with the provisions of these flood plain
regulations and other applicable codes and regulations. However, in no instance
shall a use be allowed which results in water pollution, increased threats of
fire or other nuisances, or threats to the public safety. Those structures, or
portions of structures, allowed in the flood fringe shall be required to be
floodproofed to a height of at least two feet (2') above the regulatory flood
base elevation, as it may be established, so as to prevent against the seepage
of water into said structures in the event of periodic flooding. Development or
use of the flood fringe must be authorized by both the State and the Village
Zoning Administrator. In some circumstances, other methods of flood plain
development which cause no significant increase in stage or velocity may be
allowed if supported by adequate engineering data as determined by the Zoning
Administrator. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-5: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Before starting any work regulated by this Title, an applicant shall comply
with the requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with respect to
the submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats,
improvement plans, building permits, zoning, inspections, appeals and similar
matters, along with those set forth in this Title and as may be required by
Federal and State laws, and the regulations of any department of the State of
Illinois (Illinois Division of Water Resources, Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, U.S. Corps of Engineers, etc.). (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-6: SOURCE OF INFORMATION:
The regulatory flood base elevation, the regulatory flood plain, the regulatory
floodway and the regulatory flood fringe as defined by this Title shall be
delineated by the following maps, which are on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator. These maps are listed below according to priority of use. Where
information is not available on one map, then the succeeding map shall be used.
Where conflict occurs among the maps, the highest regulatory flood base
elevation, the widest regulatory flood fringe shall be used for regulatory
purposes. In the event that no separate map designation exists for regulatory
floodways, then the regulatory flood plain shall also mean regulatory floodway,
and regulatory floodway regulations shall apply to the regulatory flood plain.
The maps to be used are as follows:
   A.   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the Village of Wadsworth," dated August 4, 1980, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps,
effective date February 4, 1981. For areas annexed to the Village since
publication of the Wadsworth Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the Lake County Flood
Insurance Rate Maps shall be used.
   B.   "Regulatory Floodplain Maps", Illinois Department of Transportation
(IDOT), Division of Water Resources in cooperation with the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA), Soil Conservation Service (SCS).
   C.   "Flood Hazard Boundary Map", United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   D.   "Hydrologic Investigations Atlas", United States Geological Survey
(USGS) in cooperation with the Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission
(NIPC).
   E.   "Floodplain Topographic Maps", USDA, SCS. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-7: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health and safety.
   A.   Within Floodways: Within the floodway identified on the Flood Boundary
Floodway Map, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection 2 below, no development shall be
allowed which acting in combination with existing or future similar works, will
cause any increase in the base flood elevation. The specific development
activities identified in subsection
9-1-7B2 shall be considered as meeting this requirement.
      2.   No increase in the base flood elevation may be permitted unless:
         a.   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the base flood elevation more than one foot (1') for the affected hydraulic
reach of the stream and will not increase flood damages or potential flood
damages;
         b.   A permit has been issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Division of Water Resource, as required in subsection
 9-1-7B1; and
         c.   For all projects involving channel modification or fill
(including levees) the Village shall submit sufficient data to the Federal
Management Agency to revise the regulatory flood data.
   B.   Within All Other Riverine Special Flood Hazard Areas: Within all other
riverine SFHAs, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   In addition to the other requirements of this Title a development
permit for a site located in a floodway (or in a riverine SFHA where no
floodway has been identified) shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from
the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, issued
pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
      2.   The following activities may be constructed subject to the issuance
of a development permit without the individual permit required in subsection 1,
above, in accordance with Statewide Permits issued by the Illinois Department
of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, provided the activities do not
involve placement of fill, change of grade or construction in the normal
channel. Such activities must still meet the other requirements of this Title:
         a.   The construction of underground utility lines not crossing a lake
or stream;
         b.   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;
         c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
         d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions and car ports;
         e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any dimension (e.g.
animal shelters and tool sheds); and
         f.   The construction of additions to existing buildings the sum of
which do not increase the first floor area as it existed on January 12, 1981,
by more than twenty percent (20%) which are located on the upstream or
downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the
sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of flood waters.
      3.   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the base flood elevation more than one foot (1') for the affected hydraulic
reach of the stream and will not increase flood damages or potential flood
damages.
   C.   Public Health Standards In All SFHAs:
      1.   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless such materials are
stored in a storage tank or floodproof building constructed according to the
requirements of subsection
 9-1-8B3.
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal
systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the FPE are watertight. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-8: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Below Flood Protection Elevation: In addition to the damage prevention
requirements of Section
 9-1-7, all buildings to be located in the special flood hazard area shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. These
building protection requirements apply to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of new buildings valued at more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   Improvements made to an existing building that increases the first
floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the market value of the
building by more than fifty percent (50%). (See subsection
9-1-7B2 of this Chapter.)
      3.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building that are valued
at or more than fifty percent (50%) of the value of the building before damage
occurred.
   B.   Protection Methods: This building protection requirement may be met by
any one of the following methods:
      1.   Permanent Landfills: Permanent landfills may be permitted as means
of providing safe construction sites, provided:
         a.   The landfill, except in exceptional circumstances, be contiguous
with the boundary of the regulatory flood plain and shaped, in plan, so as not
to create adverse velocities or current patterns.
         b.   The surface of the landfill is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
         c.   The channelward face of the fill shall be protected against
erosion. If protected by vegetative cover, slopes shall be no steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical (3:1). Steeper slopes shall be protected by
riprap. A vertical bulkhead may be used if adequately founded and protected
against scour.
         d.   Fill shall be of such material and so compacted to provide
adequate support under saturated conditions and shall be otherwise suitable for
the use intended.
         e.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
FPE. The fill should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the foundations of
the building before sloping below the FPE.
         f.   Adequate provision is made for conducting drainage across the
fill.
         g.   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the as- built
elevation of the lowest floor of the building.
      2.   Elevated Structures: Structures may be permitted provided:
         a.   The superstructure and its major access shall be raised above the
regulatory flood protection elevation by elevating members.
         b.   The structure and its intended use will not be damaged by the
regulatory flood.
         c.   The elevating members are designed to withstand saturated
conditions, hydrostatic pressure and to minimize scouring.
         d.   The size, shape, spacing and alignment of elevating members are
selected to minimize turbulence and deflection of current patterns.
         e.   Any supporting walls have permanent openings no more than one
foot (1') above grade to facilitate easy passage of ice and debris.
         f.   Superstructures and major access shall have low steel or low
concrete at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
         g.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and all
electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air- conditioning equipment and
utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPE.
         h.   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the as- built
elevation of the lowest floor.
      3.   Structural Floodproofing: Structural floodproofing will be permitted
only in special circumstances where other techniques for flood protection are
impossible or impractical. Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent
with the regulatory flood protection, elevation for the particular area, flood
velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces and
other factors associated with floodwater. The petitioner shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area. The following floodproofing
measures may be required (without limitation because of specific enumeration):
         a.   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
         b.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or
similar methods of construction.
         c.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
         d.   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
         e.   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
         f.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
         g.   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
         h.   Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface
drainage systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement
flood pressures.
         i.   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
         j.   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm
waters into the buildings or structures. Gravity draining of basements may be
eliminated by mechanical devices.
         k.   Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed
electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to
flooding and to provide protection from inundation by floodwater flows.
      4.   Nonresidential Building: A nonresidential building may be
floodproofed in accordance with the following:
         a.   A registered professional engineer shall certify that the
building has been designed so that below flood protection elevation the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into
account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice.
         b.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
         c.   The engineer's certification and a record of the as-built
elevation to which the building was floodproofed shall be maintained on file by
the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-9: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   A.   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any annexation agreement or
plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement
or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this Title. The Zoning
Administrator shall obtain the best available SFHA maps and data for the
unincorporated areas.
   B.   New subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall meet the
requirements of Sections
9-1-7 and
9-1-8 of this Chapter. Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit
developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered
professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
   C.   Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments
(PUDs) shall display the following flood data:
      1.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available "Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps";
      3.   Easements of lands dedicated to the Village for access for channel
maintenance purposes; and
      4.   The flood protection elevation for each building site. Where the
base flood elevation is not available from an existing study filed with the
Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating
the FPE and submitting it to the State Water Survey for review and approval as
best available elevation data.
   D.   Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the Village in
the special flood hazard area shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to
ensure that they comply with this Title. Except as exempted by law, no other
local government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit from the Zoning Administrator.
   E.   The Village Plan Commission shall take the following into consideration
when preparing or revising the Comprehensive Plan, community development
program, housing assistance plan and other land use or development programs:
      1.   Preserving special flood hazard area land for open space uses such
as parks, recreation areas, aesthetic natural area, etc.;
      2.   Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural gas storage
and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from locating in the
special flood hazard area;
      3.   Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings; and
      4.   Other flood hazard mitigation of floodplain management activities
that could help accomplish the purpose of this Title as outlined in Section
 9-1-2 of this Chapter.
   F.   The Zoning Administrator shall obtain and record the actual elevation
(in relation to USGS datum) of the lower habitable floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures in the SFHA and whether or not
the structure contains a basement. He shall also maintain for public inspection
all records pertaining to this Title. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 765 ILCS 205/2.
9-1-10: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person not exempted by State law shall commence any development in the
special flood hazard area as identified in Section
9-1-3 of this Chapter, without first obtaining a development permit from the
Zoning Administrator. A development permit shall be required in addition to any
other permit required by other provisions of this Code. No permit shall be
issued by the Zoning Administrator unless the requirements of this Title are
met.
   A.   Application: Applications for a development permit shall be made on the
form provided by the Village. The application shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions, and in those
parts of the site that are below base flood elevation shall show:
      1.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      2.   The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood flow;
      3.   The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities;
      4.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      5.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
buildings subject to the requirements of this Title; and
      6.   The location of any material storage facility.
   B.   Topographic Information: All topographic information shall be prepared
with a maximum contour interval of one foot (1') and is preferred on a one to
fifty (1:50) scale. This survey of topographic information shall be prepared
under supervision of and certified by a State licensed engineer or surveyor.
   C.   Additional Permits Required: The applicant for a development permit
shall be informed by the Zoning Administrator of any and all other local, State
and Federal permits that may be required before the applicant can obtain a
development permit.
   D.   Exception: If, upon examination of an application for a development
permit, it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the elevation of the
site is higher than the flood protection elevation, the development site is not
subject to the provisions of this Title, except as noted in the definition of
the Flood Plain, Regulatory. However, the bottom of any opening in the outer
wall, such as door sills, top of foundation, window well or any other openings
in the outer walls of a building or structure shall be at an elevation of not
less than the flood protection elevation unless such opening is surrounded by a
watertight area way, the top of which is at an elevation not less than flood
protection elevation. Requirements for flood insurance will still apply unless
the owner makes an appeal, as provided for in the Nation Flood Insurance
Program.
   E.   Official Elevations: Official elevations are the system of official
bench marks and elevations already established in the area by the U.S. Cost and
Geodetic Survey (first order level network) or the U.S. Geological Survey shall
hereafter be taken by engineers, surveyors, architects and contractors when
making topographical surveys and maps and when setting grades and elevations of
buildings, pavements, drainage facilities and other structures or works
publicly constructed or regulated by the Village.
   F.   Additional Information: Such other information as may be required by
the Zoning Administrator to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title
relating to flood plain regulations. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this Title place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Village
Board. The Village Board may attach such conditions to granting of a variance
as it deems necessary to further the intent of this Title.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
      6.   The provisions of Section
9-1-7 of this Chapter are met; and
      7.   The provisions of subsection
9-1-10C of this Chapter are met.
   B.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of Section
9-1-14 of this Chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
that may be as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Variances to the building protection requirements of Section
9-1-14 of this Chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair
or alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection
9-1-11A1 through A5 above. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this Title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasion or the flood height may be
increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This Title does not imply that areas outside the
regulatory flood plain or land uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This Title shall not create liability on the
part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this Title or any decision lawfully made
thereunder. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-13: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT:
A disclosure statement indicating that "the land in question is all or
partially designated" by the Village on a source of information specified in
its Flood Plain Ordinance, "as being in the flood plain and hence is vulnerable
to periodic flooding", must be provided by the seller to each potential
purchaser of property which appears as flood plain as indicated on a source of
information delineated in Section
9-1-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This Title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this Title and other
ordinances, easement, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 257, 7-
11-1988)
9-1-15: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this Title, the provisions expressed
herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes. (Ord. 257, 7-11-1988)
9-1-16: PENALTY:
The Zoning Administrator may determine, upon due investigation, that a
violation of the minimum standards of this Title exist and after such owner
fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct his property, the Village may make
application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring conformance with
this Title or make such other order as the Court sees necessary to secure
compliance with this Title. Any person who violates this Title shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
Title. Nothing herein shall prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
257, 7-11-1988; 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Stormwater Management Regulations
9-2-2: Penalty
9-2-1: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS:
The Lake County watershed development ordinance, as most recently amended by
the county of Lake on October 13, 2015, is hereby adopted by reference and is
in full force and effect within the village of Wadsworth and is found in its
own compilation. In the event that the rules, regulations, terms or conditions
imposed pursuant to the Lake County watershed development ordinance are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable rules, regulations, terms
or conditions imposed by any other applicable rule, regulation, resolution,
ordinance, statute or law, then the most restrictive rules, regulations, terms
or conditions shall govern. (Ord. 2015-972, 11-17-2015)
9-2-2: PENALTY:
Any violation of said provisions of the Lake County watershed development
ordinance of Lake County, Illinois, shall hereinafter be considered a violation
of this chapter. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation. A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day a violation
occurs or continues. "Person", for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean and
include any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
legal entity. (Ord. 2000-560, 10-17-2000; amd. Ord. 2006-685, 2-21-2006)
TITLE 10
ZONING
Title, Intent And Purpose   1
Definitions   2
General Regulations   3
District Regulations   4
Supplementary Regulations   5
Nonconforming Lots, Structures And Uses   6
Administration And Enforcement   7
Fees   8
Communication Towers   9
Gateway Economic Development Area   10
Adult Entertainment Establishments   11
Wind Energy Systems   12
Solar And Geothermal Energy Systems   13
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, INTENT AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the WADSWORTH ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To divide the Village into zoning districts, restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing
and other specified uses.
   B.   To provide a quality community environment developed in accordance with
the goals, objectives, ordinances, policies and recommendations of the Official
Plan of Wadsworth and the applicable ordinances of the Village. Specifically,
this Title is adopted to implement the Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
   C.   To protect the character and stability of agricultural, residential,
recreational, business and manufacturing areas within the Village and to
promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
   D.   To protect and provide for the orderly development of natural resources
including the resources of the air, lakes, streams, forests and the land.
   E.   To preserve a high quality natural environment, including surface and
subsurface water resources, their recharge areas, scenic vistas, woodlands and
wildlife habitat for the health and enjoyment of the people of the Village.
   F.   To ensure adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property.
   G.   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas and to determine the area
of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to ensure adequate light and air
and to protect the public health, comfort, safety and general welfare.
   H.   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas.
   I.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall
conform.
   J.   To prohibit uses, buildings, structures and vehicles incompatible with
the limitations of natural site conditions, the character of the development of
existing neighborhoods or intended uses within specific zoning districts.
   K.   To prevent additions, alterations or remodeling of existing buildings
and structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder.
   L.   To prevent congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
   M.   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
   N.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate, in the district by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them.
   O.   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Village.
   P.   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings
and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district.
   Q.   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided therein.
   R.   To provide for the intense development of the land in the Wastewater
Management Overlay District following a detailed review and approval process,
the issuance of a conditional use permit and the installation of sewer and
water utilities.
   S.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
general welfare of the people. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Application
10-2-2: Rules Of Construction
10-2-3: Definitions
10-2-4: Abbreviations
10-2-1: APPLICATION:
In the construction and interpretation of this Title, the rules and definitions
contained in this Chapter shall be observed and applied except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-2-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Tense: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and in the
plural the singular.
   B.   Person: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   C.   Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
   D.   Usage:
      1.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      2.   The word "may" is permissive.
      3.   The word "lot" shall mean a zoning lot, unless otherwise defined
herein.
      4.   The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
      5.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "intended for",
"designed for", "occupied for", "maintained for" and "arranged for".
      6.   The word "person" shall include the words "individual",
"corporation", "governmental agency", "trust", "estate", "partnership",
"association", "ventures", "joint ventures" or any other legal entity.
   E.   Measurements: All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the
nearest foot; if a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or less, the full number
next below shall be used. If a fraction is more than one-half foot (1/2'), the
next full number above shall be used.
   F.   Authority: Terms and words, unless otherwise defined herein, shall be
as defined in the "American Heritage Dictionary", Second College Edition
(Boston; Houghton Mifflin Company, 1982). (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
ACCESSORY USE: A structure or use of land which:
   A.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use
legally existing on the same zoning lot;
   B.   Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or
principal use;
   C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants,
business or industry of the principal structure or principal use served; and
   D.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or
principal use served.
ACRE: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water or both which is used or designed for the
landing or taking off of aircraft of any type including all runways whether
grass or paved, buildings or other structures whether or not such facilities
are public or are for private use only. A heliport when established as a
principal use shall be considered an airport.
ANTENNA: A commercial broadcast antenna shall mean the transmitting (base)
antenna of a commercial enterprise including but not limited to media,
communications firms, vehicle fleet operators and similar businesses. A private
broadcast antenna is a transmitting antenna operated by an individual operator
including but not limited to ham radio operators and citizen band operators.
Citizen band antennas shall be limited to sixteen feet (16') in height. A dish
antenna is a dish-shaped reviewing antenna as regulated by Section
8-3-1 of this Code. The requirements of Section
8-3-1 shall be applicable to dish antennas permitted by this Title.
APARTMENT: A dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit having an entrance
to a common hallway or common balcony.
ARCADE: A commercial enterprise providing coin-operated mechanical, electric,
electronic or computerized games of skill for the entertainment of patrons.
ASSEMBLY PLANT, HEAVY: An assembly plant which cannot meet the industrial
performance standards established for the Light Industrial District.
ASSEMBLY PLANT, LIGHT: An assembly plant which meets the performance standards
established for the Light Industrial District.
AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION: The average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
BAKERY, COMMERCIAL: A bakery where at least fifty percent (50%) of the baked
goods or other finished products are sold off the premises.
BAKERY, RETAIL:: A bakery where at least fifty percent (50%) of the baked goods
are sold on the premises at retail.
BANK: A bank includes automatic teller machines and drive-up facilities when
located on the same lot as the principal building.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building wholly or partly below the average ground
elevation. See Story.
BASE SITE AREA: That portion of a site that is available for development as
calculated pursuant to Section
10-5-3 of this Title.
BUILDABLE AREA OF A LOT: That portion of a lot bounded by the required front,
rear and side yards exclusive of any area which falls within a designated flood
plain or which is otherwise restricted from use by a drainage easement or other
easement or line established to protect natural resources or for other lawful
purposes.
BUILDING: Any structure built or maintained for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING LINE: A line on a lot, parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way
line at sufficient distance to provide the required yards, delimiting the area
in which structures are permitted subject to the provisions of this Title,
except as provided in Sections
 10-5-7,
10-5-8,
10-5-9,
10-5-11 and
10-5-13.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: See Building Line above.
CALIPER: A measurement of size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk
measured four inches (4") above natural grade for trees having calipers less
than or equal to six inches (6") diameter; and measured twelve inches (12")
above grade for tree calipers greater than six inches (6") diameter.
CAMP: Any land, including structures, used for assembly or temporary occupancy
by persons and providing outdoor recreational facilities in a naturalistic
setting.
CAMP, CHURCH: A camp operated by a religious institution or association for the
benefit of its members. A church camp may be either a youth camp or a day camp.
CAMP, COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL: A camp operated as a commercial enterprise.
CAMP, DAY: A camp not providing overnight accommodations.
CAMP, SCHOOL: A camp operated by an educational institution or association as
an adjunct to an educational program. A school camp may be either a day camp or
youth camp.
CAMP, YOUTH: A camp providing overnight camping facilities for groups of young
people such as YMCA camps, Boy Scout camps and Girl Scout camps.
CATALOG SALES, RETAIL: A retail commercial enterprise in which the products
sold are selected from a catalog or display and delivered from a warehouse
either on or off the premises.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any person licensed by the state of Illinois together with
all buildings or other facilities who receives or arranges for the care of more
than seven (7) children not including any state operated institution or any
public school or boarding school.
CHURCH OR OTHER PLACE OF WORSHIP: A building used for religious services
provided such use is the primary use of such building. A residence of any type
in which religious services are conducted shall not be considered a church for
purposes of this title.
CLUB, PRIVATE: An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests
or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes which are not
conducted primarily for gain; provided that any vending stands, merchandising
or commercial activities are conducted only as required generally for the
membership of such club.
CLUB, PRIVATE INDOOR: A private club whose primary services are to members and
whose membership activities are conducted in a building.
CONVENIENCE CENTER: A commercial enterprise of not more than three thousand
(3,000) square feet of floor area offering a wide range of convenience goods
including, but not limited to, food, groceries, gasoline, and automobile
products.
DEALER, NEW: A commercial enterprise dealing in new automobiles, trucks,
agricultural equipment, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and service,
repair and leasing.
DEALER, USED: A commercial enterprise dealing in used automobiles, trucks,
agricultural equipment, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and similar
items limited to sales only.
DENSITY, FACTOR: An intensity measure expressed as the number of units per net
buildable site area. It is the density of the buildable portion of a site.
DENSITY, GROSS: The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by
the base site area of a site.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): A measurement of the size of a tree equal to
the diameter of its trunk measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above natural
grade.
DISTRICT: See definition of Zone.
DRAINAGE: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means
necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of
flooding.
DRAINAGEWAY: A minor watercourse identified by the presence of an intermittent
or perennial stream or by the presence of the following seasonally saturated
soil types as identified by the Soil Survey: Houghton Much 103, Sawmill silty
clay loam 107, Pella silty clay loam 153, Ashkum silty clay loam 232, Peotone
silty clay loam 330 or Granby loamy fine sand 513; and also including any area
of less than one-quarter (1/4) acre which except for size meets the definition
of a wetland.
DRAINAGEWAY, FIRST ORDER: The land within ten feet (10') on either side of the
centerline of any intermittent or perennial stream which has no upstream
tributaries. These constitute the most upstream segments of any natural
drainage system.
DRAINAGEWAY, SECOND ORDER: The land within thirty feet (30') on either side of
the centerline of any intermittent or perennial stream which is formed by the
combination of two (2) or more first order drainageways.
DRAINAGEWAY, THIRD ORDER: The land within sixty five feet (65') on either side
of any intermittent or perennial stream formed by the combination of two (2) or
more second order drainageways.
DRIP LINE: The perimeter of the circular area surrounding the trunk of a tree
measured as one foot (1') of radius from the trunk for each one inch (1") of
diameter at breast height.
DRY CLEANER, RETAIL: A commercial dry cleaner wherein at least fifty percent
(50%) of the volume of cleaning is delivered to the customers on the premises
and at retail.
DWELLING: A building, exclusive of mobile homes, hotels or motels, containing
as the principal use one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, CARETAKERS: Includes dwelling unit, single-family dwelling or
apartment for either a caretaker or watchman of a principal use other than such
dwelling.
DWELLING GROUP: A building, exclusive of mobile homes, hotels or motels,
providing, as a minimum, living, sleeping and toilet facilities for more than
five (5) but not more than twenty (20) persons not comprising a family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms providing living quarters for an
individual, family or household.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind,
ice and/or gravity.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related to each other by blood, marriage or
legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of
not more than three (3) persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage or
legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a
single dwelling unit; in either case, exclusive of usual domestic servants.
FARM ANIMALS: Domestic livestock exclusive of equines. See also Stable,
Commercial and Stable, Private.
FLOOD PLAIN: Flood plains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas.
Riverine flood plains are those areas contiguous to a lake, pond, stream or
stream bed whose elevation is greater than the normal waterpool elevation but
equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation. Inland
depressional floodplains are floodplains not associated with a stream system to
which surrounding lands drain causing periodic inundation by stormwaters.
FLOODPLAIN, INLAND DEPRESSIONAL: A floodplain having no direct hydrologic
connections to a stream system but to which surrounding lands drain causing it
to be periodically inundated by stormwater.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories
enclosed and under roof measured from the exterior limits or faces of the
structure's walls. It does not include any floor space in an accessory building
or principal building which is designed for the parking of motor vehicles in
order to meet the parking requirements of this title.
FLOOR AREA FACTOR: An intensity measure expressed as the ratio derived by
dividing the total floor area of a building by the net buildable site area. It
is the floor area ratio measured on the buildable area of the site.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: An intensity measure as a ratio derived by dividing the total
floor area of a building or structure by the area of the zoning lot on which it
is located or for developments subject to the regulations of section
10-5-3 of this title, the ratio derived by dividing the total floor area of a
building or structure by the base site area.
GRADE: See definition of Average Ground Elevation.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE: The vertical distance as measured from grade to the top of
the highest roof beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of the highest gable
or slope of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity or accessory use conducted in a dwelling unit for
financial gain by a member of the household residing therein, which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes.
HORSE: See definitions of Farm Animals; Stable, Commercial; and Stable,
Private.
HOSPITAL, IMMEDIATE CARE: A hospital or a branch of a hospital specializing in
emergency services and other services not requiring overnight admission.
HOUSING, ELDERLY: Housing units of any type designed to accommodate the special
needs of elderly persons. Such housing shall be under the sponsorship or
operation of a governmental agency, a religious institution or other social
service agency.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Impervious surfaces are those which do not absorb water.
These include, but are not limited to, all buildings and paved parking areas,
driveways, roads, sidewalks and any other areas of concrete or asphalt.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: A measure of the intensity of land use which is
determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a site or,
in the case of nonresidential uses, base site area, or, in the case of
nonresidential uses, by net buildable area.
INDOOR ONLY: All aspects of the enterprise are conducted in a completely
enclosed building or structure including storage of materials and finished
products.
INDUSTRIAL USE: Includes, but is not limited to, manufacture, assembly,
cleaning, compounding, fabrication, mixing, packaging, processing, production,
repair, servicing, storage and testing of materials or products.
INDUSTRIAL USE, HEAVY: An industrial use which cannot meet the industrial
performance standards established for the light industrial district.
INDUSTRIAL USE, LIGHT: An industrial use which can meet the industrial
performance standards established for the light industrial district.
KENNEL: Any place in or at which any number of dogs, cats, or other household
pets are kept for the purpose of sale or in connection with boarding, care or
breeding, or where more than four (4) dogs over age four (4) months are kept
for any purpose.
KENNEL, BOARDING: Any use wherein dogs, cats or other household pets are
boarded either in open pens or within a building.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: An enterprise wherein dogs, cats or other household pets
are bred, raised, trained or boarded provided that more than three (3) such
animals are involved and provided a fee is charged.
LAKES AND PONDS: Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year
round. A lake is a body of water whose shoreline encompasses an area of two (2)
or more acres. A pond is a body of water of less than two (2) acres.
LAND PLANNER CONSULTANT: The Land Planner Consultant is hired on a project by
project basis.
LIBRARY, LENDING: A commercial enterprise which rents books, records, video
cassettes, compact discs, computer programs and similar items of media.
LOT: A single parcel or tract of land.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by a vertical projection of
the property lines of a lot excluding any street, easement for street purposes
or right of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) streets at their juncture, when the
interior angle formed is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: That portion of a lot expressed as a percentage which is occupied
by buildings and which is determined to be the quotient of the area enclosed by
extreme outside walls of all structures divided by the lot area.
LOT, FRONT OF: That part of an interior lot abutting the street or that part of
a corner lot extending across the narrowest part of the lot abutting the
street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, REAR OF: That part of a lot opposite the front of the lot.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land composed of one or more recorded lots, occupied
or to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or principal use or
uses, along with permitted accessory buildings or uses, meeting all the
requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setbacks and any
other requirements set forth in this Title.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Housing built on a chassis designed and constructed for
transportation to a site which has the running gear and towing hitch removed,
is equipped with permanent foundation base and foundation facia and has
permanently installed connections conforming to the Village Code.
MEDICAL LABORATORY: An establishment wherein medical tests, analysis, custom
fabrication of prosthetic devices and similar services are performed provided
the establishment is not used for the direct treatment of patients.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed or used for long-term residential occupancy
built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be attached by
which it may be moved upon a highway, whether or not such structure actually
has, at any given time, such wheels attached or is jacked-up or skirted, to be
used without a permanent foundation.
MUSIC STORE: A commercial enterprise involving as the principal use the sale of
sheet music, recorded music or musical instruments. A music store may include
as an accessory use the repair of musical instruments and the teaching of
musical skills.
NATURAL RESOURCES: Include all areas of lakes, ponds, shorelines, wetlands,
flood plains, drainageways, forests and steep slopes as herein defined.
NEWSPAPER: An enterprise involving as the principal use the editorial aspects
of the publishing of a newspaper on a regular basis.
NURSERY: A place where plants, trees and shrubs are propagated and grown for
use off-premises.
NURSERY CENTER: A facility for the sale at retail of nursery products, lawn and
garden supplies and landscape materials.
NURSERY SCHOOL: A nursery, school or other instructional facility for preschool
or kindergarten children that is not a part of an elementary school.
NURSING HOME: A building other than a hospital in which the residents or
patients receive either sheltered care or nursing care. Any medical treatment
facilities or services shall be accessory in nature.
OPEN SPACE: Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity and/or
buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot constituting the minimum lot area
of said lot not any part of an existing or future road or right of way be
counted as constituting open space.
OPEN SPACE RATIO: The proportionate part of a site consisting of open space
which shall be calculated using the base site area pursuant to the provisions
of Section
10-5-3 of this Title.
OWNER: The person or persons having the right of legal title or beneficial
interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot(s) or parcels(s) of land.
PARKING LOT, PRIVATE: A building, structure or suitably improved land area used
for the temporary storage of operable motor vehicles by the occupant,
employees, customers, tenants or owners of a principal use.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, group, agency or similar
association.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The main building or buildings on a lot or the building or
buildings which house the principal use of the premises.
PRINCIPAL USE: The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
RECORD STORE: A music store.
RECREATION CENTER: A building containing facilities for recreational
activities, games, sports, exercise or athletic activities which may include
only as an accessory use facilities for spectators to such activities.
RECREATION CENTER, PRIVATE: A recreation center operated by either a private or
a quasi-public organization for the benefit of its members.
RECREATION CENTER, PUBLIC: A recreation center operated as a commercial
enterprise and either open to the public or having a membership which is open
to the public.
RECREATION CENTER, PUBLIC: A recreation center operated by a public or quasi-
public body for the use of the general public.
RESTAURANT: A facility for the cooking or other preparation of food and
beverages for consumption on premises.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT: A restaurant which serves food for consumption either on
or off the premises. Drive through facilities may be included subject to the
regulations of this Title.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant which serves food to customers in their
automobiles.
SCHOOL: An institution or other organization, whose principal function is
education. A building or other enclosed space used principally for educational
purposes.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL: A school offering a specialized course of instruction for
profit or as a service to a civic, commercial, labor or industrial association
including trade school, business school, art school, music school, dance school
or other similar school.
SCHOOL, DAY: A school offering instruction to preschool age children on a
regular basis.
SCHOOL, NURSERY: A day school.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE: A school operated by a private association, church or other
nonpublic agency and offering essentially the same education program as a
public school.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC: A school operated by a public agency or board and offering a
state mandated program of instruction including elementary schools, middle
schools or high schools, and all similar such schools together with their
principal and accessory facilities.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: See Wastewater Treatment Plant.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of more than six (6) commercial establishments
planned, developed and managed as a unit, located on a zoning lot of at least
ten (10) acres with parking provided on the property.
SIGN: Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured
matter design to convey information visually and exposed to public view but not
including those devices located inside a building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the
premises where the sign is displayed.
SIGN AREA: The area in square feet within a perimeter of straight lines drawn
between and enclosing the extremities of the sign face or sign faces. Signs
with double faces need only be measured once, provided the faces are parallel
and are contained within the same perimeter.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold, offered or manufactured upon the
premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign supported by uprights or braces having a location in or
upon the ground.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign indicating the name and/or address of the occupant
of the building located upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
SOIL SURVEY: A publication entitled "Soil Survey Lake County, Illinois",
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, issued September, 1970.
SPECIAL FORM USE: Any relatively small, indoor, but intense form of agriculture
including but not limited to, greenhouse, mushroom barn, egg ranch or similar
use.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL: A building in which one or more equines are stabled, kept,
boarded, liveried or trained for hire.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A building housing equines and associated equipment. All
private stables shall conform to Lake County Health Department regulations. A
lot for a private stable shall contain at least two (2) acres for the first
equine and at least one additional acre for each additional equine. No equine
shall be stabled, boarded, kept or trained for hire.
STEEP SLOPES: Land area where the inclination of the land's surface from the
horizontal is fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
STORY: That portion of a building or structure included between the surface of
any floor and the floor or roof next above. A basement shall be counted as a
story if the floor next above it is more than five feet (5') above grade.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building or structure under only gable, hip or
gambrel roofs, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior
walls are not more than two feet (2') above the floor.
STREET: A place or way, however designated, for vehicular travel which affords
principal means of access to abutting property.
TANK FARM: One or more storage tanks located in the open.
TRUCK STOP: A commercial enterprise catering to the needs of truckers including
an overnight parking lot, fuel sales, repairs, automotive products and
accessories sales, restaurant, convenience center and motel facilities.
TRUCK TERMINAL: A facility for the handling of freight and the servicing of
trucks including offices, garages, transfer facilities, parking repair
facilities, truck wash, fuel storage or other enclosed storage.
TRUCK TERMINAL, HEAVY: A truck terminal serving over-the-road trucks including
both commercial fleets or private fleets.
TRUCK TERMINAL, LOCAL DELIVERY: A truck terminal serving local delivery trucks
only including both commercial and private fleets.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or any structure thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: A facility for the treatment (purification in part
or in total) of Wastewater including domestic sewage, industrial and commercial
wastewater, agricultural waste or other contaminated water; and which
discharges such water to a receiving water body or otherwise on the surface of
the earth. This definition does not include so- called zero-discharge systems,
land applications systems or soil absorption systems of waste water treatment.
WATER TREATMENT PLANT: A facility for the treatment of potable water for use by
the public including all associated wells, machinery, filter beds and on-site
storage facilities. This definition does not include private well and
associated machinery.
WETLAND: An area of one-quarter (1/4) acre or more where standing water is
retained periodically. Wetlands include all areas mapped as wetlands by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, designated as "marsh" in the Hydrologic
Investigations Atlas of the U.S. Geologic Survey and all areas designated as
"Peotone wet", "Houghton Muck wet", "Houghton peat, wet", and "Marsh" in the
Soil Survey.
WOODLAND, MATURE: An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers
an area of one acre or more at least fifty percent (50%) of which is composed
of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (dbh) of at least ten
inches (10"), or any grove consisting of eight (8) or more individual trees
having a dbh of at least twelve inches (12") whose combined canopies cover at
least fifty percent (50%) of the area encompassed by the grove; provided,
however, that no trees grown for commercial purposes shall be considered a
mature woodland.
WOODLAND, YOUNG: An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers
an area of one-half (1/2) acre or more and at least fifty percent (50%) of
which is composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height of at
least three inches (3"); provided, however, that no trees kept or grown for
commercial purposes shall be considered young woodland.
YARD: The open space between a lot line and a building in which no structure
may be located except as provided in sections
10-5-7,
10-5-8,
10-5-9,
10-5-11 and
10-5-13 of this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of the front of a zoning lot
between a street right of way line and the building setback line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of the rear of a zoning lot between
a rear lot line and a building line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard located on either side of a zoning lot extending from the
front yard to the rear yard between a building line and a lot line or street
right of way line in the case of a corner lot.
ZONE: An area of the village delimited on the zoning map and subject to a
specific set of regulations established in this title. Also referred to as a
district or zoning district herein. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 94-407,
10-4-1994; 1996 Code; Ord. 2014-924, 5-6-2014; Ord. 2024-1160, 10-1-2024)
10-2-4: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, initialisms and symbols used in the text, tables,
exhibits, forms and zoning map shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
A     Accessory use
AC    Acres
AG    Agricultural district
B     Business district
C     Conditional use
CR    Commercial recreation
CUP   Conditional use permit
dbh   Diameter at breast height
DU    Dwelling unit
DU/AC Dwelling unit per acre
FAR   Floor area ratio
FT    Feet or foot
HOD   Historic overlay district
LI    Light industrial district
LI-1  Light industrial district
LI-2  Light industrial district
OR    Office and research district
PL    Public land district
PUD   Planned unit development
SCOD  Scenic corridor overlay district
SD    Southeast district
SE    Suburban estate district
SF    Square feet or foot
SFD   Single-family dwelling
SR    Suburban residential district
STOR  Story
T     A temporary use
WMOD  Wastewater management overlay district
X     Use permitted by right
ZBA   Zoning board of appeals
 
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. 1996 Code; Ord. 97-476, 4-15-1997; Ord. 98-505, 7-
7-1998; Ord. 2004-651, 2-17-2004; Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Zoning Certificate Required
10-3-2: Scope Of Regulations
10-3-3: Exemptions
10-3-4: Establishment Of Districts
10-3-5: Zoning Maps
10-3-6: New Or Annexed Land
10-3-7: Principal Uses On A Zoning Lot
10-3-8: Buildings On A Zoning Lot
10-3-9: Division Of A Zoning Lot
10-3-10: Combining Lots Of Record
10-3-11: Access To Public Streets
10-3-1: ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Before any building or other structure or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered, and before
the use of any building, structure or land is changed within the Village, a
zoning certificate shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer 1 . (Ord. 91-341,
4-2-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-7-1A of this Title.
10-3-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
This Title shall apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses of land
within the Village. All structures and land uses constructed or commenced
hereafter and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in or relocations of
existing structures or uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to this Title.
Existing structures and uses which do not legally comply with the regulations
of this Title shall be allowed to continue subject to the provisions of Chapter
6 of this Title relating to legal nonconformances. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This Title shall not apply to the installation and use of public utility
facilities, which are local in nature, such as but not limited to poles, wires,
conduits, and vaults. However, any such facilities shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of the respective franchise ordinance and all other
Village Code provisions. This Title shall apply to any such facilities, which
are not strictly local in nature, such as but not limited to regional
transmission lines, regional trunk lines, or other such facilities. In
addition, this Title shall also apply to all above ground buildings, such as
but not limited to utility substations, lift stations, and well houses. Any
public utility facility, which is not exempt from this Title by virtue of this
Section, shall require a conditional use permit. (1996 Code)
10-3-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Title, the Village is
hereby divided into the following districts:
   A.   Residential Districts:
      1.   Purpose: The residential district regulations set forth are
established in order to achieve the intent and purpose of this Title,
generally, and the following specific purposes:
         a.   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive
odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, heat, glare, visual nuisances and other
objectionable factors.
         b.   To protect against undue congestion of public streets and other
public facilities by controlling density of population through regulations of
lots and the bulk of buildings.
         c.   To provide for ample light and air to buildings and the windows
thereof.
         d.   To provide for usable open space on the same zoning lot with the
building improvement; including such provisions as cluster development
procedures.
         e.   To protect those natural resources which are an asset to
residential areas.
         f.   To promote best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development, to protect the character of desirable development and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the village. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      2.   Residential Districts Established: The following residential
districts are established:
 
AG Agriculture
SE Suburban estate
SR Suburban residential
SD Southeast district
 
   (Ord. 97-476, 4-15-1997)
      3.   Boundaries:
         a.   Southeast District: The southeast district was created for the
areas which were largely developed prior to their annexation during the period
of 1997 through 2004 and is geographically limited to the area southerly of
Sharon Avenue, easterly of the Union Pacific Railroad right of way (south of
Wadsworth Road), easterly of Northwestern Avenue (north of Wadsworth Road),
westerly of Bayonne Avenue (south of Wadsworth Road), westerly of Belle Plaine
Avenue (north of Wadsworth Road) and northerly of Beach Road, as depicted on
the Wadsworth zoning map.
         b.   Southeast District: The area that was annexed in 2004 and 2005
that was previously platted and developed and is geographically limited to the
area southerly of 27th Street, easterly of Sunset Road, westerly of Bayonne
Avenue, and northerly of the lots on the south side of 29th Street, as depicted
on the Wadsworth zoning map. (Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
   B.   Business Districts:
      1.   Purpose: The business district regulations set forth herein are
established to achieve the intent and purpose of this title, generally, and the
following specific purposes:
         a.   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate
locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and
strengthening the economic base of the village.
         b.   To place in separate districts those businesses which may create
noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate heavy traffic in
accordance with the intent of the comprehensive plan.
         c.   To permit selected businesses of an outdoor recreational nature
to locate in districts in close proximity to large public outdoor recreation
facilities so that the facilities and services of each enhances the other and
to restrict intensive commercial activity to a complementary service or
accessory role.
         d.   To provide for the establishment of off street parking
facilities, permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and
so promote shopping convenience and business prosperity.
         e.   To provide for the further development and expansion of the
central business district and the redevelopment of surrounding areas with a
compatible mixture of residential and restricted business uses.
      2.   Business District Established: The following business districts are
established:
 
B  Business
CR Commercial recreation
 
   C.   Industrial Districts:
      1.   Purposes: The industrial districts set forth herein are established
to achieve the purpose and intent of this title, generally, and the following
specific objectives:
         a.   To protect established residential areas and the health of
families living therein by restricting those nearby industrial activities which
may create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire
hazards, excessive traffic and other objectionable influences.
         b.   To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for light
industrial uses and related activities so that the economic structure of the
community may be strengthened and that employment opportunities may be found in
the interest of public prosperity and welfare.
         c.   To provide space for manufacturing activities in locations
accessible to rail and highways so that movement of raw materials, finished
products and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a minimum danger
to public life and property.
         d.   To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict
obnoxious industrial activities while, at the same time, encourage and permit
the industrial activities which have adopted facilities for the processing of
finished products without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas.
         e.   To protect industrial districts from incompatible uses of land by
prohibiting the use of such space for new residential development thereby
preserving the land for a more appropriate use.
         f.   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well considered plan of land use for all of the village, to conserve the use of
property, to promote stability of industrial activities and related
development, and to protect the character and established development in each
area of the community, to enhance and stabilize the value of land and to
protect the tax base of the village. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      2.   Industrial Districts Established: The following industrial districts
are established:
 
OR   Office and research
LI   Light industrial
LI-1 Light industrial
LI-2 Light industrial 1  
 
   (Ord. 2004-651, 2-17-2004)
   D.   Public Land District:
      1.   Purpose: The public land district is established herein to achieve
the purposes and intent of the official comprehensive plan and of this title
generally and for the following specific purposes:
         a.   To clearly separate the zoning of large public open areas from
the zoning of adjacent private land so that the zoning of the public land does
not become an issue in the determination of the proper rezoning of private
land.
         b.   To better implement the comprehensive plan as it relates to the
open space holdings of other units of government.
      2.   Public Land District Established: The following public land district
is hereby established:
 
PL Public land
 
   E.   Overlay Districts:
      1.   Purpose: The overlay districts set forth herein are established to
achieve the purpose and intent of the official comprehensive plan and of this
title, generally, and for the following specific objectives:
         a.   To preserve the present rural landscape and appearance of the
village and surrounding areas as the village changes from a farming community
to a more balanced, mixed use suburban community.
         b.   To provide for the preservation of certain rural use areas of
historical significance to the Wadsworth community and the surrounding
unincorporated communities of Rosecrans and Russell.
         c.   To provide for the direct and orderly transition from farming and
other rural pursuits to technology based office and scientific research
activities.
         d.   To modify the type and character of uses permitted in the
underlying district(s) within the geographic boundaries of the overlay district
either by restricting the number and type of uses permitted or by allowing
additional uses.
         e.   To establish standards for new development and for the
preservation and protection of existing development and/or natural scenic
areas.
         f.   To establish procedures for the review and approval of
development proposals in accordance with the standards applicable in both the
zoning district and the overlay district. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      2.   Overlay Districts Established: The following overlay districts are
established:
 
SCOD Scenic corridor overlay district
HOD  Historic overlay district
WMOD Wastewater management overlay district
 
   (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. In the LI-2 district, the maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 0.8
  and the maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5.
10-3-5: ZONING MAPS:
There shall be two (2) zoning maps established for the village, i.e., the
zoning map and the overlay district map. The locations and boundaries of the
districts established herein are shown upon the zoning map which is hereby
incorporated in this title. The zoning map, together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto,
shall be a part of this title and shall have the same force and effect as if
the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information
shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein.
The locations, boundaries, and widths of overlay districts established above
are shown on the overlay district map which is hereby incorporated into this
title. The overlay district map, together with all notations, references and
other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto shall be a part of
this title and shall have the same force and effect as if the overlay district
map, together with all notations, references and other information shown
thereon were fully set forth and described herein.
   A.   Boundary Lines: Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of
any district as shown on the zoning maps incorporated herein, the following
rules shall apply:
      1.   Where the district boundary is indicated as following or
approximately following the municipal boundary it shall be considered as
following that boundary.
      2.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar rights of way, they shall be construed as following the
center lines thereof except that where such street lies along the Municipal
boundary, the district boundary shall be construed as following the Municipal
boundary.
      3.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following or as
approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
      4.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center
lines of streets, rivers or other flowing water courses shall be construed as
following the channel center line of such courses taken at mean low water, and
in the event of a natural change in the location of such streams, rivers or
other water courses the zone boundary shall be construed as moving with the
channel center line.
      5.   Where a lot (as distinguished from acreage) held in one ownership
and of record at the effective date of this Title is divided by a district
boundary line, the lot shall be construed as being in the district containing
the larger portion of the lot. If the Zoning Administrator cannot determine a
"larger" portion then the lot shall be construed as being in the more
restrictive district.
      6.   In unsubdivided property, unless otherwise indicated, the district
boundary line on the map accompanying and made a part of these regulations
shall be determined by the use of the scale contained on such maps.
   B.   Zoning Of Streets And Other Rights Of Way: All streets, alleys, public
ways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting
upon such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights of way. Where the
center line of a street, alley, public way or railroad right of way serves as a
district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up
to such center line which are shown to be within scenic corridors shall be the
center lines of such Scenic Corridor Overlay Districts.
   C.   Inspection Of Official Copy: An official copy of the zoning map shall
be maintained in the Village Hall. The official copy shall have posted thereon
all changes in the map authorized by action of the Board of Trustees within one
week of the effective date of such action. Such map shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours at the Village Hall.
   D.   Changes: If by amendment to the this Title, any zone boundary as shown
on the Official Zoning Map or any other matter shown thereon, is changed by the
action of the Village Board, such change shall be promptly indicated on the
Official Zoning Map by the Village, together with the date of passage of the
amendment and sufficient written description to give a precise understanding of
the change. Every change shall be certified by the Clerk.
   E.   Publication: Once each year the zoning map, together with all changes
which have occurred since the effective date of the last publication. shall be
published as provided by the statute. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-3-6: NEW OR ANNEXED LAND:
Land which may be annexed to the Village hereafter and which is not shown on
the zoning maps shall be classified as AG Agricultural District until such time
as the Village Board designates a different classification in accordance with
the provisions of this Title or shall be classified as one of the other
districts established above in accordance with an annexation agreement with the
Village following a public hearing as provided by law. Annexed land lying
within an overlay district as shown on the Overlay District Map shall be
subject to the regulations of the overlay district from the time of its
annexation. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-3-7: PRINCIPAL USES ON A ZONING LOT:
There shall be only one principal use (together with permitted accessory uses)
on a zoning lot except that in the LI, B, or OR Districts, multiple principal
uses may be permitted as a conditional use in a building or buildings designed
to house multiple principal uses, subject to the terms and conditions of the
conditional use permit. More than one zoning lot may be combined to create a
multiple principal use activity, such as a mall, pursuant to a conditional use
permit, subject to the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 94-411, 11-1-1994)
10-3-8: BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT:
   A.   Residential District: In any residential district, every principal
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a zoning
lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one such building
on one zoning lot. Accessory buildings and uses are only permitted on the same
zoning lot as the principal building or use to which they are accessory.
   B.   Districts Other Than Residential: In any district other than a
residential district, more than one principal building devoted to the same
principal use may be permitted on a zoning lot subject to the regulations for
conditional uses and following the issuance of a conditional use permit. All
principal buildings or uses within the B, CR, OR or LI Districts shall be of
conventional construction, including a concrete slab floor and concrete
foundation. Temporary or semipermanent buildings such as pole barns are
prohibited. Accessory buildings and uses are only permitted on the same zoning
lot as the principal buildings or use to which they are accessory.
   C.   LI, OR, Or B Districts: In the LI, OR, or B Districts, multiple
principal uses in multiple principal use buildings, may be permitted by
conditional use permit on a zoning lot or combinations of zoning lots developed
in such a fashion to be conducive to multiple uses, such as a regional mall,
subject to the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 94-
411, 11-1-1994)
10-3-9: DIVISION OF A ZONING LOT:
No zoning lot shall be divided or separated so that either the remaining lot or
any new lot or lots is a nonconforming lot or is a lot which as a result of
such division contains a nonconforming building or structure or a nonconforming
use. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-3-10: COMBINING LOTS OF RECORD:
Existing, contiguous nonconforming lots of record held in common ownership
shall be combined to form a conforming zoning lot or a more conforming lot.
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-3-11: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS:
Except, or as otherwise provided for in this Title in planned unit
developments, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or
parcel of land which abuts upon and has access to a public street. (Ord. 91-
341, 4-2-1991)
CHAPTER 4
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Uses Permitted In Zones
10-4-2: Lot Area, Yard And Bulk Regulations
10-4-3: Overlay District Regulations
10-4-4: Exhibit A, Table 1 Through Table 2-A
10-4-1: USES PERMITTED IN ZONES:
The uses permitted in the zoning districts established by this Title are shown
in Table 1, Use Permitted in Zones, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter. These tables shall be interpreted strictly and the use
list from one table shall not be applicable to the other except as provided by
the text of this Title. Where the applicable table or list is not clear in the
text the more restrictive shall apply.
   A.   Uses Permitted By Right: Uses permitted by right are indicated by an X
placed in the zoning district column opposite the use.
   B.   Conditional Uses: Uses permitted as conditional uses are indicated by a
"C" placed in the zoning district column opposite the use. Conditional uses are
only permitted subsequent to the issuance of a conditional use permit as
provided in Section
10-7-4 of this Title. A particular use may be a permitted use in one zoning
district
   C.   Temporary Uses: Temporary uses are indicated by a "T" placed in the
zoning district column opposite the use. Temporary uses are only permitted
subsequent to the issuance of a temporary use permit as provided in Section
10-7-2 of this Title.
   D.   Accessory Uses: Uses which are permitted in a district only when
accessory to a use permitted by right or to an approved conditional use are so
indicated by an "A" placed in the zoning district column opposite the use.
Accessory uses are also permitted in multiple use buildings. See definition in
Section
10-2-3 of this Title.
   E.   Definitions Of Other Uses: See Section
 10-2-3 of this Title. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-4-2: LOT AREA, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Area: Any principal use as shown in Column 2, together with all
accessory uses, shall be located on a lot having an area as shown in Column 3
of Table 2, Lot Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter, except that certain particular uses shall have a
minimum lot area as provided in Section
10-5-4, Standards for Certain Permitted Uses.
   B.   Lot Width: Any principal use together with all accessory uses shall be
located on a lot having a minimum width as shown in Column 4 or Table 2, Lot
Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter. The lot width shall be measured between the side lot
lines at the building line. For lots fronting on curvalinear streets the chord
measurement shall be used. For lots located on cul-de-sacs, the actual frontage
at the right-of-way line shall be not less than sixty feet (60').
   C.   Front Yard: Each lot shall have a front yard as shown on Column 5 of
Table 2, Lot Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter.
   D.   Rear Yard: Each lot shall have a rear yard as shown in Column 6 of
Table 2, Lot Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter.
   E.   Side Yards: Each lot shall have a side yard extending along the side
lot lines on opposite sides of the lot, the total width of which shall be not
less than as shown in Column 7 and no side yard shall be less than shown in
Column 8 of Table 2, Lot Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter.
   F.   Yard Abutting A Street: Any side or rear yard which abuts a street
shall have a width of not less than as shown in Column 9 or Table 2, Lot Area,
Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter.
   G.   Yard Abutting A Residential Zone: Any side or rear yard in any business
or industrial district which abuts a residential district shall have a width as
shown in Column 10 of Table 2, Lot Area, Yard and Bulk Regulations, Section
10-4-4 of this Chapter.
   H.   Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by any principal building
together with all accessory buildings shall not exceed the percent of the total
area of the lot as shown in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", column 11 of this
chapter.
   I.   Floor Area Ratio: The combined floor area ratio for any principal
building together with all accessory buildings shall not exceed the ratio shown
in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", column 12 of this
chapter.
   J.   Height Of Principal Use: No principal building or other structure shall
exceed the height in feet, nor the height in stories, as shown in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", columns 13 and 14 of
this chapter.
   K.   Height Of Accessory Use: No accessory building or other structure shall
exceed the height in feet, nor the height in stories, shown in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", columns 15 and 16 of
this chapter. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-4-3: OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Scenic Corridor Overlay District Regulations:
      1.   Intent: The scenic corridor overlay district is established to
preserve the scenic qualities of the village area in a period of transition
from a rural farming community to a low density, nonfarm residential community.
The vistas, open fields, wetlands and majestic stands of hardwood forest are
primary scenic resources which make Wadsworth a pleasant place to live. These
resources form the basis for both planning and zoning for low density, open
residential subdivisions. It is the intent of this section to preserve highly
visible portions of this scenic resource so that future development and future
residents can continue to enjoy the qualities which first attracted nonfarm
residents to the village and its environs.
      2.   Uses Permitted: Those uses permitted in the scenic corridor overlay
district shall be those uses as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter,
subject to the regulations established herein. Any existing use is a permitted
use in the SCOD provided such use was a legally established use and permitted
use in the underlying district on the effective date hereof.
      3.   Prohibited Construction: Except as noted below all buildings and
structures including at grade construction shall be excluded from the scenic
corridors.
      4.   Exceptions: The following uses and accessory uses are permitted in
scenic corridors subject to the landscape standards established herein:
         a.   Buildings and structures including existing accessory structures
existing on the effective date hereof.
         b.   Agricultural uses provided that no barns or other structures
shall be constructed within such scenic corridor.
         c.   Open uses as provided in section
10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter.
         d.   Entrances to subdivisions including identification signs subject
to the approval of the plan commission and village board of trustees.
         e.   Temporary real estate sales signs subject to the issuance of a
temporary use permit. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
         f.   Within the B (business) district, buildings, structures,
driveways, walks, lighting, parking lots, and signage; subject to applicable
setbacks, which are permitted within the B (business) district, are permitted
within the scenic corridor. (Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
      5.   Landscape Standards: All scenic corridor areas shall be landscaped
in accordance with the following standards:
         a.   All landscape improvements shall be undertaken only in accordance
with a landscape plan prepared by the owner, submitted to and approved by the
plan commission. In addition to the standards below, the plan shall conform to
the standards and requirements of Wadsworth landscape ordinance or other
suitable standards adopted by the village board.
            (1)   Landscape improvements shall be designed to blend in with the
existing landscape of the site and its immediate environs. Particular attention
shall be paid to natural areas and to farms, wetlands and other open areas.
Landscape features shall be designed to preserve and enhance such features.
            (2)   All screening shall be of a "naturalistic" design. (Ord. 91-
341, 4-2-1991)
            (3)   All built features such as signs, entrance details and
fencing shall reflect either a rural or farmlike character in keeping with the
intent of the scenic corridor. Further, any ground sign as permitted by section
10-5-8 of this title and located within twenty feet (20') of the scenic
corridor shall have the area surrounding such sign for a distance of twenty
feet (20') in all direction landscaped in a manner which blends in with the
landscaping of the adjacent scenic corridor area. The purpose of such
landscaping shall be to screen the sign supports and to improve the
compatibility of the sign with the scenic corridor by lessening to every degree
possible the visual impact of the sign. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 94-
406, 9-20-1994)
         b.   Forested areas shall be protected and preserved. Any trees cut
during construction or in the establishment of a permitted use shall be
replaced as follows:
            (1)   Trees greater than ten inch (10") dbh shall be replaced with
two (2) trees at least three inch (3") caliper.
            (2)   Trees from six inch (6") to ten inch (10") dbh shall be
replaced with one and one-half (11/2) trees of at least three inch (3")
caliper.
            (3)   Trees smaller than six inch (6") dbh but larger than three
inch (3") dbh shall be replaced with one tree of at least three inch (3")
caliper.
            (4)   Replacement trees shall be of the same species as those
removed or of another suitable species indigenous to the immediate area.
Deciduous trees shall be replaced with deciduous trees and evergreen trees
shall be replaced with a suitable species of evergreens. All replacement trees
shall be guaranteed for one year.
         c.   Old fields may be left undisturbed or if disturbance is
unavoidable restored to their original (before development) condition.
         d.   Nurseries, orchards, tree farms, farm fields and pastures may be
continued in use for the same or similar farming or horticultural purposes.
         e.   The yards of existing homes and farmstead lying within scenic
corridors may be continued as yards and appropriately landscaped provided that
incompatible uses or landscape features are not introduced into the scenic
corridor area.
      6.   Alternative Design: The plan commission and village board may
approve an alternative design for the size, location and landscaping of a
scenic corridor as follows:
         a.   As part of a planned unit development provided that:
            (1)   No existing natural feature is destroyed.
            (2)   The amount of land area devoted to scenic corridor purposes
is not diminished.
         b.   In a business district, in accordance with standards to the
Wadsworth landscape ordinance or other suitable standard adopted by the village
board.
   B.   Historic Overlay District Regulations:
      1.   Intent: The historic overlay district is created to protect the
character and appearance of the older part of the community. New development
within the Wadsworth historic overlay district as shown on the overlay district
zoning map is required to conform to the appearance, scale and arrangement of
buildings presently found in the area. While existing residential uses are
permitted, it is expected that new development will be of a more commercial
character and that the Wadsworth historic overlay district will become a
community center for the larger village community.
      2.   Uses Permitted: The only uses permitted by right in the historic
overlay district are existing uses. In addition, any other use otherwise
permitted in the underlying zone and certain commercial uses listed in section
10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter, are
permitted uses requiring site plan review. See subsection
10-5-4A of this title.
      3.   Existing Structure Regulations: Existing uses may be enlarged,
repaired, maintained or converted to a permitted alternative use provided that
the character and appearance of the existing structure is maintained.
      4.   New And Replacement Structure Regulations: The replacement of
existing structures and the construction of new structures shall be undertaken
only in accordance with a plan, including a site plan as provided in subsection
10-5-4A of this title, submitted to and approved by the village board. In
addition to the standards below such plan shall conform to the Wadsworth
appearance ordinance and Wadsworth landscape ordinance or other suitable
standards adopted by the village board.
         a.   All structures herein, shall be designed to blend in with
existing structures and shall have an appearance which corresponds to existing
structures in the historic overlay district or to other structures typifying
structures built at that time. Exterior materials used, architectural form
(roof pitch, number of stories, fenestration and architectural detailing) and
arrangement shall provide the basis for achieving a suitable correspondence.
         b.   The scale of structures shall also conform to the existing
historic overlay district. No structure which replaces an existing structure
shall have a floor area exceeding that of the original structure by a factor of
more than two (2). No new structure shall exceed the size of the largest
structure in the historic overlay district by a factor of more than half (1.5).
      5.   Lot, Yard And Bulk Regulations: The following standards shall apply
to existing lots and parcels in the Wadsworth historic overlay district.
         a.   No lot shall be regarded as a nonconforming lot and no use shall
be regarded as a nonconforming use in the historic overlay district solely
because of lot size regulations provided that additional lot area or other
adjoining area may be required to correct deficiencies in septic systems or to
provide additional parking in conjunction with the change of an existing use to
new use.
         b.   Front yard setback lines shall be either the front setback line
of the existing building or the setback line of the adjoining building with the
least setback. In no case shall a new building be permitted to set back farther
than the buildings on either side of the lot on which it is located.
         c.   All lots shall conform to the existing side and rear lot setback
requirements of the district in which they are located.
         d.   All lots shall conform to the height regulations of the district
in which they are located.
         e.   Within the historic overlay district the floor area ratio or lot
coverage regulations shall not be applicable.
         f.   Within the historic overlay district the site capacity
regulations shall not be applicable.
         g.   The applicable requirements of the Lake County health department
and Lake County department of transportation shall apply. (Ord. 341, 4-2-1991)
      6.   Historic Overlay District Boundaries: The boundaries of the historic
overlay district shall be as set forth on the historic overlay district map
dated March 1, 1993, section
10-4-4, exhibit A, of this chapter, and such subsequent amendments as the
village board may from time to time approve. (Ord. 405, 9-20-1994)
   C.   Reserved. (Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
   D.   Wastewater Management Overlay District Regulations:
      1.   Intent: The wastewater management review district is established to
promote office, research corporate park and related commercial uses through the
private development of a unified wastewater treatment system in the area
adjoining the Illinois Tollway in the vicinity of Route 173. Based on the
establishment of such facilities the district regulations provide for more
intensive use of land. It is not the intent of this overlay district to
establish residential neighborhood of greater density or intensity of use than
would otherwise be permitted by the underlying district regulations.
      2.   Uses Permitted: The uses permitted in the wastewater management
overlay district are those uses as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter,
subject to the following regulations.
      3.   Lot, Yard And Bulk Regulations:
         a.   For uses served by conventional septic disposal systems the lot,
yard and bulk regulations shall be the same as shown for the district in which
the use is located as shown in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", of this chapter.
         b.   For uses served by an approved alternative wastewater treatment
system the lot, yard and bulk regulations shown in section
10-4-4, table 2-A, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations In The Wastewater
Management Overlay District", of this chapter shall apply.
      4.   Alternative Wastewater Treatment Systems: Alternative technologies
including, but not limited to, spray irrigation systems, mechanical systems,
zero discharge systems or combinations of such systems may be approved. Such
system shall first be approved by the appropriate agency of the state of
Illinois, the Lake County health department or the Lake County public works
department in conformance with jurisdiction of each.
      5.   Design Requirement: In addition to meeting the technical
requirements of the reviewing agencies above, alternative systems in the
wastewater management overlay district shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   Individual systems serving single uses shall be capable of being
integrated into a districtwide system or shall be capable of expansion to serve
the needs of the district or a larger service area within the district.
         b.   The design of the system shall include plans or programs for
operation and management of the facility consistent with the overall objective
of establishing a unified system.
         c.   Alternative wastewater treatment systems designed to serve more
than a single user shall only be approved in conjunction with a potable water
system designed to serve the same area.
         d.   In addition to the approvals required above, an alternative
system shall also be approved by the village engineer.
      6.   Service Area: The village, at its discretion, may require the
establishment of a separate utility service area to provide for the
establishment, operation and maintenance of water and wastewater treatment
facilities within the wastewater management overlay district.
   E.   Interpretation Of Table: The uses permitted in the overlay district
portion of zones are shown in section
 10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter, as
follows:
      1.   The uses permitted in the overlay district portion of an underlying
zone shall be as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1-A, "Uses Permitted In Overlay Districts", of this chapter,
under the heading of the overlay district. Other uses as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1 of this chapter are excluded from the overlay district portion
of the underlying zone.
      2.   The further interpretation of section
10-4-4, table 1-A of this chapter shall be the same as provided for section
10-4-4, table 1 of this chapter. See section
10-4-1, "Uses Permitted In Zones", of this chapter. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-4-4: EXHIBIT A, TABLE 1 THROUGH TABLE 2-A:
   EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1202.png]
 
(Ord. 95-418, 3-21-1995; amd. 1996 Code)
TABLE 1. USES PERMITTED IN ZONES
AG SE SR SD Use B CR OR LI LI-1 LI-2 PL
AG SE SR SD Use                                         B CR OR LI LI-1 LI-2 PL
        Accountant's office                         X   X             
        Adult entertainment establishments                 C1        
        Advertising agency                          X   X             
        Agricultural implement dealer, new               X      X     
        Agricultural implement dealer, used              X      X     
A  A  A  C  Agricultural use with farm animals                          
X  C  C  C  Agricultural use without farm animals       X X  X  X  X    X    X
C        Airport                                                     
        Ambulance garage                            X     X  X    X     
        Animal hospital, indoor only                X     X  X    X     
        Antenna, commercial broadcast               C C  C  C  C    C     
C  C  C  C  Antenna, private broadcast                                  
A  A  A  A  Antenna, satellite receiving dish           X X  X  X  X    X    X
        Antique shop                                X                
        Apartment, owner or caretaker               C                
X        Apiary                                      C                
        Appliance store, household                  X                
        Arboretum                                                  X
        Arcade (game room)                          C A               
        Art gallery, retail sales                   X                
        Art supply store                            X                
        Artist's studio                             X   X  X  X    X     
        Asphalt plant                                    C           
        Assembly plant, heavy                            C      C     
        Assembly plant, light                            X  C    X     
        Assembly plant, medium                           X      X     
C        Auction house                               C                
        Automat, vending machines                   A A  A  A  A    A    A
        Automobile accessory store                  X     C  C    C     
        Automobile auction                          C     C  C    C     
        Automobile body shop                        C     C  C    C     
        Automobile dealer, new                      C     C  C    C     
        Automobile dealer, used                     C     C  C    C     
        Automobile laundry (car wash)               C     C  C    C     
        Automobile parts store                      X     C  C    C     
        Automobile service station                  X     C  C    C     
        Automobile wrecking yard (junkyard)         C     C           
        Bait shop                                   X X               
        Bakery, commercial                          C     X  X    X     
        Bakery, retail                              X                
        Bank                                        X X  X  X  X    X     
        Bank, automatic teller machine              X X  A  X  X    X     
        Bank, drive-in facility                     X X  A  X  X    X     
C        Banquet facility                                            
        Barbershop                                  X   A             
        Beauty shop                                 X   A             
        Bicycle shop                                X X               
        Billiard parlor                             C                
        Blacksmith                                  X   X             
        Blueprinting shop                           X   A  X  X    X     
        Boat building                               X     X  X    X     
        Boat dealer, new                            C     X  X    X     
        Boat storage yard                                X  X    X     
        Bookstore                                   X   A             
        Botanical garden                             X    X  X    X     
        Bowling alley                               X                
        Building materials dealer                   C     X      X     
        Building materials dealer and installer,    X     X  X    X     
            indoor only
        Bus station                                 C                
        Business machine store                      X     X      X     
        Business office                             X   X  X  X    X     
C        Camp                                         X               
C        Camp, church                                 X               
C        Camp, commercial                             X               
C  C  C  C  Camp, day                                    X               
C        Camp, school                                 X               
C        Camp, youth                                  X               
        Candy store                                 X   A             
        Cannabis Craft Grower7                      C   C  C  C    C     
        Cannabis Cultivation Center7                C C  C  C  C    C     
        Cannabis Dispensary7                        C   C  C  C    C     
        Cannabis Infuser7                           C C  C  C  C    C     
        Cannabis Processor7                         C C  C  C  C    C     
        Cannabis Transporter7                       C C  C  C  C    C     
        Car wash (automobile laundry)               C     C  C    C     
T  T  T  T  Carnival                                    T T  T  T          T
        Carpet store, excluding cleaning plant      X                
        Catalog sales, mail order only                 X  X  X         
        Catalog sales, retail                       X                
        Cellular tower                                         C     
C        Cemetery                                                    
C  C  C  C  Childcare facility                          C   C  C  X    X     
T        Christmas tree sales                        T T  T  T           
C  C  C  C  Church or other place of worship                   X         
T        Circus                                      T T  T  T      T     
        Clothing store                              X                
        Club, private                               C C    C      C     
        Club, private indoor                        C A  A  C  C    C     
C  C  C  C  College or university                       C C  C  C  C    C    C
C        Columbarium                                                 
        Community center, private                   C A      X    X     
        Community center, public                    C A      X    X    X
        Computer store                              X   A             
X  X  X  X  Conservation area (natural area)                            
C        Contractor's equipment                           X           
        Contractor's office including materials and C     C  C    C     
            equipment storage
T  T  T  T  Contractor's office, temporary              T T  T  T  T    T    T
        Contractor's storage yard                        C  C    C     
        Convenience center                          X                
C  C    C  Convent                                                     
C  C  C  C  Country club (golf course)                   X  A             
        Credit union                                X   X  X  X    X     
        Currency exchange                           X   A  X  X    X     
        Dance hall                                  C A               
        Data processing office                      X   X    X    X     
C  C  C  C  Daycare center (childcare facility)         C   C  C  X    X     
        Delicatessen, including restaurant          X A  A             
        Department store, 10,000 square feet or     C                
            more
        Department store, under 10,000 square feet  X                
        Detective agency                            X   A             
        Dressmaker                                  X                
        Drugstore                                   X                
        Dry cleaner, plant only                          X      X     
        Dry cleaner, retail                         X                
A        Dwelling, caretaker's                       A A  A  A  A    A    A
X  X  X  X  Dwelling, single-family                                     
        Electrical power plant, fossil fuel              C           
        Employment agency                           X   X             
        Exterminating contractor                         X  X    X     
C        Extraction of earth products (mining)       C C  C  C      C     
        Fabric store, sewing center                 C                
        Farm supply store                           C                
        Feed and grain sales                        X                
C        Feedlot                                                     
C        Fire station                                X X  X  X  X    X    X
        Fish market                                 X                
        Florist                                     X   A             
        Food catering shop                          X   A             
        Food processing and packing                      X           
        Forest preserve                             C               X
        Furniture repair (upholstery)               X       X    X     
        Furniture store, new                        X                
        Furniture store, used                       X                
T  T  T  T  Garage sale                                                 
C        Garden store (nursery store)                C       X    X     
C        Gift shop                                   X A               
        Golf course, commercial                     X X  A  X      X     
        Golf driving range, commercial               X               
        Golf driving range, indoor                   X      X    X     
        Golf, miniature                             C X               
C      C  Government building, other                  X   X  X  X    X    X
C      C  Government office building                  X               X
A        Greenhouse, nonretail                                       
C        Greenhouse, retail                          X     X  X    X     
        Grocery store, less than 10,000 square feet X                
        Grocery store, 10,000 square feet or more   C                
        Hardware store                              X                
        Health club (commercial recreation center)  X A  A    X    X     
        Hearing aid sales                           X                
X  X  X  X  Historic site (landmark)                                    
        Hobby shop                                  X       X    X     
C  C  C  C  Home occupation2                                            
        Hospital                                    C   C  C           
        Hospital, communicable disease              C   C  C           
        Hospital, general                           C   C  C      C     
        Hospital, psychiatric                       C   C  C      C     
        Hospital, specialized                       C   C  C      C    C
        Hotel                                       C   X             
T  T  T  T  House sale, yard sale                                       
        Housing, elderly, congregate care           C   C  C  C    C     
        Ice cream shop                              X A  A    X    X     
        Ice skating rink                            X A              X
        Ice skating rink (indoor)                   X A      X    X    X
        Industrial park                                    C    C     
        Industrial use, heavy                            C      C     
        Industrial use, light                          C  X  C    X     
        Industrial use, medium                           X      X     
        Insurance agency                            X   X             
        Interior decorator                          X   A  X  X    X     
        Jewelry store                               X                
        Kennel, boarding                                            
        Kennel, commercial                                          
        Laboratory, chemical testing                   X  X  X    X     
        Laboratory, product testing                    X  X  X    X     
        Laboratory, research                           X  X  X    X     
X  X  X  X  Landmark (historic site)                                    
C        Landscape architecture                      C     C  C    C     
        Landscape materials sales yard              C     X  C    X     
        Laundromat, coin operated                   X A               
        Leather goods store                         X                
        Library, lending                            X                
        Library, public                             X                
        Liquor store, packaged goods only           X A               
C        Live entertainment                                          
        Locksmith                                   X       X    X     
        Luggage store                               X                
        Manufacturing plant, heavy                       C      C     
        Manufacturing plant, light                     C  X  C    X     
        Manufacturing plant, medium                      C      C     
C        Mausoleum                                                   
        Meat market                                 X                
        Medical cannabis cultivation center4        C C  C  C  C    C     
        Medical cannabis dispensaries5              C   C  C  C    C     
        Medical laboratory                          X   X  X  X    X     
        Mobile home dealer, new                     C                
T  T  T  T  Model home, including sales office                          
C  C    C  Monastery                                                   
        Monument works                                   C  C    C     
        Mortgage banking office                     X   X             
        Motel                                       C   X             
        Motorcycle dealer, new                      C                
        Municipal buildings and structures               X  X    X    X
C        Museum                                      X A  A            X
        Music store                                 X                
        Newspaper                                   X   X  X      X     
        Newsstand or shop                           X   A  X      X     
X        Nursery                                                     
C        Nursery center (garden center)              C       X    X     
C        Nursery, retail                             C       X    X     
        Nursing home, skilled care                  X   C  C  C    C     
        Office building or corporate offices        X   X  X  X    X     
        Office, professional medical                X   X  X  X    X     
        Office, professional other than medical     X   X  X  X    X     
        Office supply store                         X   A             
        Offices, administrative                        X  X  X    X     
        On-Premises Cannabis Consumption                            
            Establishment
        Optical equipment sales                     X   A             
        Optician's office or store                  X   X  X      X     
        Paint store                                 X                
  C  C  C  Park                                         X              X
        Parking lot, commercial                     C   A  X      X     
C        Parking lot, private                        X A  A  X      X     
        Pawnshop                                    X                
        Personal loan office                        X   A  X      X     
        Pet shop                                    X                
        Photocopy shop                              X   A  X  X    X     
        Photographic processing laboratory          X   X  X  X    X     
        Photographic studio                         X   A  X  X    X     
        Photography shop                            X   A  X  X    X     
        Picture framing, retail                     X                
C  C  C  C  Planned unit development                    C C  C  C  C    C     
        Playground                                  A A               
A  A  A  A  Pole barn/post frame construction6                          
C        Police station                              X   X  X  X    X    X
        Post office                                 X   X  X  X    X    X
        Print shop, commercial printing                X  X  X    X     
        Print shop, instant printing                X   A  X  X    X     
            Public and private utilities and all
C  C  C  C  aboveground public or private utility       C C  C  C  C    C    C
            buildings3
        Publisher, editorial office only            X   X             
C  C  C  C  Pumping station                             C C  C  C  C    C    C
        Radio and television service and repair     X       X    X     
        Radio, television or hi-fi store            X                
        Ready mix plant                                  X           
        Real estate office                          X   X             
T  T  T  T  Real estate sales office, temporary         T T  T  T  T    T    T
        Record store                                X                
        Recreation center, commercial (health club) X A  A  X  X    X     
C        Recreation center, private                  X A    X  X    X     
C        Recreation center, public                   X A    X  X    X     
            Recreational vehicles and/or recreational
        trailers (motorized and nonmotorized)       C                
            retail sales and incidental storage
        Religious reading room                      X                
        Restaurant                                  X C  C  C  C    C     
        Restaurant, carryout                        X C  C             
        Restaurant, drive-in                        X C  C             
        Restaurant, with liquor sales               X C  C             
        Roller skating rink                         C A               
        Rug cleaning plant                               X      X     
        Saddle shop                                 X A    X  X    X     
        Savings and loan association                X   X             
        School                                      X   X             
        School, commercial                          X   X             
    C    School, day                                                 
    C    School, elementary                                         X
        School, high                                               X
        School, junior high                                        X
        School, nursery (day school)                C   C  C  X    X     
        School, private                                C             
    C    School, public                                             X
        Secretarial service                         X   A             
        Shoe repair shop                            X                
        Shoe store                                  X                
C        Special events, including fundraisers,                      
            political rallies, and charitable events
        Sporting goods store                        X A               
C  C  C  C  Stable, commercial                          C C      X    X     
A  A  A  A  Stable, private                             C C      X    X     
        Stadium                                                    C
        Stationery store                            X   A             
        Stockbroker's office                        X   A             
        Storage yard, finished materials                 C      C     
        Storage yard, finished product                   C  C    C     
        Storage yard, raw materials                      C      C     
        Swimming pool, indoor commercial            X A      X    X     
        Swimming pool, outdoor commercial           X X      X    X     
        Tailor shop                                 X                
        Tank farm, gas and natural gas                   C      C     
        Tank farm, petroleum and liquid chemicals        C      C     
        Tavern                                      X A  A             
        Tavern, with live entertainment             C A               
        Taxicab, garage                                  C  C    C     
        Tennis club                                  X  C  X  X    X     
        Theater                                     X C  C             
        Theater, movie                              X C  C             
C        Theater, tent                               X A               
        Tobacconist                                 X   A             
        Toy store                                   X X               
        Travel agency                               X   A             
        Truck dealer, new                           C           X     
        Truck dealer, used                          C           X     
        Truck service and repair                    C           X     
        Truck stop                                  C                
        Truck terminal, heavy                            X      X     
        Truck terminal, local delivery                   X      X     
        Undertaker (funeral parlor)                 C                
        Upholstery shop                             X       X    X     
        Variety store                               X                
        Veterinarian's office, indoor only          X       X    X     
        Warehouse, heavy                                 X      X     
        Warehouse, light                               A  X  X    X     
        Warehouse, self-storage                          X  X    X     
C  C  C  C  Wastewater treatment plant                  C C  C  C  C    C    C
C        Water, spring collection                                    
C  C  C  C  Water supply tank                           C C  C  C  C    C    C
C  C  C  C  Water treatment plant, including            C C  C  C  C    C    C
            alternative system
T  T  T  T  Yard sale                                                   
        Yarn store                                  X                
 
Notes:
    1.    Adult entertainment establishments are permitted only on properties
located along Illinois Route 41, north of Edwards Road, and zoned in the LI-
1 District, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the
provisions of chapter 11 of this title.
    2.    See section
10-5-10 of this title.
    3.    See subsection
10-5-5C6 of this title.
    4.    See subsection
10-5-5E11 of this title.
    5.    See subsection
10-5-5E12 of this title.
    6.    See section
10-5-7 of this title.
    7.   See subsection
10-10-5E13 of this title relating to cannabis uses.
(Ord. 2006-690, 6-6-2006; amd. per correspondence dated 7-19-2006; Ord. 2008-
768, 10-21-2008; Ord. 2009-780, 4-21-2009; Ord. 2010-810, 4-6-2010; Ord. 2010-
812, 5-18-2010; Ord. 2011-847, 7-19-2011; Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013; Ord. 2014-
919, 3-19-2014; Ord. 2014-924, 5-6-2014; Ord. 2016-994, 8-2-2016; Ord. 2018-
1033, 2-20-2018; Ord. 2019-1068, 9-17-2019; Ord 2024-1160, 10-1-2024)
TABLE 1-A. USES PERMITTED IN OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Use SCOD HOD WMOD
Use                                                              SCOD HOD WMOD
Existing uses:                                                           
 Any existing use                                                   X    
 Any existing use permitted in the district in which it is      X       X
  located
Uses in underlying zones:                                                
 Zone in which it is located except as provided below               C   X
 Any accessory use permitted as an accessory use in the zone in     A   A
  which it is located
 Any use permitted in the B Zone, if the property is zoned B    X        
 Any use permitted in any zone other than B District, in which  X        
  it is located, exclusive of all buildings and structures
Other uses:                                                              
 Any agricultural use exclusive of buildings and structures     X        
 Christmas tree sales                                               T    
 Church                                                             C    
 Conservation area                                              X        
 Forest preserve                                                X        
Uses requiring site plan review:                                         
 Antique shop                                                       X    
 Art gallery                                                        X    
 Bank                                                               X    
 Bank, ATM                                                          A    
 Bank, drive-in facility                                            X    
 Blacksmith                                                         X    
 Bookstore                                                          X    
 Botanical garden                                               X        
 Candy store                                                        X    
 Credit union                                                       X    
 Dressmaker                                                         X    
 Drugstore                                                          X    
 Dwelling, caretaker                                                X    
 Dwelling, single-family                                            X    
 Fabric store                                                       X    
 Farm supply store                                                  X    
 Fire station                                                       X    
 Florist, retail                                                    X    
 Gift shop                                                          X    
 Golf course                                                    X       C
 Grocery store                                                      X    
 Hardware store                                                     X    
 Historic site, landmark                                        X        
 Home occupation                                                    X    
 Ice cream shop                                                     X    
 Library                                                            X    
 Meat market                                                        X    
 Office, all types                                                  X    
 Paint store                                                        X    
 Park, passive recreation only                                  X    X    
 Post office                                                        X    
 Real estate sales office                                           X   T
 Restaurant                                                         X    
 Restaurant, with liquor sales                                      X    
 Saddle shop                                                        X    
 Savings and loan association                                       X    
 Tavern                                                             X    
 Wastewater treatment plant including alternative system            C   C
 
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 94-406, 9-4-1994; Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
TABLE 2. LOT SIZE, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
         Lot Size   Yard                                          Bulk
                               Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot      Max            Height Of Height Of
Zone Use Area Width Front Rear Side  Side    A Street Residential Coverage Imperivous FAR Principal Accessory
                                                      Zone                 Surface        Use       Use
         Sq.  Ft.   Ft.   Ft.  Ft.   Ft.     Ft.      Ft.         %                   – Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
         Ft.
1    2   3    4     5     6    7     8       9        10          11       12         13  14  15    16  17
TABLE 2. LOT SIZE, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
                  Lot Size      Yard                                          Bulk
                                           Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot      Max             Height Of Height Of
Zone Use          Area    Width Front Rear Side  Side    A Street Residential Coverage Imperivous FAR  Principal Accessory
                                                                  Zone                 Surface         Use       Use
                  Sq. Ft. Ft.   Ft.   Ft.  Ft.   Ft.     Ft.      Ft.         %                   –  Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
1    2            3       4     5     6    7     8       9        10          11       12         13   14  15    16  17
     Any SFD      200,000 250   60    30   80    40      60       ---         10       10         0.10 35  2.5   35  2.5
AG   Any other    200,000 250   60    30   80    40      60       100         10       -          0.10 35  2.5   35  2.5
     use
     Any SFD      40,000  130   30    30   33    13      30       ---         20       -          0.10 35  2.5   25  2.5
SD1  Any other    40,000  130   30    30   33    13      30       100         20                 0.10 35  2.5   25  2.5
     use
     Any
     conditional
     use or       200,000 250   60    30   80    40      60       100         10       15         0.10 35  2.5   35  2.5
SE   agricultural
     use with
     farm animals
     Any other    80,000  160   60    30   40    20      60       ---         15       15         0.15 35  2.5   25  2.5
     use
     Any
     conditional
     use or       200,000 250   60    30   80    40      60       100         10       20         0.10 35  2.5   35  2.5
     agricultural
SR   use with
     farm animals
     Any SFD      40,000  100   60    20   20    10      30       ---         20       20         0.25 35  2.5   20  1.0
     Any other    80,000  160   60    30   40    20      60       100         15       20         0.15 35  2.5   25  1.0
     use
B    All uses     40,000  100   60    20   12    0       30       100         20       80         0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
CR   All uses     80,000  160   75    20   40    20      50       100         15       20         0.15 35  2.0   25  1.0
OR   All uses     200,000 250   100   100  80    40      100      100         15       80         0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
LI   All uses     80,000  160   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       80         0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
LI-1 All uses     80,000  160   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       80         0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
LI-2 All uses     80,000  160   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       80         0.50 35  2.0   25  1.0
PL   All uses     80,000  160   60    20   20    10      60       100         20       80         0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
 
Note:
1. See subsection 10-6-2I of this title regarding special provisions for
nonconforming lots.
(Ord. 98-505, 7-7-1998; amd. Ord. 2006-701, 8-1-2006; Ord. 2024-1160, 10-1-
2024)
TABLE 2-A. LOT SIZE, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS IN THE WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
         Lot Size                    Yard                         Bulk
                               Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot          Height Of Height Of
Zone Use Area Width Front Rear Side  Side    A Street Residential Coverage FAR Principal Accessory
                                                      Zone                     Use       Use
         Sq.  Ft.   Ft.   Ft.  Ft.   Ft.     Ft.      Ft.         %        – Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
         Ft.
1    2   3    4     5     6    7     8       9        10          11       12  13  14    15  16
TABLE 2-A. LOT SIZE, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS IN THE WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
             Lot Size                       Yard                         Bulk
                                      Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot           Height Of Height Of
Zone Use     Area    Width Front Rear Side  Side    A Street Residential Coverage FAR  Principal Accessory
                                                             Zone                      Use       Use
             Sq. Ft. Ft.   Ft.   Ft.  Ft.   Ft.     Ft.      Ft.         %        –  Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
1    2       3       4     5     6    7     8       9        10          11       12   13  14    15  16
     Without 40,000  100   60    20   12    0       30       60          20       0.20 25  2.0   25  1.0
B    sewers
     With    20,000  75    60    20   12    0       30       60          30       0.30 25  2.0   25  1.0
     sewers
     Without 80,000  160   75    20   40    20      50       100         15       0.15 35  2.0   25  1.0
CR   sewers
     With    40,000  100   75    20   20    10      30       60          20       0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
     sewers
     Without 200,000 250   100   100  80    40      100      100         15       0.20 35  2.0   25  1.0
OR   sewers
     With    80,000  160   100   100  40    20      50       100         30       0.30 35  2.0   25  1.0
     sewers
     Without 80,000  160   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       0.20 35  2.0   35  2.0
LI   sewers
     With    40,000  100   75    50   40    20      50       100         40       0.30 35  2.0   35  2.0
     sewers
     Without 80,000  160   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       0.20 35  2.0   35  2.0
PL   sewers
     With    40,000  100   75    50   40    20      50       100         20       0.20 35  2.0   35  2.0
     sewers
 
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
CHAPTER 5
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Industrial Performance Standards
10-5-1-1: LI-1 And LI-2 Districts
10-5-2: Floodplain Regulations
10-5-3: Site Capacity Regulations
10-5-4: Standards For Certain Permitted Uses
10-5-5: Standards For Conditional Use
10-5-6: Planned Unit Development
10-5-7: Standards For Accessory Uses
10-5-8: Signs
10-5-9: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5-10: Customary Home Occupations
10-5-11: Fences, Walls And Hedges
10-5-12: Temporary Uses
10-5-13: Exceptions To District Regulations
10-5-14: Table 3 Through Table 11
10-5-1: INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations and standards for
the installation and operation of industrial uses, based upon consideration of
the objectionable characteristics of such uses and the zones in which they are
permitted.
Further, this is intended to prescribe procedures and methods of measurement of
industrial characteristics subject to such standards.
Any use permitted in the OR, LI zones or any overlay district, whether such use
is permitted as a principal use or as an accessory use, shall be subject to
these standards:
   A.   Permit Procedure: Before the zoning officer issues a building permit
for a use in any OR or LI zone, the applicant shall furnish the zoning officer
sufficient information to enable the zoning officer to assure himself that all
performance can and will be complied with at all times. The zoning officer, in
order to determine whether or not the applicant will meet such standards, may
require the applicant to submit the following information:
      1.   A plot plan showing the location of all present and proposed
structures, drives, parking lots, waste disposal areas, bulk storage areas,
streets, streams or other significant features on or within two hundred feet
(200') of the proposed site.
      2.   A description of the activity to be conducted regarding waste
products, external effects or other conditions which are regulated herein;
provided, however, that the applicant shall not be required to reveal any trade
secrets or sufficient detail with regard to a process which would cause any
secret process or manufacturing procedure for a closely guarded proprietary
compound or product to become public knowledge and be available to competitors.
      3.   The type and location of abatement devices to control, or recording
instruments to measure, conformance with required standards, not including
devices and instruments which are inherent in the manufacturing process.
      4.   Such other data and certification as may reasonably be required by
the zoning officer to reach a determination.
All information and evidence submitted in applications to indicate conformity
to performance standards shall constitute a certification and an agreement on
the part of the applicant that the proposed use can and will conform to such
standards at all times.
   B.   Performance Standards: In the OR and LI zones, the following
regulations shall apply:
      1.   Noise:
         a.   Permitted Noise Levels: At no point on or beyond the boundary of
any lot which abuts a lot in the same zone shall the sound pressure level
resulting from any use or activity, whether open or enclosed, exceed the
maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave band as set forth in
table 3, section
10-5-14 of this chapter.
The sound pressure level resulting from any use or activity which abuts any
other zone shall not exceed the maximum permitted level for the octave band as
provided in Table 3, Section
10-5-14 of this Chapter.
         b.   Method Of Measurement: Sound levels shall be measured with a
sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to
standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall
be made using the flat network and "slow" meter response of the sound level
meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards if
those noises are capable of being accurately measured with such equipment.
Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this Title, shall be
those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level
meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises
capable of being so measured, but objectionable because of intermittence, beat,
frequency or shrillness shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
         c.   Exception: Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to noises not
directly under the control of the property user; noises resulting from the
construction and maintenance of buildings and facilities including site
preparation; noises of safety signals or warning devices and noises of railroad
or trucking equipment.
      2.   Vibration: Steady-state vibrations, for the purpose of this Title,
are vibrations which are continuous or vibrations in discrete pulses more
frequent than one hundred (100) per minute. Discrete pulses which do not exceed
one hundred (100) impulses per minute shall not cause displacement in excess of
twice the values established in Table 4, Section
10-5-14 of this Chapter. Impact vibrations shall mean vibrations occurring in
discrete pulses separated by an interval of at least one minute and numbering
no more than eight (8) per twenty four (24) hour period.
         a.   Permitted Vibration Displacements: At no point on or beyond the
boundary of any lot shall the ground-transmitted steady-state or impact
vibration caused by any use or activity (except those not directly under the
control of the property uses) exceed the limits as established in Tables 4 and
5, Section
10-5-14 of this Chapter, for the OR and LI Zones.
         b.   Method Of Measurement: For the purpose of measuring vibrations, a
three (3) component measuring system shall be used. A three (3) component
measuring system denotes instrumentation which can measure earthborn vibrations
in three (3) directions, each of which occurs at right angles to the other two
(2).
      3.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission, from all sources within
any lot, or particulate matter containing more than five percent (5%) by weight
of particles having a particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is
prohibited. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards and roads within the boundaries of any lot
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other
acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of
weight limitations specified herein is prohibited. The emission of smoke or
particulate matter of a density equal to, or greater than No. 2 on the
Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided
herein.
         a.   Smoke Emission: In the OR and LI Zones, the emission of more than
twelve (12) smoke units per stack in any one hour period is prohibited;
however, once during any six (6) hour period each stack shall be permitted up
to twelve (12) additional units in a fifteen (15) minute period for soot
blowing and fire cleaning. Only during such fifteen (15) minute periods shall
smoke of a density equal to, but not exceeding, Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted
and then only for fire cleaning and for not more than four (4) minutes per
period.
         b.   Particulate Matter Emission: The rate of emission of particulate
matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the
rate established in Table 6, Section
10-5-14 of this Chapter.
         c.   Methods Of Measurement:
            (1)   Smoke: For the purpose of grading the density of emission of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of
Mines, shall be employed. For the purpose of determining smoke units, the
Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least every minute during the
period of observation. Each reading (Ringelmann number) shall be multiplied by
the time in minutes for which it is observed and the products added together to
determine the total number of smoke units observed during the total period of
observation.
            (2)   Particulate Matter: The total net rate of emission of
particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be determined as
follows:
Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission
and divide by the number of acres of lot areas, thereby obtaining the hourly
rate of emission in pounds per acre. Add together the individual rates of
emission as derived above to obtain the total rate of emission from all sources
within the boundaries of the lot. It is this total that shall not exceed the
rate established in table 6, section
10-5-14 of this chapter.
      4.   Odors: No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or
odor causing substances which would be offensive beyond any property lines of
any industrial use will be permitted. An odor emitted no more than fifteen (15)
minutes in any one day shall not be deemed as continuous, frequent or
repetitive within the meaning of these regulations. The existence of an odor
shall be presumed when analysis by a competent technician demonstrates that a
discernable odor is being emitted. Any process which may involve the creation
or emission of any odors shall be provided with a primary and a secondary
safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard
system fails. The rules and regulations of the Illinois air pollution control
board shall be complied with.
      5.   Radiation Hazards: The handling of radioactive materials, the
discharge of such materials into air and water and the disposal of radioactive
wastes shall be in conformance with:
         a.   The applicable regulations of the atomic energy commission; and
         b.   The applicable regulations of any instrumentality of the state.
      6.   Fire And Explosive Hazards:
         a.   The provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 210/1001 et
seq., shall be complied with and no explosives shall be stored, used or
manufactured without first submitting to the zoning officer a certificate of
compliance from the Illinois department of mines and minerals.
         b.   No gasoline or other inflammables or explosives shall be stored
unless the location, plans and construction conform to the laws and regulations
of the state of Illinois fire marshal's office.
      7.   Glare And Heat: Every use and activity shall be so operated that it
does not emit heat or heated air beyond the boundary of the lot on which it is
located. No direct or sky reflected flare shall emanate from any use or
activity so as to be visible at any point on or beyond the boundary of the lot
on which such use or activity is located. This restriction shall not apply to
signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this title or other applicable
ordinances, nor to activities of a temporary or of an emergency nature. Night
lighting necessary for safety and the protection of property is excluded from
this provision.
      8.   Electromagnetic Interference: There shall be no electromagnetic
interferences that adversely affect the operation of any equipment other than
that belonging to the creator of such interference or that does not conform to
the regulations of the federal communications commissions.
   C.   Enforcement: The zoning officer shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Upon confirmation of a violation, enforcement and penalty provisions
of section
10-7-5 of this title shall prevail. In addition, the village may require the
installation, maintenance and operation by the offending industry of continuous
measuring or recording instruments to demonstrate the operation and to ensure
continuous compliance with the prescribed standards. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-5-1-1: LI-1 AND LI-2 DISTRICTS:
All of the provisions of this chapter which apply to the LI district shall
apply in the same manner to the LI-1 and LI-2 districts. (Ord. 2004-651, 2-17-
2004)
10-5-2: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
Title 9 of this code shall be complied with, in addition to the requirements of
this title. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-5-3: SITE CAPACITY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: In addition to the general purposes of this title, the
regulations contained herein are established for the following purposes:
      1.   To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the
intensity of land development in relation to the natural capabilities of the
environment to sustain disturbance without significant disruption to the
natural functions and ecological processes provided by the sensitive natural
resources and features.
      2.   To prohibit uses and structures which are incompatible with the
character of land and the natural resources and features thereon.
      3.   To protect persons and property from hazards resulting from the
inappropriate development of land containing sensitive, unstable or hazardous
natural resources or features.
      4.   To promote the orderly development of the Village in accordance with
the Official Plan.
   B.   Applicability: This regulation shall apply in the following instances:
      1.   Any lot or parcel for which a building permit is requested where
such lot contains any of the natural resources or features identified herein
provided that any lot of forty thousand (40,000) square feet which legally
exists as of the date of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this Title,
including any legal nonconforming lot which is held in single ownership as of
the date of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this Title shall not be
denied a building permit solely because of any failure to conform to the
standards of this Section. Further, no such existing lot which is not a
nonconforming lot shall be designated a nonconforming lot solely because of any
failure to conform to the standards of this Section.
      2.   The subdivision of any parcel of land which is subject to the
regulations of Title 11 of this Code into two (2) or more lots.
      3.   The construction or development of any planned unit development
which contains a total of ten (10) or more dwelling units.
      4.   The site capacity calculations required by subsection C below shall
be waived by the Plan Commission for properties of less than ten (10) acres
when the Commission determines that no natural resources or natural features
identified by this regulation are present on such properties.
   C.   Site Capacity And Environmental Performance Standards:
      1.   In addition to all lot area, yard and bulk regulations established
by Section
10-4-2 of this Title or by any conditional use, variation or annexation
agreement, all developments subject to this regulation shall comply with those
standards specified in the following table governing the minimum open space
ratio, maximum density factor, maximum gross density, maximum impervious
surface ratio and maximum floor area ratio.
      2.   Site capacity for any proposed development is equal to the net
buildable area of the site multiplied by the density factor, in the case of
residential uses; or by the floor area ratio or impervious surface ratio,
whichever is more restrictive, in the case of nonresidential uses. The site
capacity calculation provides the mechanism for subtracting from the base site
area all portions of a site inappropriate for development.
   D.   Site Capacity Calculation: The following calculations shall be
submitted for all development to which this regulation applies, prior to the
approval of any preliminary or final plat of subdivision, the commencement of
any site development or the issuance of any building permit:
      1.   Base Site Area (All Land Uses): The base site area shall be
determined by the following calculations.
   a. Gross site area as determined by actual on- site survey.                acres
   b. Subtract land constituting road and land within ultimate rights of way o-
existing roads, rights of way of utilities and easements                         acres
of access.
   c. Subtract land which is not contiguous:
    (1) A separate parcel which does not abut, adjoin or share common        -
  boundaries with the rest of the development.                                   acres
     (2) Land which is cut off from the main parcel by a road, railroad,      -
 existing land uses or major stream, such that common use is hindered or that   acres
  the land is unavailable for building purposes.
   d. Subtract land which, in previously approved subdivision encompassing the-
same land, as part or all of the subject parcel, was reserved for resource       acres
reasons, (e.g., flooding or for recreation.)
   e. Subtract land used or proposed for nonresidential uses whenever both
nonresidential and residential uses are proposed. (In case of the site capacity  -
calculation for the proposed nonresidential use, subtract the land proposed for  acres
residential use.)
   f. Equals Base Site Area.                                                  =
                                                                                 acres
 
      2.   Resource Protection Land (All Land Uses): All land area consisting
of the natural resources or natural features listed below shall be measured.
The total acreage of each resource shall be multiplied by its respective open
space ratio to determine the amount of resource protection land or area
required to be kept in open space in order to protect the resource or feature.
In those areas of a site which consists of two (2) or more natural resources or
features, only that resource or feature which is subject to the highest open
space ratio shall be calculated. This sum total of all resource protection land
on the site equals the total resource protection land.
RESOURCE OR FEATURE OPEN SPACE RATIO ACRES OF LAND IN RESOURCE PROTECTION LAND
                                     RESOURCE
RESOURCE OR FEATURE    OPEN SPACE RATIO ACRES OF LAND IN RESOURCE PROTECTION
                                        RESOURCE         LAND
                                                       
Flood plain               1.001         x             =
                                                 
Wetlands                  1.001         x             =
Steep slopes:                                             
15% to 30% slope          .502          x             =
30% and above             .603          x             =
Mature woodlands          .704          x             =
Young woodlands           .40           x             =
Lakes and ponds           1.00          x             =
Drainageways              1.00          x             =
Improved drainageways     .505          x             =
Total land in resource                    =           
Total resource                                            =
protections lands
                                                       
1 May be modified by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the
standards of Section 10-5-5 of this Chapter.
2 80% in areas of Rodman Soils.
3 95% in areas of Rodman Soils.
4 May be reduced to 55% by utilizing the Replacement of Forest Credit.
5 This refers to both construction or reconstruction of the drainageway and
the establishment of a maintenance easement.
 
      3.   Recreational Land (Residential Subdivision And Planned Development
Uses Only): This calculation is required for all residential subdivisions or
planned unit developments with the exception of subdivisions which would be
required to provide less than one-fourth (1/4) acre by the following
calculation. This calculation does not apply to individual residential lots or
to nonresidential uses. Total recreation land required for residential uses is
as follows:
Take      Base site area
Subtract  Total acres of land in resource                  -
Equals    Total unrestricted land                          =
Multiply  Total unrestricted land by recreation multiplier x
          for the appropriate district.
 
Zoning District Recreation Multiplier
               
SE                                                         .0210
SR                                                         .0300
Planned Unit Development                                   .0400
 
Equals:   Total recreation land required                   =
 
          Any resource protection land in the categories
Subtract: noted below provided said land is improved, or
          will be improved, for recreation.
 
         Forest
         Lake shore
         Pond shore
 
Equals:   Total recreation land                            =
          remaining to be provided
 
      4.   Site Capacity (Residential): Individual site capacity is determined
by multiplying the density factor by the net buildable site area to obtain the
maximum number of dwelling units permitted. The calculations are as follows:
Take     Total resource protection land              Ac.
Add      Total recreation land remaining             +Ac.
Equals   Total open space                            =Ac.
Take     Base site area                              Ac.
Multiply Open space ratio                            xAc.
Equals   Minimum required open space                 =Ac.
Take     Base site area                              Ac.
Subtract Total open space or minimum required        -Ac.
        open space (whichever is greater)            
Equals   Net buildable site area                     =Ac.
Multiply District maximum density factor             xAc.
Equals   Number of dwelling units                    =Units
        (do not round off: use lowest whole number)  
Take     Base site area                              Ac.
Multiply Gross density                               x
Equals   Maximum dwelling units                      =Units
        (do not round off: use lowest whole number)  
         
Use maximum dwelling units or number of dwelling units, whichever is less.
 
      5.   Site Capacity (Nonresidential): Individual site capacity is
calculated as follows. Both maximum impervious surface area and maximum floor
area must be calculated.
Take        Base site area             Ac.
Subtract    Resource protection land   -Ac.
Equals      Buildable land             =Ac.
Take        Buildable land                
Multiply by Floor area ratio           x
Equals      Maximum floor area         =
Take        Buildable land                
Multiply by Impervious surface ratio   x
Equals      Maximum impervious surface =
 
   E.   Environmental Protection Standards:
      1.   General Standards:
         a.   Prior to the commencement of any development subject to this
Regulation, plans and other information reasonable necessary to identify and
verify the existence of any of the environmental features noted below shall be
submitted. All plans for development shall account for such features and shall
fully comply with the environmental protection standards applicable to each
feature. Site alterations, regrading, filling and clearing of vegetation after
the adoption of this Regulation but prior to the submission and approval of
such plans shall be a violation of this Title. All references to "open space"
shall mean the term as it is defined herein.
         b.   In any proposed development wherein resources and open spaces are
required to be protected and preserved, the developer shall furnish the Village
a preliminary resource protection plan at the time of submission of the
preliminary development plan or tentative plat. This plan shall be drawn to the
same scale as the preliminary development plan, tentative plat or site plan and
shall include the following:
            (1)   Natural conditions of the site including topography,
drainageways, watershed divides and all resources required to be protected.
            (2)   Proposed site improvements including the location, size
(footprint or building pad) of buildings, septic system or alternative systems,
drainage and detention improvements.
            (3)   All proposals, features or structures intended to protect and
preserve resources both during construction and in the completed project
including but not limited to easements, dedications grading, structures,
fences, reforestation and compensatory features.
         c.   The final plat shall show any approved easements, dedications or
other appropriate means used to implement the resource protection plan.
      2.   Flood Plain:
         a.   Permanent Open Space: All flood plains shall be permanent open
space.
         b.   Permitted Uses: Only those uses permitted by Title 9 of this
Code.
      3.   Wetlands:
         a.   Permanent Open Space: All such areas shall remain as permanent
open space. Wetlands may be deepened or enlarged but wetlands shall not be
filled except in accordance with regulations of Title 9 of this Code.
         b.   Permitted Uses: Only those uses which are permitted by right in
flood plains shall be permitted by right in wetlands. These uses are specified
in Title 9 of this Code.
All other structures and uses permitted by the underlying zoning may be
permitted in a wetland pursuant to the issuance of a variance. The standards
and procedures for such variance shall be the same as those for flood plain
uses established by Title 9 of this Code.
      4.   Steep Slopes: In areas of steep slopes, the following standards
shall apply:
         a.   Fifteen To Thirty Percent Slope: At least fifty percent (50%) of
such areas shall remain as permanent open space. No more than thirty percent
(30%) of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of
vegetation, with the exception that no more than twenty percent (20%) of such
areas may be disturbed in the case of Rodman Soils.
         b.   More Than Thirty Percent Slope: At least sixty percent (60%) of
such areas shall remain as permanent open space. No more than fifteen percent
(15%) of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of
vegetation, except that no more than five percent (5%) of such areas may be
disturbed in the case of Rodman Soils.
      5.   Forest:
         a.   In forests containing a combination of young woodlands and mature
woodlands, the total area that may be cleared shall be determined by the
calculations in subsection D2 Resource Protection Land. The maximum area which
may be cleared may be determined by calculating the weighted average open space
ratio applicable to the forest as a whole; that is, forest multiplied by the
area contained within that type of forest and divided by the entire area of
forest on the site.
Where the forest stands are of a single category, the following standards
apply: No more than thirty percent (30%) of any mature woodland may be cleared
or developed. The remaining seventy percent (70%) shall be maintained as
permanent open space. No more than sixty percent (60%) of any young woodland
shall be cleared or developed. The remaining forty percent (40%) shall be
maintained as permanent open space or may be included as part of an enlarged
lot or lots in accordance with subsection F of this Section. A tree survey may
be submitted but is not required in order to delineate woodland areas. In
addition:
            (1)   The developer may designate a new forest area on a part of
the site not forested. A reforestation plan shall be submitted showing the
location, size and type of all plant materials to be installed. Such materials
shall be of a suitable type and compatible with the existing or native
vegetation of the site.
            (2)   The new forest area shall consist of one and two-tenths (1.2)
times the surface acreage of the forest area disturbed by the development.
            (3)   The following amount of plant materials shall be provided per
each acre of new forest to be established. Fractional requirements resulting
from fraction of acres to be established shall conform to lists of approved
plant materials by soil types provided by the Director of Planning. Either of
the following two (2) options may be chosen:
         Plant Materials        Minimum Size Of
         Required Per Acre      Plant Materials
         
           5 canopy trees   4 inch caliper
           10 canopy trees  21/2 inch caliper
Option 1    50 canopy trees  5 foot height
           20 understory tre3 foot height
           100 shrubs       3 foot height
         
           5 canopy trees   4 inch caliper
Option 2    600 canopy trees 3 foot height
           30 understory tre2 foot height
           130 shrubs       2 foot height
 
      6.   Lakes And Ponds: All such areas shall be permanent open space. No
development or diverting of these bodies of water shall be permitted except to
provide required roads. Filling shall be permitted only in conjunction with
deepening the land and is permitted only if surface area and flood retention
capabilities remain unchanged or are enlarged. Notwithstanding the regulations
herein, where the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers wetland regulations impose a
higher standard or greater restriction, such regulations shall be met.
      7.   Lake Shorelines: The shorelines of lakes, consisting of the area
within one hundred feet (100') from the shorelines, shall contain no more than
fifteen percent (15%) impervious surfaces. At least seventy five percent (75%)
of all such areas shall be permanent open space.
      8.   Pond Shorelines: The shorelines of ponds consisting of the area
within fifty feet (50') from the shoreline shall contain no more than fifteen
percent (15%) impervious surfaces. At least seventy five percent (75%) of all
such areas be permanent open space.
      9.   Drainageways:
         a.   Permitted Uses: No portion of a natural drainageway shall be
developed. An existing natural drainageway may be improved and up to fifty
percent (50%) of the area of such drainageway may be used for other permitted
open uses such as passive recreation, storm water detention or circulation
provided that the remaining area shall be improved only as follows:
            (1)   The time of concentration of stormwater flows remains
unchanged or is lengthened;
            (2)   Stormwater and ground water storage capacity are unchanged or
increased;
            (3)   Natural vegetation is installed;
            (4)   The resultant new drainageway has less velocity than
preexisted or reduces stream-bank erosion.
         b.   For those developments which do rely on underground absorption
fields, the extent of the drainageway shall be determined either by its order
of magnitude or the limits of the seasonably saturated soils presented in the
drainageway, whichever area is greater. For the purpose of this determination,
for following soil types identified by the Soil Survey shall be considered
seasonally saturated drainageway soils.
 
Houghton muck            (103)
Sawmill silty clay loam  (107)
Pella silty clay loam    (153)
Ashkum silty clay loam   (232)
Peotone silty clay loam  (330)
Granby loamy fine sand   (513)
 
         c.   Obstructions: In no event shall filling or grading be permitted
which would result in surface water flows being interrupted, causing flooding
or inundation of upstream or downstream property owners. The Zoning Officer may
require installation of storm sewers, ditches or other devices to ensure that
these provisions are met.
   F.   Open Space:
      1.   General Requirements: The location and total areas of all open space
required by this Title shall be clearly indicated on the plans submitted
pursuant to subsection D of this Section. Open space shall be designated in one
or more of the following ways:
         a.   Natural Areas: Natural areas of undisturbed vegetation or areas
replanted with vegetation after construction. Woodlands, woodland swamps
(hydric soils), prairies, wetlands (hydric prairies) and savannah are specific
types of natural areas.
         b.   Recreational Areas: Recreational areas designated for specific,
active recreational uses, such as tot lots, tennis courts, swimming pools,
ballfields and similar uses.
         c.   Greenway Acres: Greenway acres are linear green belts linking
residential areas with open space areas. These greenways may contain bicycle
paths, foot paths and bridle paths. Connecting residential and recreational
areas with greenways is encouraged.
         d.   Buffers: Buffers are generally landscaped and serve to separate
residential uses from adverse uses or highly traversed roadways.
         e.   Agricultural Areas: Agricultural areas or garden plots are areas
reserved for agriculture including croplands, pastures and garden plots.
Land designated as open space shall be maintained as open space for the use
designated and may not be separately subdivided or developed except as provided
herein. Land which is required by this Title to remain as open space may be
used for the recreational, agricultural, resource protection, amenity and other
purposes specified in this Chapter and is designated on the plans. Recreation
open space areas shall be generally accessible to all residents of a
development. Access between agricultural areas and nonagricultural areas may be
restricted. Access to land remaining in open space for the purpose of
protecting natural resources may also be restricted in order to ensure such
protection. Except as otherwise provided in this Title, no area occupied
nonrecreational, roads, road rights of way or parking areas shall be counted as
designated open space.
      2.   Preservation Of Open Space: Open space areas shall be designed so
their use and enjoyment as open space are not obstructed. Open space areas
shall be maintained as specified below. The form of open space ownership shall
be designated on the plans. Open space areas may be owned and preserved by any
of the following mechanisms or combinations hereof:
         a.   Dedication of open space to the Village, an appropriate public
agency or not-for-profit organization, approved by the Village Board, which is
willing to accept the dedications.
         b.   Common ownership of the open space by a homeowners' or property
owners' association which assumes full responsibility for its maintenance and
which shall prevent development and/or subsequent subdivision of the open space
land for other than open space purposes. In the event that open space is to be
owned and maintained by such an association, documents establishing the
association, detailing its obligations and otherwise providing for the
maintenance and preservation of open space areas shall be prepared and
submitted with the plans. Covenants shall provide for the mandatory inclusion
of all property owners for the purpose of being responsible for the continual
maintenance of the open space and recreational areas.
         c.   Deed restricted private ownership which shall ensure that no
development and/or subsequent subdivision of the open space land for other than
open space uses shall be permitted. The maintenance responsibility of all open
space areas shall be specified and provision shall be made for guaranteeing
this responsibility.
         d.   Conservation rights conveyed in accordance with and subject to
the provisions and requirements contained in "An Act Relating Conservation
Rights in Real Property 1 ", provided the items of such conveyance have been
reviewed and approved by the Village Board.
In the event that any property owners' association, private party or other
agency charged with the responsibility of maintaining open space fails to
maintain the open space, the Village or its designated agent may proceed to
correct the failure of maintenance, following reasonable notice and demand that
the deficiency of maintenance be corrected; however, no prior notice is
required if the failure to so maintain has created a clear and imminent hazard
to the health, safety or welfare of the residents or the general public. The
cost of such maintenance to the Village shall be charged against that person,
association or agency having the responsibility for maintenance of the open
space.
      3.   Maintenance Of Open Space: Maintenance of open space shall be as
follows:
         a.   Conservation And Natural Areas: Maintenance of conservation areas
and natural areas of undisturbed vegetation or replanted areas shall consist of
the removal of litter, diseased trees, junk or debris. Natural watercourses
shall be maintained free- flowing and devoid or debris. Stream channels shall
be maintained so as not to alter flood plain levels.
         b.   Recreational Areas: Maintenance of recreational areas shall
consist of all acts necessary to ensure that recreational areas remain in
usable condition and that no hazards, nuisances or unhealthy conditions exist.
         c.   Greenway Areas: Maintenance of greenway areas and bufferyards
shall consist of all acts necessary to ensure that the areas remain usable as
originally designed and that no hazards, nuisances or unhealthy conditions
exist.
         d.   Retention/Detention Open Space Areas: Maintenance of open space
areas used for retention/detention shall comply with the standards of
subsection E9 of this Section.
         e.   Agricultural Areas: Maintenance of agricultural areas and garden
plots shall remain as active agricultural uses or as conservation or natural
areas (fallow areas) as provided above.
   G.   Lot Standards: The following standards shall apply to both existing
oversize lots and parcels and to all lots created pursuant of this Title
provided that in planned unit developments individual lot standards may be
waived in whole or in part in favor of strict compliance with the overall
capacity and resource protection regulations herein.
      1.   Any lot containing either a mature or young woodland shall be
oversized in accordance with the following:
         a.   For completely wooded lots the minimum lot area shall be as
follows:
District              
 Type Of Woods      Minimum Lot Area
                    
SR District           
 Mature woods        80,000 s.f.
 Young woods         60,000 s.f.
  
SE District
 Mature woods        180,000 s.f.
 Young woods         80,000 s.f.
                    
All other districts   As provided in this Title generally
 
         b.   For partially wooded lots, the minimum required lot area shall be
calculated by taking the minimum lot area required for completely wooded lots
as shown above and subtracting therefrom an area equal to that portion of the
lot which is not subject to resource protection for woodlands.
         c.   For lots containing a mixture of young and mature woodlands the
minimum lot area shall be calculated on a pro rata basis.
         d.   Any lot containing lands which are not subject to resource
protection in an amount equal to the minimum lot size required by the this
Title for the district in which they are located (lots not otherwise subject to
the provisions of this Title) may contain additional land or area which is
subject to resource protection.
      2.   Lots containing soils designated as drainageway soils shall be
platted as oversize lots in accordance with the following standards:
 
40,000    square feet of developable land
+     area of drainageway soils requiring protection (See subsections E and
          G above)
          
=    �Total lot area required provided the resultant area equals or exceeds
          the minimum area required for the zone in which the lot is located.
 
      3.   Where a lot contains woodlands or other protected resources and
drainageway soils or a combination of these two (2) features, the size of the
lot shall be increased so as to protect the woodlands as provided in subsection
G1 above, and provide forty thousand (40,000) square feet of developable land
free of drainageway soils and other protected resources as provided in
subsection G2 above. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 765 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
10-5-4: STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Site Plan Review:
      1.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this Section to provide additional
regulations for the establishment of certain uses in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Village and to establish a procedure for the
coordinated review of such uses for compliance with the requirements of the
several ordinances of the Village. Included here are standards and procedures
for the review and approval of specific uses whether they be uses otherwise
permitted by right, conditional uses or accessory uses.
      2.   Responsibility: The review of site plans as provided herein shall be
the responsibility of the Plan Commission and any use for which site plan
review is required shall be established only with the approval of the Plan
Commission.
      3.   Uses Requiring Site Plan Review: The following uses shall be subject
to the site plan review standards and procedures herein:
         a.   A site plan for a conditional use shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the required public hearing.
         b.   Any use located in an overlay district for which site plan review
is required as provided in Section
10-4-3.
      4.   Required Information: The following information or documents shall
be submitted to the Plan Commission for their review and consideration provided
that the chairman may waive the submission on any document or other information
which he finds is not applicable to the use in question or to the regulations
of the district in which it is located:
         a.   Survey of the property.
         b.   The location and size (footprint) of all buildings and
structures.
         c.   Parking, circulation and access including any required State or
County access permits.
         d.   Exterior lighting, signage and fencing.
         e.   On-site septic layout or plan of alternative system.
         f.   Drainage and detention plan.
         g.   Soils analysis or report from the Lake County Soil and Water
Conservation District, if one is required.
         h.   Topographic survey.
         i.   Landscape plan.
         j.   Natural resources protection plan.
         k.   Elevation drawings, photographs or renderings (Historic Overlay
District only).
         l.   Additional information or documentation as may be required of a
particular conditional use.
      5.   Timing: The Plan Commission shall have thirty (30) days from the
date of receipt of all required information to complete its review and either
approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the site plan.
      6.   Standards For Approval: In approving a site plan the Plan Commission
shall be guided by the following rules, regulations or standards where
applicable:
         a.   The Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
         b.   The various provision of this Title including but not limited to,
industrial performance standards, lot, yard and bulk regulations, site capacity
regulations, standards for certain permitted uses, standards for conditional
uses, standards for accessory uses, sign regulations and off-street parking and
loading regulations.
         c.   The various provisions of the subdivision regulations as they
otherwise apply to drainage and stormwater detention and the installation of
improvements.
         d.   The standards of the Wadsworth Landscape Ordinance or such other
landscape standards as may be approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
         e.   The regulations of An Ordinance Regulating Development In Special
Flood Hazard Areas in the Village, where applicable.
         f.   The requirements and regulations of the Lake County Health
Department, Department of Public works and the Lake County Department of
Transportation, where applicable.
         g.   The prior conditions of approval established for any subdivision,
planned unit development or conditional use of which the lot or parcel in
question is a part.
      7.   Engineer To Approve: The Village Engineer shall review site plans
relative to all matters concerning drainage detention, floor elevation,
culverts inverts, wastewater treatment and water supply and distribution
systems and shall report his finding to the Plan Commission, where applicable.
No site plan shall be approved by the Plan Commission without the prior
approval of the Village Engineer.
   B.   Greenhouse And/Or Nursery Center:
      1.   The site shall contain at least five (5) acres.
      2.   All buildings shall be set back from all lot lines a minimum of
sixty feet (60').
      3.   Circulation of traffic shall be without hazard. Ingress and egress
to and from the property should be separated.
      4.   There shall be at least one parking space per two hundred (200)
square feet of inside or outdoor sales and display area.
      5.   Parking areas shall be off-street and shall be maintained in a dust-
free condition and located so as to afford highway traffic a clear view of
exiting and entering vehicles.
      6.   Truck and customer traffic shall be separated whenever possible.
      7.   All plans relating to drainage and runoff shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   C.   Dwelling Unit Standards:
      1.   The following minimum floor area standards shall apply to all newly
constructed housing units in the Village:
a. Single-family detached units:
                   
 Total floor area  1,400 square feet
 Ground floor area 900 square feet
b. Single-family attached units:
  
 Total floor area  1,300 square feet
 Ground floor area 800 square feet
 
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
   D.   Farm Animals: The keeping of farm animals in the SE Suburban Estate and
SR Suburban Residential Zones shall be permitted only on lots of two hundred
thousand (200,000) square feet or more. Such farm animals shall only be kept or
housed on a not for profit basis. This prohibition shall not apply to the
keeping of chickens (hens only) upon lots of less than two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet in accordance with the provisions of subsection
10-5-7G of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-1060, 5-7-2019)
10-5-5: STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USE:
   A.   Purpose: In addition to those uses permitted by right in each district,
there are certain other uses which may be permitted by conditional use permit,
subject to the provisions in this section. These conditional uses require
particular consideration of surrounding uses and zoning districts and their
impact upon the planned and orderly development of the neighboring property and
the Village.
   B.   Location: Particular conditional uses may be permitted in zoning
districts as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1 of this title.
   C.   Standards For All Conditional Uses: The Village Board may authorize a
conditional use as provided herein upon determining and finding as fact, the
following:
      1.   Public Convenience: That the proposed use is necessary or desirable
at the location involved to provide a service or facility which will further
the public convenience and contribute to the general welfare of the
neighborhood or community.
      2.   Not Detrimental To Property: That the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the value of other properties or improvements in the vicinity.
      3.   Compliance With Regulations: That the proposed use will comply with
the regulations of the zoning districts in which it is located and this title
generally, including, but not limited to, all lot, yard and bulk regulations,
parking and loading regulations, sign control regulations, floodplain
regulations and all other applicable ordinances.
      4.   Stipulations And Conditions: That the proposed use shall conform to
any stipulations or conditions made a part of a conditional use permit issued
for such use.
      5.   Specific Conditional Uses: That the proposed use shall conform to
the regulations established for specific conditional uses as provided in this
section. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      6.   Public And Private Utilities, Public Services: Buildings,
structures, and transmission lines not designed primarily for local service
only, including, but not limited to, water, sewerage, gas, telephone, and/or
electric utilities; and police, fire, radio, and television stations, including
broadcasting antennas shall be permitted only a conditional use and shall
comply with subsections C1 through C5 of this section and with the following:
         a.   Jurisdictional Approval: Applications for permission to operate
waterworks or sewage treatment plants shall be accompanied by a report and a
recommendation from all governmental entities having jurisdiction. Such
recommendations as to design and construction, type of treatment, source of
water, standards for testing and sampling, and standards for the quality of
effluent shall be incorporated in the conditional use permit.
         b.   Lot Area And Location: The required lot area and location shall
be specified as part of the conditional use permit and be determined in
relation to the proposed use, the intensity of such use, and the effects of
such use upon the environment.
         c.   Fencing Or Screening: If findings indicate that a hazard may
result or that interference with the development or use and enjoyment of
surrounding properties may ensue, fencing or screening with a densely planted
hedge or other shielding material may be required in a manner consistent with
such findings.
         d.   Performance Standards: The proposed structure or use shall
satisfy the performance standards set forth in Section
10-5-1 of this Chapter. (1996 Code)
   D.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to
the Village Clerk in writing by the owner of the property in question and shall
be accompanied by:
      1.   The information and documentation required for site plan review 1 .
      2.   Additional information as required in this Section.
   E.   Standards For Specific Conditional Uses: In addition to the general
standards for conditional uses established above, the following conditional
uses shall comply with the specific standards herein established:
      1.   Airports And Heliports:
         a.   The area shall be sufficient and the site otherwise adequate to
meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Illinois
Department of Aeronautics for the class of airport proposed in accordance with
their published rules and regulations.
         b.   Any building, hangar or other structure shall be at least three
hundred feet (300') from any street or property line.
         c.   There shall be an adequate number of off-street parking spaces.
The off-street parking design shall be reviewed for approval by the Village.
         d.   If airport zoning is not in effect:
            (1)   Any proposed runway or landing strip shall be situated so
that the approach zones are free of any flight obstructions such as towers,
chimneys, other tall structures or natural obstructions outside the airport
site.
            (2)   There shall be sufficient distance between the end of each
usable landing strip and the airport boundary to satisfy the requirements of
the Federal Aviation Administration. If air rights or easements have been
acquired from the owners of abutting properties in which approach zones fall,
satisfactory evidence thereof shall be submitted with the application. The
Village may require and the developer shall submit any environmental
assessments, noise studies, traffic studies or similar impact or operating
studies or projection prepared by the developer or owner and submitted to
either the Federal Government or the State in order to obtain any licenses,
permits or grants. In the absence of such studies, the Village may request
same.
      2.   Automobile Wrecking Yard:
         a.   The site, its size, topography, location, boundaries and
surrounding uses shall be such that the site can, as a practical matter, be
screened from the public view, from any collector or larger street and from any
adjoining residential district in accordance with the standards provided below.
Any site which fails to meet this standard shall not be considered.
         b.   Any automobile wrecking yard, junkyard, scrapyard or salvage yard
for which permission is granted under this Section shall at all times be
subject to the performance standards established for the LI Zoning District.
         c.   All outdoor storage areas shall be screened or fenced with a
solid fence at least six feet (6') but no more than eight feet (8') in height,
earth berms or enclosed with a dense evergreen growth at least six feet (6') in
height. Storage or placement of wrecked vehicles or other salvage of any type
between the street and such fence or screen is expressly prohibited.
         d.   Any junk or salvage yard which offers to the public at retail any
new or used merchandise shall provide at least two (2) parking spaces in an
off-street parking lot per one hundred (100) square feet of retail floor space.
      3.   Camp, Day Or Youth:
         a.   Application for permission to construct or operate a day camp or
youth camp shall be accompanied by a report and recommendation from the Lake
County Health Department.
         b.   The site for any day or youth camp shall include a usable outdoor
recreation area of not less than one acre per fifty (50) persons for which
other facilities are provided. The recreation area shall not be part of any
required yard.
         c.   In addition to the front yard required in the zone in which the
camp is located, there shall be two (2) side yards and a rear yard of at least
fifty feet (50') each.
         d.   All outdoor recreation areas within two hundred feet (200') of a
street or boundary line shall be fenced.
         e.   No outdoor recreation apparatus or play field shall be located in
any required yard.
      4.   Camp, Commercial Recreational:
         a.   The facilities of any commercial recreational camp shall be
approved by the Lake County Health Department before such camp begins
operation.
         b.   Inspections shall be made from time to time by the Lake County
Health Department and by the Village to assure that facilities continue to meet
the requirements of all applicable Village ordinances and regulations.
         c.   No structures on the camp site or camping trailers shall be used
as permanent living quarters unless such structure meets all the requirements
of the Building Codes of the Village 2 . (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      5.   Child Care Facility:
         a.   Applications for permission to construct or operate a child care
facility shall be accompanied by copies of all valid permits issued and
required by the State of Illinois, Department of Children and Family Services
and any other applicable County, State or Federal agency. If such permits
cannot be obtained prior to the time of application, the application shall be
accompanied by a report from the appropriate licensing agency, if any, stating
how the applicant intends to meet these requirements. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991;
1996 Code)
         b.   Applications for permission to construct or operate a child care
facility shall be accompanied by a report and recommendation from the Lake
County Health Department.
         c.   There shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of
safe, outdoor play area for every child for which the facility is licensed to
accommodate.
         d.   There shall be a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of
usable indoor floor area for every child for which the facility is licensed to
accommodate. Usable floor area does not include administrative space, storage
areas, bathrooms, hallways, kitchen or other areas that are not used for direct
activities with children.
         e.   All outdoor play areas shall be fenced.
         f.   No outdoor play apparatus or play field shall be located in any
required yard.
         g.   Any child care facility intended or licensed to accommodate more
than fifty (50) children shall take access only from arterial or collector
roads.
         h.   Nothing contained within this Title shall prohibit the
establishment or operation of a noncommercial child day care facility which has
been licensed by the State and is accessory and incidental to a principal
commercial or industrial use. As a noncommercial accessory use, the day care
facility shall accommodate only the children of persons employed on the
premises or shall accommodate children only on an irregular basis solely for
the convenience of the patrons of the principal use.
      6.   Cemetery:
         a.   The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a system of collector and larger streets, including the
enlargement of existing streets in the vicinity. In addition, the site shall
have direct access to a public thoroughfare.
         b.   Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing at least
ten (10) acres.
         c.   All burial buildings shall be set back at least eighty feet (80')
from any street bounding the cemetery and at least fifty five feet (55') from
all side and rear lot lines. A burial building is any building used for the
interment of bodies or other remains of persons who have died, including
mausoleums, vaults or columbaria.
         d.   All graves or burial lots shall be set back at least thirty feet
(30') from any street bounding the cemetery and at least twenty five feet (25')
from all side and rear lot lines.
         e.   Existing cemeteries may continue to operate in a manner
consistent with the existing development in the area presently occupied. Any
expansion to land not occupied at the time of adoption of the Ordinance
codified in this Title must comply with the requirements of this subsection
subsequent to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         f.   Adequate parking shall be provided on the site and no cemetery
parking shall be permitted on any public street. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; 1996
Code)
      7.   Extraction Of Earth Products:
         a.   An application for extractive operations shall be accompanied by
a map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or
larger showing the following:
            (1)   Existing topography at two foot (2') or more frequent contour
intervals.
            (2)   Locations of watercourses and drainage systems.
            (3)   An outline of the area to be excavated.
         b.   An additional map(s) drawn at the same scale shall show a general
plan for proposed operations and rehabilitation of the site including the
following:
            (1)   The locations of proposed watercourses and drainage systems
including lakes, ponds and retention areas.
            (2)   The sequence of operations and the schedule of rehabilitation
measures.
            (3)   The proposed locations of sorting, grading, crushing and
similar equipment necessary to the operation and initial distribution of
stockpiles.
            (4)   The proposed locations of any buildings, scale house,
equipment storage areas and equipment repair sheds or areas.
            (5)   Site rehabilitation plans shall include proposed future land
uses, proposed roadways, park lands and recreational features.
         c.   The operation and rehabilitation of extractive products areas
shall be in accordance with the following conditions:
            (1)   Excavation shall not take place within a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') of any boundary line. Where deep quarrying (30 feet or
more) is planned, boundary setbacks shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty
feet (150') or shall conform to State reclamation standards.
            (2)   Buildings, structures and storage or repair areas shall be
located in conformance with yard requirements of the zone in which they are
located.
            (3)   Access ways and roads shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition either by oiling or by spraying with calcium chloride.
            (4)   Perimeter roads shall be buffered from extraction activities
with earth mounds at least ten feet (10') in height which store topsoil. Mounds
shall be planted with grass or other suitable material, such as viburnum, as an
erosion retardant.
            (5)   All truckloads of extracted materials removed from the site
shall be covered with tarpaulins in conformance to State standards to ensure
public safety and prevent damage to individuals or other vehicles.
            (6)   All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner,
especially with respect to hazards to persons, damage to adjacent lands or
improvements, and damage to any street by slides, sinking or collapse of
supporting soil adjacent to an excavation. All operations shall be fenced. No
extractive operation shall be conducted in a manner so as to lower the water
table on surrounding properties.
            (7)   No excavation, removal or fill shall be permitted if the
finish conditions would contain the following:
               (A)   Deep pits having side slopes of greater than thirty
degrees (30°).
               (B)   Serious on site erosion problems or erosion problems which
could extend to neighboring properties.
               (C)   Undrained depressions other than artificial lakes or
drainage problems which adversely affect neighboring properties. (Ord. 91-341,
4-2-1991)
            (8)   No processing and stockpiling operations shall be conducted
closer than six hundred sixty feet (660') from any SE (suburban estate), SR
(suburban residential), or SD (southeast district) district or within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of any public or private educational facility. All
processing operations should be enclosed whenever possible and shall be
enclosed whenever the operation is to be for a larger period of time than nine
(9) months. Stockpile areas shall be screened from view.
No extraction operations shall be conducted in such a manner that the
groundwater table of surrounding properties is lowered. This determination is
to be made from data secured from testing wells installed, located, operated
and maintained by the operator on the perimeter of the excavation site. (Ord.
2009-794, 11-3-2009)
         d.   Conditional use permits for the extraction of earth products
shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) years. Such permits
are renewable for additional five (5) year periods.
         e.   A corporate surety bond or guaranteed letter of credit shall be
furnished to the village to assure compliance with the approved rehabilitation
map. The bond or letter of credit shall be in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per acre, whichever is greater, for the completion of
operations and the rehabilitation of the tract.
      8.   Public And Private Utilities And Services:
         a.   Lot Area And Location: The required lot area and location shall
be specified as part of the conditional use permit and be determined in
relation to the proposed use, the intensity of such use and the effects of such
use upon the environment.
         b.   Fencing Or Screening: If findings indicate that a hazard may
result or that interference with the development or use and enjoyment of
surrounding properties may ensue, fencing or screening with densely planted
evergreen hedge or other shielding material may be required in a manner
consistent with such findings. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      9.   Recreational Vehicle And Recreational Trailer Sales:
         a.   The minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres.
         b.   The hours of operation, when the facility is open for business to
the public, shall be limited to between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M.
         c.   The sale of related goods and services, which are reasonably
related to the sale of recreational vehicles or recreational trailers, or are
customarily sold with said sales, are permitted as accessory uses to the
conditional use.
         d.   Adequate provisions are made for vehicular ingress and egress, as
well as parking.
         e.   Incidental storage of recreational vehicles or recreational
trailers is permitted as an accessory use to the conditional use; provided that
said storage is done in a neat and orderly fashion. (Ord. 422, 6-6-1995)
      10.   Contractor's Office Including Materials And Equipment Storage:
         a.   The site, its size, topography, location, boundaries and
surrounding uses shall be such that the site can, as a practical matter, be
screened from the public view, from any street and from any residential
district in the area in accordance with the standards provided below. Any site
which fails to meet this standard shall not be considered.
         b.   Any contractor's office, including materials and equipment
storage for which permission is granted under this section, shall at all times
be subject to the performance standards established for the industrial district
as outlined in section
10-5-1 of this chapter.
         c.   All outdoor storage areas shall be screened or fenced with a
solid fence at least six feet (6') but no more than eight feet (8') in height,
or earth berms at least six feet (6') in height with dense planting on its
slopes.
         d.   No company trucks, equipment, or materials shall ever be stored
temporarily or permanently between the street and any office, structure,
accessory building or fence. (Ord. 2008-768, 10-21-2008)
      11.   Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center:
         a.   Definitions:
   CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that
is registered by the department of agriculture to perform necessary activities
to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with
usable medical cannabis.
   ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY: A room, greenhouse, building, or other enclosed
area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a
cultivation center's agents or a dispensing organization's agent working for
the registered cultivation center or the registered dispensing organization to
cultivate, store, and distribute cannabis for registered qualifying patients.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, food compliant, tamper
resistant, tamper evident container, or package used for the purpose of
containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing
organization.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT: Food, oils, ointments, or other products
containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.
         b.   Location Restrictions: A registered cultivation center may not be
located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of
a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or
daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility,
or an area zoned for residential use 3 .
         c.   Site Plan Review: The use shall be subject to all site capacity
calculation and site plan review procedures as required by this title.
         d.   Compliance With State Regulations And Rules: All medical cannabis
cultivation centers shall comply with the compassionate use of medical cannabis
pilot program act (public act 098-0122) and all rules and regulations adopted
in accordance thereto.
         e.   Single Use Property: Medical cannabis cultivation centers shall
not be established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property that
shares parking with other uses.
         f.   Setbacks: A medical cannabis cultivation center shall be a
minimum of one hundred feet (100') from all property lines.
         g.   Parking: Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by cultivation center
staff continually recorded in a tamperproof format.
         h.   Signage:
            (1)   All signage for the medical cannabis cultivation center shall
be limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area,
and one identifying sign, which can only include the dispensary address, not to
exceed two (2) square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly
illuminated.
            (2)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a cultivation center.
            (3)   Signs shall not include any realistic or stylized graphical
representation of the cannabis plant or its parts or any realistic or stylized
graphical representation of drug paraphernalia.
            (4)   Signs shall not include any wording that would identify the
property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical, botanical or
slanging terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis intoxication or
drug paraphernalia including, but not limited to, "cannabis", "marijuana",
"weed", "pot", "420", "joint", "Mary Jane", "ganja", "hash", "herb", "doobie",
"bong", "blunt", "bowl", "zoned", "sloshed", "burnt", "stoned", "green day",
"reefer", "smoke", "toke", "wacky tobaccy/baccy", "spliff", "roach", "skunk",
etc.
         i.   Age And Access Limitations: It shall be unlawful for any medical
cannabis cultivation center to allow any person who is not at least eighteen
(18) years of age on the premises. Cultivation centers shall not employ anyone
under the age of eighteen (18). Access shall be limited exclusively to
cultivation center staff and local and state officials and those specifically
authorized under the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act
(public act 098-0122).
         j.   Security And Video Surveillance:
            (1)   The medical cannabis cultivation center shall be an enclosed,
locked facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on the
premises, including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably designed
to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. The
facility shall be enclosed by high security fence. The fence must be adequately
secure to prevent unauthorized entry and include gates tied into an access
control system.
            (2)   The medical cannabis cultivation center parking area,
cultivation, production, warehousing areas and shipping bays and entrance shall
be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by
cultivation center staff and continually recorded in a tamperproof format.
            (3)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: "This area is under live/recorded video surveillance to
aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this facility.".
            (4)   The zoning administrator shall review the adequacy of
lighting, security and video surveillance installations with assistance from
appropriate local law enforcement officials.
            (5)   Loading of product shall occur within secure enclosed
shipping bays and shall not be visible from the exterior of the building.
         k.   Noxious Odors: All cultivation centers shall operate in a manner
that prevents odor impacts on neighboring premises or properties and, if
necessary, the facility shall be ventilated with a system for odor control.
         l.   Conduct On Site:
            (1)   Retail sales of medical cannabis or medical cannabis infused
products are strictly prohibited at medical cannabis cultivation centers.
            (2)   It shall be unlawful to cultivate, manufacture, process or
package any product, other than medical cannabis and cannabis infused products,
at a cultivation center.
      12.   Medical Cannabis Dispensaries:
         a.   Definitions:
   CARDHOLDER: A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been
issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by the department of
public health.
   DESIGNATED CAREGIVER: A person who: 1) is at least twenty one (21) years of
age; 2) has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of cannabis; 3) has
not been convicted of an excluded offense; and 4) assists no more than one
registered qualifying patient with his or her medical use of cannabis.
   ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY: A room, greenhouse, building, or other enclosed
area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a
cultivation center's agents or a dispensing organization's agent working for
the registered cultivation center or the registered dispensing organization to
cultivate, store, and distribute cannabis for registered qualifying patients.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, food compliant, tamper
resistant, tamper evident container, or package used for the purpose of
containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing
organization.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR
DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is registered by the department of financial and professional
regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for
the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT: Food, oils, ointments, or other products
containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.
         b.   Location Restrictions: A dispensing organization may not be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of a preexisting
public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare
center, daycare home, group daycare home, or part day childcare facility. A
registered dispensing organization may not be located in a house, apartment,
condominium, or an area zoned for residential use 4 .
         c.   Site Plan Review: The use shall be subject to all site capacity
calculation and site plan review procedures as required by this title.
         d.   Compliance With State Regulations And Rules: All medical cannabis
dispensary establishments shall comply with the compassionate use of medical
cannabis pilot program act (public act 098-0122) and all rules and regulations
adopted in accordance thereto.
         e.   Single Use Property: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall not be
established in multiple use or tenant property or on a property that shares
parking with other uses.
         f.   Setbacks: A medical cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') from all property lines.
         g.   Buffering from other medical cannabis dispensaries: A medical
cannabis dispensary shall be a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from all
other medical marijuana dispensaries measured from the parcel boundaries.
         h.   Parking:
            (1)   Parking shall be located in an area which is visible from a
public road or a private road that is accessible to the public. It cannot be
screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing or other obstructions.
            (2)   Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video
surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff and
continually recorded in a tamperproof format.
         i.   Exterior Display: No medical cannabis dispensary shall be
maintained or operated in a manner that causes, creates or allows the public
viewing of medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products or cannabis
paraphernalia or similar products from any sidewalk, public or private right of
way or any property other than the lot on which the dispensary is located. No
portion of the exterior of the dispensary shall utilize or contain any flashing
lights, searchlights or spotlights or any similar lighting system.
         j.   Signage And Advertising:
            (1)   All signage for the medical cannabis dispensaries shall be
limited to one flat wall sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, and
one identifying sign, which can only include the dispensary address, not to
exceed two (2) square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly
illuminated. Exterior signs on the dispensary building shall not obstruct the
entrance or windows on the dispensary.
            (2)   Electronic message boards and temporary signs are not
permitted in connection with a dispensary.
            (3)   Signs shall not include any realistic or stylized graphical
representation of the cannabis plant or its parts or any realistic or stylized
graphical representation of drug paraphernalia.
            (4)   Signs shall not include any wording that would identify the
property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical, botanical or
slanging terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis intoxication or
drug paraphernalia including, but not limited to, "cannabis", "marijuana",
"weed", "pot", "420", "joint", "Mary Jane", "ganja", "hash", "herb", "doobie",
"bong", "blunt", "bowl", "zoned", "sloshed", "burnt", "stoned", "green day",
"reefer", "smoke", "toke", "wacky tobaccy/baccy", "spliff", "roach", "skunk",
etc.
            (5)   A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near all
dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: "Only
cardholders, designated caregivers, and staff may enter these premises. Persons
under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering.". The required text shall be
no larger than one inch (1") in height.
            (6)   Any additional merchandise packaging provided by the
dispensary, such as bags, sacks, totes or boxes, shall be opaque without text
or graphics advertising or identifying the contents of the products contained
within.
         k.   Drug Paraphernalia Sales: Medical cannabis dispensaries that
display or sell drug paraphernalia shall do so in compliance with the Illinois
drug paraphernalia control act 5  and the compassionate use of medical cannabis
pilot program act (public act 098-0122).
         l.   Age And Access Limitations: It shall be unlawful for any medical
cannabis dispensary to allow any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years
of age on the premises. Dispensaries shall not employ anyone under the age of
eighteen (18). Access shall be limited exclusively to dispensary staff,
cardholders, designated caregivers, local and state officials, and those
specifically authorized under the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot
program act (public act 098-0122).
         m.   Hours Of Operation: Medical cannabis dispensaries shall operate
only between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
         n.   Drive-Through Windows: A medical cannabis dispensary may not have
a drive-through service.
         o.   Security And Video Surveillance:
            (1)   The medical cannabis dispensary shall be an enclosed, locked
facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on the premises,
including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably designed to ensure
the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
            (2)   The medical cannabis dispensary parking area, client
entrance, sales area, backroom, storage areas and delivery bay and entrance
shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be
viewed by dispensary staff, continually recorded in a tamperproof format.
            (3)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes
the following language: "This area is under live/recorded video surveillance to
aid in the prosecution of any crimes committed against this facility or its
patrons.".
            (4)   The zoning administrator shall review the adequacy of
lighting, security and video surveillance installations with assistance from
appropriate local law enforcement officials.
            (5)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall report all criminal
activities to the police immediately upon discovery.
            (6)   Deliveries shall occur during normal business hours within a
secure enclosed delivery bay; no delivery shall be visible from the exterior of
the building.
         p.   Conduct On Site:
            (1)   Loitering is prohibited on the dispensary property.
            (2)   It shall be prohibited to smoke, inhale or consume cannabis
products in the medical cannabis dispensary or anywhere on the property
occupied by the dispensary. A sign, at least 8.5 by eleven inches (11"), shall
be posted inside the dispensary building in a conspicuous place and visible to
a client and shall include the following language: "Smoking, eating, drinking
or other forms of consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on dispensary
property.". (Ord. 2014-919, 3-19-2014)
   13. Cannabis Uses:
      a.   Definitions:
                                 Has the same definition as "cannabis" set
CANNABIS:                        forth in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis
                                 Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
                                 A "cannabis business establishment," "infuser
                                 organization," or "infuser", as defined in
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and
                                 Tax Act, as amended, and such other cannabis
                                 business establishments authorized under the
                                 Act, as amended.
                                 Means "dispensing organization" and
CANNABIS DISPENSARY:             "dispensary" as defined in Section 1-10 of the
                                 Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
                                 Means "cultivation center" as defined in
CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:     Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and
                                 Tax Act, as amended.
                                 Means "craft grower" as defined in Section 1-
CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:           10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as
                                 amended.
                                 Means "infuser organization" or "infuser" as
CANNABIS INFUSER:                defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis
                                 Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
                                 Means "transporting organization" or
CANNABIS TRANSPORTER:            "transporter" as defined in Section 1-10 of
                                 the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as
                                 amended.
                                 Means "processing organization" or "processer"
CANNABIS PROCESSOR:              as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis
                                 Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
ON-PREMISES CANNABIS CONSUMPTION A cannabis business establishment or other
ESTABLISHMENT:                   entity that is authorized or permitted to
                                 allow the on-premises consumption of cannabis.
 
         b.   Location Restrictions: A cannabis business establishment may not
be located within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a pre-
existing public or private school, playground, recreation center, public park,
public library, or child care facility.
         c.   Site Plan Review: All cannabis business establishments shall be
subject to all site capacity calculation and site plan review procedures as
required by this title. Cannabis business    establishments must submit a site
plan as part of the conditional use application. The Village may impose
additional setback, landscaping, screening, and buffering requirements on a
cannabis business establishment to mitigate impacts on surrounding properties.
         d. State Licensing: Applicants seeking conditional use approval for a
cannabis business establishment must submit a complete copy of their license
application and all plans submitted to the State of Illinois, or any agency
thereof, as part of their conditional use application. Before issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or otherwise opening to the public, cannabis business
establishments must provide a copy of their license to operate as a cannabis
business establishment from the respective state agency.
         e.   Compliance with State Regulations and Rules: All cannabis
business establishments shall comply with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
as amended, and all rules and regulations adopted in accordance thereto.
         f.   Odor Control: All cannabis business establishments must submit a
plan for the control of cannabis odors from the subject property as part of the
conditional use application.
         g.   Security: All cannabis business establishments must submit a
security plan as part of the conditional use application.
         h.   Drive-Thru Windows: A cannabis dispensary may not have a drive-
through service.
         i.   Cannabis Dispensary Parking: Cannabis dispensaries are required
to have five (5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor
area.
         j.   Traffic Study: Cannabis business establishments must submit a
study showing the impact of the proposed business on traffic in the surrounding
area as part of the conditional use    application.
         k.   Random Inspections: Cannabis dispensaries are subject to random
and unannounced inspections by local law enforcement to verify compliance with
all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
         l.   Cannabis Waste: All cannabis business establishments must submit
a plan for the recycling and destruction of cannabis waste as part of the
conditional use application, and all cannabis business establishments must
comply with all state, county, and Village regulations governing cannabis
waste.
         m.   Hours of Operation: Unless otherwise prescribed by state law, the
Village may impose limits on the hours of operations of cannabis business
establishments as a condition of any conditional use approval.
         n.   On-Premises Consumption Prohibition: No cannabis business
establishment may allow the smoking, inhalation, or consumption of cannabis on
the premises in any form. A sign, at least 8.5 by 11 inches, shall be posted
inside the cannabis business establishment in a conspicuous place and visible
to patrons and shall include the following language: "Smoking, eating, drinking
or other forms of consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on the
premises of this establishment."
         o.   Number. The number of each type of cannabis business
establishments allowed in the Village may be established by the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 2014-919, 3-19-2014; Ord. 2019-1068, 9-17-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  10-5-4 of this Chapter.
2 1. Title 8 of this Code.
3 1. 410 ILCS 130/105-B.
4 1. 430 ILCS 130/130-D.
5 1. 720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.
10-5-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The regulations contained in this section are established to
encourage creative and imaginative design of coordinated land uses and to
provide relief from the subdivision and zoning district requirements which are
designed for conventional developments, but which may inhibit innovation and
cause undue hardship with regard to the use of parcels which present technical
development problems. Planned unit developments are intended to allow
substantial flexibility in planning and designing a project. This flexibility
often occurs in the form of relief from compliance with conventional zoning and
subdivision requirements. Ideally, this flexibility results in a development
that is better planned, that contains more amenities, and ultimately a
development that is more desirable to live in than one produced in accordance
with typical zoning ordinance and subdivision controls. These regulations are
established to provide a safe and desirable living environment for residential
areas characterized by a unified building and site development program, to
preserve natural features of the site and to provide adequate open space for
recreation and other community purposes. Further, these standards and
regulations are established to provide for the design, review and approval of
any development of land within the wastewater management overlay district as
shown on figure 8 of the Wadsworth comprehensive plan update of 2000.
   B.   Districts: A planned unit development may be located in any zoning
district as shown in section
10-5-14, table 8 of this chapter, subject to the procedures and standards set
forth in this section.
   C.   Permitted Uses: Unless expressly modified pursuant to subsection E of
this section, the uses permitted in a planned unit development shall be: 1)
those listed as permitted uses in the underlying zone and any overlay district
in which the property is located, or 2) those uses approved as conditional uses
in accordance with this title, or 3) such other uses as may be approved
pursuant to subsection E of this section.
   D.   Standards: A planned unit development shall comply with the following
standards, unless expressly modified pursuant to subsection E of this section:
      1.   Lot Size, Yard, And Bulk Regulations: The planned unit development
shall comply with the standards established in section
10-5-14, table 8, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations For Planned Unit
Developments", of this chapter.
      2.   Minimum Site Area: The minimum land area to be included in a planned
unit development shall be ten (10) acres.
      3.   Basic Density: The basic density (dwelling units per acre of land)
permitted in any planned unit development shall be as shown in section
10-5-14, table 7, "Site Capacity And Environmental Performance Standards", of
this chapter.
      4.   Number Of Dwelling Units Permitted: The number of dwelling units
permitted in a planned unit development shall be determined by using the site
capacity calculations shown in section
10-5-3, "Site Capacity Regulations", of this chapter.
      5.   Open Space: Open space shall be provided for recreational and other
outdoor benefits and activities. The minimum open space requirements for
particular zoning districts are set forth in section
10-5-14, table 7 of this chapter, but in no event shall be less than twenty
percent (20%), and in the AG district not less than eighty percent (80%), of
the gross site be developed for active or passive recreation, stormwater
detention and other open space uses including the conservation of significant
natural features of the site such as floodplains, wetlands, forests, scenic
areas and vistas. All such areas shall be considered recreational open space
whether or not they are developed for recreational use or left in a natural
state.
      6.   Separation Of Traffic: A planned unit development shall provide
maximum separation of vehicular traffic from pedestrianways and play areas.
      7.   Unified Design: A planned unit development shall provide a unified
design based upon significant architectural features, compatible building
materials and a distinctive arrangement of structures and open spaces.
      8.   Nonresidential Uses: Adequate sites for retail shopping and service
areas, schools, places of worship and other community services may be provided
where the development is large enough to support these services in accordance
with the standards established in this section.
      9.   Surrounding Uses And Property; Relationship Of Development To:
Existing residential developments shall be buffered from all uses in a planned
unit development other than single-family homes and permanent open space. Such
permanent open space including recreational areas shall have an average width
of at least two hundred feet (200') provided that no portion of such a buffer
shall have a minimum width of less than one hundred feet (100').
      10.   Stormwater Detention: Surface drainage and stormwater detention
facilities shall be designed in accordance with the standards of title 11 of
this code.
      11.   Flooding: The floodplain regulations of section
10-5-2 of this chapter shall apply to all planned unit developments.
      12.   Parking: The off street parking requirements of section
10-5-9 of this chapter shall apply to all planned unit developments.
      13.   Street Improvements: All streets and street improvements shall be
designed by a registered professional engineer. The width of streets and the
design of the pavement and other structures shall be based upon their intended
use and shall be related to the overall design of the planned unit development.
Any street dedicated to the public shall be designed and constructed to the
standards of title 11 of this code.
      14.   Required Setbacks: All structures located on the perimeter of a
planned unit development shall be set back from the property line or street
right of way a distance equal to the required setback in the adjacent zone.
Interior yards and setbacks shall conform to the regulations established in
section
10-5-14, table 8 of this chapter.
      15.   Height Restriction: Any principal structure within a planned unit
development may extend up to thirty five feet (35') in height. Further, a
planned unit development may approve a structure in excess of thirty five feet
(35') in height provided it does not exceed a height determined by a plane
extending inward from a grade at the perimeter of the planned unit development
at an angle of thirty degrees (30°) above the horizontal and provided further
that no structure shall exceed a height of fifty feet (50').
   E.   Departure From Standards: The planned unit development may depart from
strict conformance with the required density, dimension, area, height, bulk,
use and specific content regulations of this title, as well as standards
required by title 11 of this code, but only to the extent specified in the
preliminary development plan and documents authorizing the planned unit
development so long as the planned unit development provides tangible benefits
to the neighborhood or community in which it is located. Benefits to the
community of the planned unit development and the improved design of the
planned unit must justify the intended variation from the normal requirements
of this title. These benefits shall be in the form of provisions of exceptional
amenities, design excellence, etc. The waiver of any requirement shall be the
direct cause of accrual of positive benefits to the residents of the
development as well as to the general community (e.g., waiver of yard
requirements might result in more usable open space). Departure from any
requirement specified in this title or other village ordinances and regulations
is a privilege, and shall be granted only upon recommendation of the zoning
board of appeals and approval by the village board.
   F.   Preapplication Process (Step One): Before submitting an application for
a planned unit development, the applicant shall request a preapplication
meeting with the village administrator to meet with the preapplication
committee. After the preapplication meeting the applicant shall submit a sketch
plan and make an oral presentation of the proposed planned unit development to
the village board. The purpose of this presentation shall be to inform the
village board of the proposed development and the manner in which it has been
planned to take advantage of the regulations of this section.
   G.   Preliminary Development Plan Process (Step Two):
      1.   Application: After the preapplication procedure of subsection F of
this section has been completed, the applicant shall submit a completed
preliminary development plan application and reimbursement of fees agreement
with appropriate monetary deposit. The preliminary development plan application
shall include, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   A boundary survey of the site prepared by a registered land
surveyor.
         b.   A topographic map of the site with a contour interval of not more
than two feet (2').
         c.   A map drawn to scale showing streets, lots, parcels and sites for
all uses in the planned unit development including areas to be conveyed,
dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, conservation areas,
detention facilities, school sites, public buildings and similar uses or for
common areas for the use of the residents.
         d.   A site plan drawn to scale showing the approximate location of
all buildings, structures and improvements other than single- family homes.
         e.   A preliminary resource protection plan as required in subsection
10-5-3E of this chapter.
         f.   Site capacity calculations in conformance with section
10-5-3 of this chapter.
         g.   All preliminary engineering as required by title 11 of this code.
The village engineer shall review and approve the preliminary engineering and
shall report his recommendations to the plan commission and village board in
writing.
         h.   A preliminary plat of subdivision when a subdivision of land
subject to the village's subdivision ordinance is proposed in connection with a
planned unit development. Review of the tentative plat of the proposed
subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with review of the preliminary
development plan.
         i.   A preliminary landscape plan prepared in conformance with title
12 of this code.
         j.   Natural resource opinion from the Lake County soil and water
conservation district.
         k.   A consultation report from the Illinois department of natural
resources concerning endangered species protection and natural areas
preservation.
         l.   Correspondence from the Illinois historic preservation agency in
regards to historic, architectural or archaeological sites.
         m.   Correspondence from the Illinois department of transportation
(IDOT) or the Lake County division of transportation (LCDOT) where the planned
unit development has access to roads under the jurisdiction of these agencies
indicating that access will be permitted and the location of the access.
         n.   Correspondence from the Lake County health department indicating
they have reviewed the preliminary development plan and soils information for
septic systems on the planned unit development site.
         o.   Draft agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern
the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development
and any of its common open areas, streets, parking facilities or other
facilities and improvements.
         p.   Elevation and/or perspective drawings in sketch form of all
proposed structures and improvements except single-family residences and their
accessory buildings. The drawings need not be the result of final architectural
decisions, but shall be in sufficient detail to accurately portray the
buildings proposed.
         q.   A written narrative statement containing a detailed explanation
of the size and character of the planned unit development and the manner in
which it has been planned, including:
            (1)   Description of the site.
            (2)   Description of the proposed development.
            (3)   Discussion of any proposed rezoning, which is part of the
project.
            (4)   Request for approval of a conditional use permit for the
planned unit development.
            (5)   Discussion of the specific ways in which the planned unit
development departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations.
            (6)   Discussion of the ways in which the planned unit development
is related to the natural features of the site and any conservation features
incorporated into the design of the planned unit development.
            (7)   A statistical summary including detailed information on land
use, proposed development, population, traffic generation and assessed
valuation.
            (8)   A development schedule including:
               (A)   The approximate date when construction of the project can
be expected to begin.
               (B)   The phases in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin.
               (C)   The anticipated rate of development.
         r.   Any other information or documentation requested by the village.
      2.   Consultant Report: Within thirty (30) days of submittal of a
complete preliminary development plan application and supporting documents the
village planner, village engineer, and village attorney will provide a written
report with recommendations to the village plan commission, zoning board of
appeals, and the village board.
      3.   Zoning Board Of Appeals Review And Recommendation:
         a.   Hearing: The zoning board of appeals shall conduct a public
hearing on the application for a conditional use permit for a planned unit
development, any requested departures under subsection E of this section, and
the proposed preliminary development plan in accordance with the procedures
established for conditional use permits in this section. In addition to the
notice required by state statute, notice of the application for preliminary
development plan approval shall be given by the petitioner by registered or
certified first class mail, at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the
ZBA meeting at which it will be considered, to the owners of record of all
parcels of land to a depth of three (3) separate owners but not to exceed
within one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from the perimeter of
the proposed planned unit development; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall require a developer to give notice to the owners of property located
outside the village.
         b.   Decision: Following the public hearing and review of the
application for approval of the preliminary development plan, the zoning board
of appeals shall, within thirty (30) days, unless an extension is requested by
the applicant, recommend approval, modification, or disapproval of the
conditional use permit for a planned unit development, requested departures,
and approval of a preliminary development plan, and the reasons therefor, or
indicate why a report and recommendation cannot be rendered to the village
board. The zoning board of appeals may recommend such special conditions as it
may deem necessary to ensure conformance with the objectives and standards
established in this section. The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act
within thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree,
shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the conditional use permit,
requested departures, and proposed preliminary development plan as submitted.
      4.   Plan Commission Review And Recommendation:
         a.   Meeting: The application for preliminary development plan
approval shall be submitted to the plan commission for review at a public
meeting.
         b.   Decision: Following a public meeting and review of the
application for approval of the preliminary development plan, the supporting
documents, and village consultants' review letters, the plan commission shall
review the preliminary development plan and within thirty (30) days, unless an
extension is requested by the applicant, recommend approval, modification, or
disapproval of the preliminary development plan, and the reasons therefor, or
indicate why a report and recommendation cannot be rendered to the village
board. The plan commission may recommend such special conditions as it may deem
necessary to ensure conformance with the objectives and standards established
in this section. The failure of the plan commission to act within thirty (30)
days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a
recommendation for the denial of the preliminary development plan as submitted.
      5.   Village Board Decision: Within sixty (60) days following the receipt
of the recommendations of the plan commission and the zoning board of appeals,
or their failure to act as above provided, the board of trustees shall either:
a) deny the application for approval of the preliminary development plan; b)
refer it back to the plan commission and/or zoning board of appeals for further
consideration of specified matters; or c) approve by ordinance the preliminary
development plan, conditional use permit, and departures under subsection E of
this section, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by
the applicant as a condition of such approval, to permit development of the
planned unit development as approved; provided, however, that every such
ordinance and conditional use permit shall be expressly conditioned upon
approval of the final development plan in accordance with subsection H of this
section upon the applicant's compliance with all provisions of this code and
the ordinance granting the conditional use permit. The failure of the board of
trustees to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying approval of the
preliminary development plan.
      6.   Effect Of Preliminary Development Plan Approval: Approval of a
preliminary development plan shall not constitute approval of the final
development plan. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the
layout submitted on the preliminary development plan as a guide to the
preparation of the final development plan which will be submitted for approval
of the village and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary approval,
if any. No building or construction, excluding public improvements, may take
place within the proposed planned unit development, and no permits may be
issued, until the final development plan and accompanying data has been
submitted, approved, and recorded.
      7.   Limitation On Preliminary Development Plan Approval: Subject to an
extension of time granted by the village board, unless a final development plan
covering at least the area designated in the preliminary development plan as
the first phase or unit of the planned unit development has been filed within
two (2) years from the date the board of trustees grants preliminary
development plan approval, or in any case where the applicant fails to file the
final development plan and to proceed with development in accordance with the
provisions of this code, the preliminary development plan approval shall
automatically expire and be rendered void.
   H.   Final Development Plan Process (Step Three):
      1.   Application: Within two (2) years of the approval of a preliminary
development plan in accordance with subsection G of this section, the applicant
shall submit a completed final development plan application. The final
development plans may be filed in phases in accordance with the development
schedule. The final development plan application shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
         a.   All final engineering documents as required by the subdivision
regulations, title 11 of this code, or as otherwise required by the conditional
use permit.
         b.   A final plat prepared in accordance with the regulations of title
11 of this code showing thereon all easements for utilities, stormwater
management, the protection of landscaping, scenic easement and resource
protection as required by village ordinance.
         c.   Final landscape plan prepared in conformance with title 12 of
this code.
         d.   Final resource protection plan in conformance with subsection
10-5-3E of this chapter.
         e.   Agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of
its common open areas, streets, parking facilities or other facilities and
improvements in final form as approved by the village attorney.
         f.   Signed copies of all agreements covering school, park, library
and fire protection donations as approved by the village attorney.
         g.   Receipts for the payment of all fees required by the village.
      2.   Consultant Report: Within thirty (30) days of submittal of a
complete final development plan application and supporting documents the
village planner, village engineer, and village attorney will provide a written
report with recommendations to the village plan commission and the village
board.
      3.   Plan Commission Review And Recommendation: The plan commission shall
review the final development plan at a public meeting. Within thirty (30) days
after the conclusion of the plan commission's review of the final development
plan, the plan commission shall make a report and recommendation to the village
board as to whether the final development plan conforms to the requirements of
the applicable ordinances and is in substantial conformance with the approved
preliminary development plan. The failure of the plan commission to act within
thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the owner may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision recommending denial of the preliminary development
plan.
      4.   Village Board Decision: Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the
recommendation of the plan commission, the village board shall approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the final development plan. Any approval or
approval with conditions shall be in the form of an ordinance. The failure of
the board of trustees to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying
approval of the final development plan.
   I.   Modification Of Plan:
      1.   The Village Board may, from time to time, approve minor changes
within a planned unit development. Such changes:
         a.   Shall not increase the density or number of dwelling units
permitted in the planned unit development.
         b.   Shall not abrogate any design or development standard governing
the development of the planned unit whether established by ordinance, by
variance or by the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         c.   Shall not establish a use not otherwise permitted by this title
as a part of the planned unit development.
         d.   Shall not reduce any required yard setback from a street or
property line that adjoins property that lies outside the planned unit
development.
         e.   Shall not reduce any open space areas on the property.
      2.   Any modification of a final plan contrary to the above standards
shall be a major change and must follow the procedures for approval of a
preliminary development plan as set forth in subsection G of this section,
including the issuance of a new conditional use permit.
   J.   Failure To Complete Improvements: All public improvements shall be
completed within two (2) years of final approval. At its discretion and for
good cause, the Village Board may extend, for one additional year, the period
for the completion of public improvements.
   K.   Fire District Review Fee: At the time of final development plan
approval, and prior to recording of the final plat, the developer shall pay a
fire district review fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per dwelling unit or
such other amount as may be established from time to time by the Village Board
or such other amount as may be specifically approved by the Village Board for a
particular planned unit development. For commercial and all other
nonresidential lots within a planned unit development, the developer shall pay
a fire district review fee as determined by the Village Board for the
particular development. Upon receipt by the Village, the fire district review
fees shall be remitted to the fire district within which the property is
located. (Ord. 2010-815, 5-18-2010)
10-5-7: STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Uses Permitted As Accessory Uses: The term accessory use includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Generally: Uses which are permitted in a particular zone only as
accessory uses as shown in section
10-4-4, table 1, "Uses Permitted In Zones", of this title, even though such
uses may be principal uses elsewhere. In the zones indicated, such uses shall
not be established as principal uses and must be accessory to a permitted
principal use existing and being maintained and operated as such at the time of
establishment of the accessory use. Such accessory use may serve a broader
public or market than the principal use to which it is accessory. (Ord. 94-397,
4-5-1994)
      2.   For Residential Uses (SE, SR And SD Districts):
         a.   Stables, barns, gazebos, private greenhouses, sheds or buildings
for domestic storage are accessory buildings to a single-family dwelling.
Freestanding garages up to a size of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet
will not be considered accessory buildings in homes which lack an attached
garage but will be considered part of the principal building. No more than two
(2) accessory buildings (freestanding accessory structures) will be permitted.
In the event that the detached garage exceeds seven hundred twenty (720) square
feet, then any excess over seven hundred twenty (720) square feet shall be
included in the total aggregate square footage permitted as accessory
buildings. (Ord. 2014-924, 5-6-2014)
         b.   One story detached accessory structures used as tool or storage
sheds, children's playhouses, chicken coop, and similar uses may be built
without foundation or footing, provided the floor area of the structure does
not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. A permit from the Village will
be needed before construction. Tool or storage sheds, children's playhouses,
and chicken coops under one hundred (100) square feet will not be counted
against one's accessory buildings allotment, provided that only one such
structure of said types will receive this exemption. (Ord. 2019-1060, 5-7-2019)
         c.   All other accessory buildings must be permanent in nature and
built of masonry, wood frame or post frame and must comply with any applicable
foundation or footing requirements as specified by the International
Residential Code, as it may be amended from time to time, as well as applicable
permit requirements of this Code.
Metal garages, open air buildings such as carports, fabric/plexiglas or plastic
enclosed buildings (greenhouses excepted) and PODS type storage buildings are
not permitted. PODS type storage buildings may be used on a temporary basis not
to exceed thirty (30) days as long as use of said building is in conjunction
with a move or construction project. All accessory buildings must be compatible
in appearance with the principal building. Compatibility shall include similar
color schemes in agreement with the principal building. All accessory building
plans must adhere to Village Building Codes and Village Zoning Codes and must
be approved by the Lake County Health Department and the Village building
inspector. (Ord. 2014-924, 5-6-2014)
         d.   The total square footage of all accessory buildings on a parcel
or lot is to be determined by the total square footage of the living space of
the single-family dwelling and the size of the lot or parcel.
The maximum square footage that the accessory buildings may aggregate shall be
determined as follows:
            (1)   In the SD (properties over 1 acre in size), SE and SR Zoning
Districts, fifty percent (50%) of the total living space of the single-family
dwelling (not including the basement) and an additional percentage of the total
living space of the single- family dwelling (not including the basement) as
follows:
               (A)   Less than two (2) acres: No additional square footage is
permitted;
               (B)   Two (2) acres or more but less than three (3) acres:
Twelve and five-tenths percent (12.5%) of the living space of the principal
building (excluding basement);
               (C)   Three (3) acres or more but less than four (4) acres:
Twenty five percent (25%) of the living space of the principal building
(excluding basement);
               (D)   Four (4) acres or more but less than five (5) acres:
Thirty seven and five-tenths percent (37.5%) of the living space of the
principal building (excluding basement);
               (E)   Five (5) acres or more: Fifty percent (50%) of the living
space of the principal building (excluding basement).
As an example, on a three (3) acre lot with a principal dwelling consisting of
three thousand (3,000) square feet of total living space, the total aggregate
square footage of accessory buildings that would be permitted would equal fifty
percent (50%) of three thousand (3,000) square feet, or one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet, plus twenty five percent (25%) of three thousand
(3,000) square feet, or seven hundred fifty (750) square feet, for a total
permitted square footage of all accessory structures of two thousand two
hundred fifty (2,250) square feet.
               (F)   No industrial or commercial uses shall be permitted for
accessory buildings in residential areas, except as specifically shown in
section
10-4-4, table 1 of this title. The maximum allowable area covered by accessory
buildings shall never exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the square footage
of the living area of the principal building (excluding basement). Accessory
buildings must also satisfy all other requirements of this title, including
applicable lot coverage limitations.
            (2)   In the SD (properties less than 1 acre in size) Zoning
District, the total square footage of all accessory buildings shall be computed
in accordance with all of the terms and provisions of section
10-4-4, table 2 of this title. No industrial or commercial uses shall be
permitted for accessory buildings in the SD District, except as specifically
shown in section
10-4-4, table 1 of this title. (Ord. 2008-759, 6-17-2008)
         e.   Driveways: All detached accessory buildings three hundred (300)
square feet and larger in size constructed or substantially rebuilt after
February 6, 2024 shall be provided with driveway access by way of an extension
of an existing driveway or the installation of a new driveway with direct
access to a public right of way and installed as specified by the Village Code.
         f.   Electrical: All detached accessory building three hundred (300)
square feet larger in size constructed or substantially rebuilt after February
6, 2024 shall have the all of the following electrical components and
specifications:
            (1)   Installed electrical service not exceeding that provided to
the principal structure with a minimum of one hundred ten (110) volts and at
least two (2) twenty (20) ampere circuits;
            (2)   At least two (2) wall-mounted duplex receptacles protected by
ground fault circuit interrupters;
            (3)   At least one (1) overhead light fixture operated by a wall-
mounted switch; and
            (4)   At least one (1) overhead duplex receptable for powering an
overhead garage door opener.(Ord. 2008-759, 6-17-2008)
      3.   For Business Uses (B And CR Districts):
         a.   Storage building for merchandise or materials normally carried in
stock as part of a principal use, employee training facilities, dining
facilities and similar facilities for the exclusive use of the company and its
employees, off street parking and loading facilities, garages.
         b.   All accessory structures shall be permanent structures of
conventional construction including a concrete or cinder block foundation.
(Ord. 92-368, 7-7-1992)
      4.   For Industrial Uses (OR, LI, LI-1, And LI-2 Districts):
         a.   Process, production or maintenance facilities clearly subordinate
and incidental to the principal use; employee training facilities, dining
facilities and similar facilities for the exclusive use of the company and its
employees; guardhouses, garages, off street parking and loading facilities,
storage buildings.
         b.   All accessory structures shall be of conventional construction
including a concrete slab floor and concrete foundation. Temporary or
semipermanent buildings such as pole barns are prohibited. (Ord. 2004-651, 2-
17-2004)
      5.   For All Uses: Signs as permitted by section
10-5-8 of this chapter, public utility equipment and supporting structures,
other uses meeting the definition of an "accessory use" in section
10-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      6.   Agricultural Uses (AG District): Accessory buildings within the
Agricultural District shall be compatible in use with the principal use. All
accessory buildings must be approved by the Lake County Health Department.
(Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
      7.   Public Uses (PL District): Accessory buildings and principal
buildings within the Public Land District constructed as a pole barn/post frame
construction will be allowed as a permitted use. All buildings with septic
systems must be approved by the Lake County Health Department. (Ord. 2009-780,
4-21-2009)
   B.   Location Of Accessory Uses:
      1.   Front Yard: No accessory building may be located in a required front
yard in any zone and no accessory use may be located in a required front yard
in a Residential Zone other than a sign as permitted by section
10-5-8, "Signs", of this chapter.
      2.   Side Yard: No accessory building may be located in a required side
yard in any zone, except that in a Business or Industrial Zone, an accessory
building may be located adjacent to a railroad right-of-way for the purpose of
providing a rail loading dock.
      3.   Rear Yard: No accessory building may be located in a required rear
yard in any zone except:
         a.   No accessory building shall be located within six feet (6') of a
principal building. An attached accessory building shall be considered as a
part of the "principal building" as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title.
         b.   In a Business or Industrial Zone, an accessory building may be
located adjacent to a railroad right-of-way but only for the purpose of
providing a rail loading dock.
   C.   Construction Of Accessory Buildings: An accessory building shall not be
erected prior to the establishment or construction of the principal building or
use to which it is necessary.
   D.   Standards: All accessory uses shall conform to the definition of an
"accessory use" found in section
10-2-3 of this title, and to the regulations of the district in which it is
located as shown in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", of this title.
   E.   Regulations For Specific Accessory Uses:
      1.   Customary Home Occupations: See section
10-5-10 of this chapter.
      2.   Fallout Shelters: Fallout shelters are permitted as principal or
accessory uses and structures in any zone, subject to the yard and lot coverage
regulations of the zone. These shelters may contain or be contained in other
structures or may be constructed separately. In addition to shelter use, they
may be used for any principal or accessory use permitted in the zone, subject
to the applicable zone regulations and all other applicable ordinances, but
shall not be used for principal or accessory uses prohibited expressly or by
implication in the zone.
      3.   Signs: See section
10-5-8 of this chapter.
      4.   Swimming Pools: Private swimming pools for the exclusive use of the
residents of the principal use and their guests are permitted in any
Residential Zone, provided that no swimming pool or part thereof, including,
but not limited to, aprons, walks and equipment rooms shall protrude into any
required yard. Swimming pools must be fenced or otherwise protected against
intrusion. All pools having a depth greater than twenty four inches (24") shall
be fenced. No private swimming pool accessory to a residence shall be operated
as a business or as a private club.
      5.   Tents: No tent shall be used, erected or maintained as living
quarters. Tents used in Commercial or Industrial Zones or tents used for
camping purposes, wherever permitted, shall be of a temporary nature. (Ord. 91-
341, 4-2-1991)
   F.   Front Yard Accessory Structure Limitations: Notwithstanding any other
provisions contained within this zoning title, no accessory structure shall be
constructed between the principal structure and the front building line except
as approved by the Village Board for good cause shown. Each application to the
Village Board for such a structure shall be accompanied by sufficient
information such as a site plan and building elevations to enable the Village
Board to determine whether the proposed structure would adversely impact upon
adjacent properties or would be otherwise compatible with the existing uses and
purpose and intent of this zoning title. (Ord. 2003-618, 2-18-2003)
   G.   Chickens: The keeping of hens, the female of the chicken species,
Gallus domesticus, shall be permitted on single family residential properties
(with 1 principal structure) containing a minimum of six thousand (6,000)
square feet (sq. ft.), subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Number Of Hens:
         a.   This table identifies the number of hens allowed per single
family residential property:
 
Minimum Lot Size                  Maximum Number Of Hens Allowed
6,000 sq. ft. to 42,999 sq. ft.   6
43,000 sq. ft. to 79,999 sq. ft.  12
80,000 sq. ft. to 199,999 sq. ft. 24
 
      2.   Chicken Coops And Yards:
         a.   Space Required: All hens shall be provided with a covered inside
enclosure and adjacent outside fenced area.
         b.   Hens Contained: Hens shall be kept in the chicken coop or chicken
yard at all times.
         c.   Permits: A building permit is required for all enclosures and if
applicable, an electrical permit.
         d.   Electrical Service: Electrical service to enclosures and/or
shelters shall comply with all Village Building and Electrical Codes, rules and
regulations. Under no circumstances shall electrical service be provided to an
enclosure and/or shelter by using extension cords or other temporary means.
         e.   Chicken Coops:
            (1)   Hens shall be kept in an enclosed outdoor coop, an accessory
structure used for the purpose of keeping live chickens, so as to offer
protection from weather elements and from predators and trespassers.
            (2)   Coops shall be built and kept in such a manner, large enough
to provide at least four (4) square feet per hen and allow the hens easy
ingress and egress to an enclosed chicken yard. Coops shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in height.
            (3)   Coops shall be designed to be predator and pest resistant,
and easily accessed for cleaning and maintenance.
            (4)   Coops shall be covered with uniform materials and shall be
maintained intact with all parts secure. Any repairs shall maintain consistency
with original structure in appearance and condition. The coop must be replaced,
removed, or repaired upon evidence of deterioration.
            (5)   Exterior lighting shall not continuously illuminate a coop.
         f.   Chicken Yards:
            (1)   Coops shall be connected with an enclosed yard or run with a
minimum size of eight (8) square feet per chicken. The enclosed yard shall be
surrounded by a fence made of wood or metal and of sufficient height to contain
the hens.
            (2)   Hens may be allowed to roam in a fenced backyard, but shall
not be allowed to roam outside of the fenced yard. Hens must be returned to the
secured chicken coop each night.
            (3)   Chicken yards constructed with wire mesh fencing shall retain
a flat, uniform plane, in a well-maintained, safe condition.
            (4)   Barbed wire, razor wire or similar fencing materials are
prohibited.
         g.   Location And Setbacks:
            (1)   Street Setbacks: Chicken coops and yards shall not be located
between the principal building and any improved alley, easement for purposes of
ingress or egress, or road right-of-way.
            (2)   Lot Line Setback: All enclosures/structures shall be located
a minimum of ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
            (3)   Setback To Habitable Structures: In addition to setback
requirements for accessory structures, chicken coops shall be located a minimum
of thirty feet (30') from any existing structures on any adjoining parcel, such
as dwellings, non- residential buildings, patios, porches, gazebos, decks, or
swimming pools, but not including storage structures such as garages or sheds.
            (4)   Location: All chickens, chicken coops, and chicken yards
shall be kept/located in rear yards only.
      3.   Prohibitions And Management Practices:
         a.   Roosters: The keeping of roosters shall not be allowed on any
property less than five acres (200,000 square feet) in size.
         b.   Odors: Chicken coops and yards must be cleaned on a regular
basis, so they remain free from undue accumulated waste, such as to cause odors
reasonably detectable on adjacent properties.
         c.   Construction Of Coops: Coops shall be enclosed and well-
ventilated and hens shall be protected from the weather and predators.
         d.   Feed: All feed for hens shall, except when placed for consumption
by the hens, be kept in containers with tightly fitted lids that are rodent-
proof.
         e.   Maintenance Of Coops: Coops shall be maintained in good repair
and non-dilapidated condition.
         f.   Slaughter: No outdoor slaughter of chickens shall be allowed, and
any slaughtering or related processing must be conducted in a humane and
sanitary manner.
         g.   Sales: No sales of eggs or hens shall be allowed.
         h.   Other Types Of Animals: No other poultry, including but not
limited to geese, ducks and turkeys shall be kept on the property.
         i.   Disposal Of Waste And Deceased Hens: All waste and deceased hens
must be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
         j.   Hen Health: Hen health must be maintained with proper feed and
water.
         k.   Breeding Prohibited: The breeding of chickens on-site is
expressly prohibited.
         l.   Animal Cruelty: Animal cruelty laws pertain to hens.
         m.   Laws, Rules And Regulations: All persons maintaining hen
facilities shall comply with all local, County, State and Federal laws, rules
and regulations pertaining to maintaining and keeping hens. (Ord. 2019-1060, 5-
7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-1146, 2-6-2024)
10-5-8: SIGNS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of these sign regulations is to:
         a.   Maintain traffic safety by minimizing the distractions, hazards,
or obstructions to the motoring public and others caused by signs;
         b.   Provide proper identity to local business, industrial, and
government users;
         c.   Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of the Village;
         d.   Promote signage that is compatible with adjoining uses as well as
the general character of the area and zoning district in which the signage is
located; and
         e.   Enable these sign regulations to be easily enforceable and
interpreted so as to be fair and consistent.
      2.   Applicability: Signs may be created, placed, established, painted,
or maintained only in conformance with the provisions of this section. These
regulations may be subject to further restrictions by other applicable
regulations of the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this
code. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008)
   B.   Definitions:
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene. The term "animated sign" expressly
includes multicolor electronic message center signs, video screens, television
screens, plasma screens and holographic displays, but does not include single
color electronic message center signs.
   AWNING: A rooflike structure typically made of cloth, metal, or other
material attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a building.
Awnings are typically erected over a window, doorway, or building front and
they may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the building.
   BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
   BENCH SIGNS: Any bench that is in the front yard, side yard, corner side
yard, or visible from a public right of way that is made from any material that
has any message, advertisement, or logo printed or attached to the seating area
or structure of bench. Benches and associated structures utilized for public
transportation in and out of the right of way would be identified as a bench
sign.
   BOX SIGN: A sign (also known as a cabinet sign) with text or symbols printed
on a plastic or acrylic sheet that is mounted on a cabinet or box that houses
the lighting source and equipment.
   BUSINESS SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a profession or business
conducted, or to a commodity, service, activity, or entertainment sold, offered
or manufactured upon the premises where such sign is located or in the building
to which such sign is affixed.
   CHANGE IMAGE SIGN: Any sign that, through the use of moving structural
elements, sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated method,
results in movement, the appearance of movement or change of sign image or
message. This includes electronic message centers and animated signs.
   CHANGEABLE COPY: Letters, numerals, or other graphics which are not
permanently affixed to a structure and/or set for permanent display and are
intended to be alterable through manual means.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that
directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: Any sign identifying individuals or companies involved in
design, construction, demolition, financing, or development when placed upon
the premises where construction or development is ongoing.
   DAYTIME: From sunrise to sunset. Sunrise and sunset times are those posted
on the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's (NOAA) internet
website for Chicago, Illinois, for the particular day in question.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign used to convey directions and other information for
the convenience of the public. These signs will include restrooms, address
numbers, public telephone, and signs that direct people and traffic, such as
"entrance" or "exit".
   DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign that indicates the names of multiple tenants or
owners of a property or structure, the address of the premises, and/or the name
of any business that owns, controls, or manages a property or structure.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD: A sign or portion of sign that uses changing
lights of a single color to form a message or series of messages that are
electronically programmed or modified by electronic processes.
   ENTRANCE SIGN: A freestanding or wall sign located at the entrance of a
subdivision, office park, park or forest preserve, providing only the name and/
or location of that activity.
   FLAGS: Flags, symbols or crests of nations, or any organization of nations,
states and cities, fraternal, religious, and civic organizations.
   FLASHING SIGN: Any illuminated sign that contains an intermittent or
flashing light source or that changes light intensity in sudden transitory
bursts.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign on a frame, pole or other support structure that
is not attached to any building.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGNS: A sign bearing the address of the premises and/or the
name of its occupant but containing no logo and no commercial message.
   INDIRECT LIGHTING: Illumination from a light source not contained within a
sign or awning or halo or silhouette lighting that is not visible or exposed on
the face of the sign.
   INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN: A wall sign mounted on a wall as individual letters,
numbers, or symbols without a raceway or background except that background
afforded by the building to which the sign is affixed. Individual letter signs
are not illuminated; they can be illuminated by indirect lighting, halo
lighting, or silhouette lighting.
   INFLATABLE SIGNS: A sign that is inflated in any form by means of air, hot
air, or continuous inflation by generator or compressor. The form would include
any form and would include, but not be limited to, products, animal forms, or
any type of tethered balloon.
   INTERNAL LIGHTING: Illumination from a light source that is contained within
a sign or awning.
   LED (LIGHT EMITTING DIODE): A solid state component that uses a
semiconductor (a silicon chip or some other type of semiconductor) that emits
visible light when electric current passes through it.
   LOGO: A name, symbol, or trademark of a company or establishment encompassed
in one individual graphic.
   MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike structure or canopy of rigid materials
supported by and extended from the facade of a building.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is
on the ground. Typically constructed of brick, wood, stone, or metal, monument
signs have a base that is at least eighty percent (80%) of the width of the top
of the sign structure.
   MOVING SIGN: Any sign that revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or
otherwise attracts attention by moving parts, whether operated by mechanical
equipment or by natural resources, not including flags or banners.
   MULTI-TENANT DEVELOPMENT: A development typically under unified ownership
and control consisting of two (2) or more commercial, office, or industrial
establishments.
   NIGHTTIME: From sunset to sunrise. Sunrise and sunset times are those posted
on the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's (NOAA) internet
website for Chicago, Illinois, for the particular day in question.
   NIT(S): A luminance unit equal to one candela (1 candle) per square meter
measured perpendicular to the rays from the source. Nits are used to measure
display intensity or brightness. Nits, when used in conjunction with contrast
ratio and viewing angle, determine the quality of the image in the desired
application.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign which identifies or communicates a message
related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold which
is not the primary activity, service, or commodity provided on the premises
where the sign is located, including temporary signs that advertise real
estate, goods, services, and employment in or out of the public right of way.
   PENNANTS: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   POLITICAL SIGN: A sign which announces a candidate as seeking public
political office and/or which conveys political issues and expressions of
noncommercial individual speech.
   PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground; a sign designed to be moved from place to place. These
signs are, but are not limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames
designed to be self- supporting and movable; paper, cardboard or canvas signs
wrapped around supporting poles (this term also includes those signs commonly
known as sandwich signs and zip strip signs).
   PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure
and extends by more than eighteen inches (18") beyond the line of the building
or structure or that portion of the building or structure to which it is
attached.
   PYLON SIGN: A type of freestanding sign that is mounted on a single pole or
other support, with or without a skirt.
   READER BOARD: A sign that includes interchangeable letters and/or numbers,
either illuminated or nonilluminated.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed, painted, or maintained upon, or
over, the roof of any building or that is wholly dependent upon a building for
support and projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof,
the eave line of the building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck
line of a building with a mansard roof.
   SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated
or nonilluminated that is visible to the public from adjoining streets or
adjoining properties and that directs attention to a product, service, place,
activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any
permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner,
pennant, placard, temporary sign, lights, balloons or other device designed to
attract attention, advertise, identify or convey information. Building details
that are an integral part of the overall architectural design of a building or
works of art accessory to a building are not to be considered signs.
   SIGN AREA: The surface measurement of a sign (see illustrations herein).
   SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure that supports a sign, including a decorative
cover.
   STREET FRONTAGE: A lot line or the length of a lot line that is also the
line of any public street right of way other than an alley. The street frontage
of a lot or parcel that is legally created or described as extending to the
centerline of a street must be measured along the line that denotes the edge or
boundary of the easement established for the street.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display
that by intent is not permanent; constructed of cloth, canvas, lightweight
fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other lightweight materials with or without
frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
   TRI-VISION SIGN: A sign capable of presenting three (3) separate images
sequentially by rotating triangular cylinders.
   VEHICLE SIGN: Any advertising or business sign attached to a motor vehicle
that is parked and placed in a position for the purpose of displaying the same
to the public.
   VIDEO SIGN: Any sign which uses lights, video, a TV screen, cathode ray
tubes or other similar items to display a message, image, moving picture or
video.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign which is placed or fastened against a building or
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building
or other structure, or painted on a wall of a building. Any sign that projects
above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a
building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with
a mansard roof will be considered a roof sign.
   WINDOW SIGN: A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window
exposed to public view. A sign that is interior to the building that faces a
window exposed to public view that is located within two feet (2') of the
window face is a window sign for the purposes of calculating the total area of
all window signs. Merchandise used in a window display will not be considered a
window sign.
   ZIP STRIP SIGNS: Signs with or without frames that are made from, but not
limited to, paper, plastic, cardboard, or canvas that are wrapped or attached
to supporting poles, gas pumps, landscape plant materials, refuse containers,
or other supports not intended for signage that are usually temporary in
nature. These signs are also known as sandwich signs and are considered
portable signs. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009; Ord.
2013-898, 6-18-2013)
   C.   Computations And Measurements:
      1.   Sign Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign face (which is
also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only 1 face) shall be
computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral section of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence
or wall when such supporting device otherwise meets the regulations of this
section and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
      2.   Area Of Double Faced Signs: Where the sign faces of a double faced
sign are parallel or the interior angle formed by the faces is ninety degrees
(90°) or less, only one display face shall be counted in computing sign area.
If the two (2) faces of a double faced sign are of unequal area, the area of
the sign shall be the area of the larger sign face. In all other cases, the
areas of all faces of a multifaced sign shall be added together to compute the
area of the sign.
      3.   Height: The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance to
the highest point of the sign or sign structure, measured from the elevation of
the road to which it is oriented, or, if there is no road, from the natural
ground elevation beneath the sign.
      4.   Wall Area: In computing the area of a wall only the first twelve
feet (12') of building height shall be used.
      5.   Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area For A Lot: The permitted sum of
the area of all individual signs on a lot shall be computed by applying the
formula set out in table 2, "Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot", of this section
to the lot frontage, building frontage, or wall area, as specified in the
table. Lots fronting on two (2) or more streets shall be allowed the stated
sign area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is
oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's
total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area
frontage on that street.
   D.   Signs Permitted In All Districts:
      1.   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
      2.   Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, not to
exceed sixty (60) days per year.
      3.   Nameplates and address signs which indicate the occupants and/or
address of buildings or lots not to exceed three (3) square feet.
      4.   Utility signs not to exceed four (4) square feet.
      5.   Warning signs and safety warnings required by federal, state or
local laws.
   E.   Prohibited Signs:
      1.   Beacons.
      2.   Bench signs.
      3.   Flashing signs.
      4.   Pennants.
      5.   Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
      6.   Portable signs.
      7.   Roof signs.
      8.   Signs that by their position, wording, illumination, size, shape or
color, obstruct, impair, obscure, or interfere with traffic signs, signals, or
devices.
      9.   Off site signs (off premises signs), including temporary signs that
advertise real estate, goods, services, and employment in or out of the public
right of way.
      10.   Signs painted directly on the exterior of a building.
      11.   Signs placed on parked vehicles or trailers where the apparent
purpose is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property.
      12.   Any sign not listed in this section is prohibited.
   F.   Zoning District Classes: For the purpose of this section, zoning
districts are grouped into the following classes:
      1.   Residential:   AG, SE, SR and SD.
      2.   Nonresidential: B, CR, OR, LI, LI-1, LI-2.
      3.   Public:   PL. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008)
   G.   Permitted Sign Types: Signs shall be allowed in accordance with the
following table:
      1.   Signs Permitted Without Permits: An "A" indicates that a sign type
is allowed in the respective zoning district without a permit.
      2.   Signs Requiring Permits: A "P" indicates that a sign type is
permitted in the respective zoning district only after a sign permit for the
subject sign has been obtained.
      3.   Signs Not Allowed: An "N" indicates that a sign type is not allowed
in the respective district.
      4.   Signs That Require A Conditional Use Permit: A "CU" indicates that a
sign type requires a conditional use permit before being allowed.
            TABLE 1
Sign Type Zoning District Class
          Residential Nonresidential Public
Sign Type                   Zoning District Class
                            Residential Nonresidential Public
Freestanding:                                         
 Animated3                 N           CU             CU
 Change image sign3        N           CU             CU
 Electronic message board1 N           P              P
 Entrance                  P           P              P
 Identification            A           A              A
 Off premises              N           N              N
 Temporary                 N           P              P
 Tri-vision                N           N              N
 Video                     N           N              N
Building:                                             
 Animated                  N           N              N
 Change image sign         N           N              N
 Electronic message board  N           N              N
 Entrance                  P           P              P
 Identification            A           A              A
 Marquee                   N           P              P
 Off premises              N           N              N
 Projecting                N           P              P
 Roof                      N           N              N
 Wall                      N           P              P
 Window sign               N           A              A
 
Notes:
      1.   See subsection H6 of this section for additional regulations
concerning electronic message board signs.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this table regarding video signs,
TV screens attached on a gas pump are permitted, subject to subsection H4b of
this section.
      3.   Freestanding animated and change image signs shall only be permitted
(via the issuance of a conditional use permit) along Illinois Route 173, U.S.
Highway 41, Interstate 94 and Russell Road (west of Interstate 94).
(Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
   H.   Special Sign Standards:
      1.   Entrance Signs:
         a.   Residential Districts: Entrance signs will be allowed at the
entrances of any residential development and will be approved during the
subdivision or PUD approval process. Each sign area of an entrance sign shall
not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area; not exceed a height of six feet
(6'); and have a minimum setback of ten feet (10') from the right of way.
         b.   Nonresidential And Public Districts: Entrance signs for
nonresidential and public districts will follow all the applicable standards of
this section.
      2.   Identification Signs:
         a.   Residential Districts: Identification signs in residential
districts shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area and may carry only the
property address and occupant name.
         b.   Nonresidential And Public Districts: Identification signs in
nonresidential and public districts shall not be greater than ten (10) square
feet in area; shall only carry property address and occupant name; and shall
not carry any commercial message. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008)
      3.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall be allowed in addition to all
signs allowed under this section and shall not be counted in calculating a
site's maximum allowable signage.
         a.   Setbacks And Heights: Temporary signs are subject to the setback
and height standards as shown in table 3 of this section.
         b.   Location: Temporary signs shall be located only on the site for
which the sign is requested. All temporary signs must be located on private
property only and outside of the public right of way.
         c.   Types Of Signs: The following types of temporary signs shall be
allowed in all zoning districts, unless otherwise provided:
            (1)   Construction Signs (In All Districts Except Residential
Districts): One temporary sign, up to twelve (12) square feet in area, shall be
permitted for the duration of a permitted construction project.
            (2)   Real Estate Signs: One temporary real estate sign, up to six
(6) square feet in area for parcels ten (10) acres or less in the residential
district, and thirty two (32) square feet in area for nonresidential districts
and for parcels larger than ten (10) acres in the residential districts. Real
estate signs shall be permitted only on the property for sale or for rent and
shall not be permitted off site.
            (3)   Banners, Streamers, And Balloons: Temporary banners,
streamers, and balloons with a diameter of less than two feet (2') may be
allowed for special events such as grand openings, special promotions and
similar events. A permit must be obtained prior to their display.
            (4)   Political Signs: Temporary political signs shall be
permitted.
            (5)   Subdivision/Development Marketing Signs: One temporary sign,
not to exceed sixty four (64) square feet, may be permitted per road frontage
for marketing lots in a subdivision or a development that has received final
plat, PUD, or conditional use permit approval. The location and height will be
approved as part of the final plat, PUD, or conditional use permit approval.
(Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
      4.   Gas Station Signs:
         a.   Gas Pump Signs: Signs on the actual gas pump that identify the
gas company by name or logo, or identify the type of fuel will not be included
in the total sign area square footage calculations. All other permitted signage
on the gas pump will be included in the total sign area square footage
calculations.
         b.   TV Screens:   TV screens attached on a gas pump that do not
exceed two (2) square feet in area will be permitted and will not be included
in the total sign area square footage calculations.
      5.   Directional Signs: Directional signs (as defined in subsection B of
this section) will not be included in the total sign area square footage
calculations if each individual directional sign is less than six (6) square
feet in area and contains no advertising, including logos. (Ord. 2009-794, 11-
3-2009)
      6.   Electronic Message Board Signs:
         a.   Only one electronic message board sign (that does not display
fuel prices at gas stations) shall be allowed on each zoning lot. Lots which
are contiguous to one another and are held or leased under a common owner or
lessee and serve the same principal use or uses shall be considered a single
zoning lot.
         b.   Electronic message board signs shall only be allowed as
freestanding signs or part of freestanding signs.
         c.   No electronic message board sign shall be located within fifty
feet (50') from the lot line of a property used for residential purposes.
         d.   The electronic message portion of a freestanding sign may not
exceed fifty (50) square feet.
         e.   Electronic message board signs shall be monochromatic.
         f.   Electronic message board signs shall be controlled electronically
by a computer or other similar device that has manual override capabilities.
         g.   Fuel prices on signs at gas stations may be displayed in
electronic numbers in lieu of changeable copy numbers.
         h.   Electronic message board signs shall be turned off at all times
when the business or use that it serves is closed.
         i.   Electronic message board signs do not include animated signs,
change image signs, video signs and tri-vision signs.
         j.   Flashing lights, scrolling lights and rotation of lights around
the sign so as to draw attention and cause a distraction are prohibited.
         k.   Each message displayed on an electronic message board sign shall
not scroll, move or flash and must be static or depicted for a minimum of
twenty (20) seconds.
         l.   Electronic message board signs that are used to display fuel
prices shall be for the exclusive use of the display of fuel prices and may not
display any other type of message or advertisement. Signs that display fuel
prices may not change until a change in the price of fuel has occurred. The
fuel price displayed on an electronic message board sign shall not scroll,
move, or flash and must be static.
         m.   The message area of an electronic message board sign may be
illuminated by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting diodes) or magnetic
discs. Whatever the light source, undue brightness is prohibited. "Undue
brightness" means illumination of the sign in excess of five thousand (5,000)
nits in the daytime and one thousand (1,000) nits in the nighttime. The sign
must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer which must be used to reduce
nighttime brightness levels. Further, prior to the issuance of a permit for an
electronic message board sign, the applicant shall provide written
certification from the sign manufacturer or sign installer that the light
intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above.
Electronic message board sign users shall reduce the level of brightness of the
sign if determined by the village that the light levels exceed the levels
specified above. Refer to the definitions in this section regarding recognized
daytime and nighttime hours.
         n.   Electronic message board signs are expressly prohibited within
the Wadsworth Road historic overlay district.
         o.   Electronic message board signs shall only display promotional
messages of a good or service that is offered at the place of business on the
particular zoning lot that said sign is located. (Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
   I.   Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot: The sum of the area of all building
and freestanding signs on a lot shall be less than or equal to the maximum
permitted sign area indicated in table 2 of this section. The lowest number
resulting from any of the applicable computations in any column in table 2 of
this section shall be the maximum total sign area permitted for the respective
district class. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008)
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER LOT
 
                                     Zoning District Class
                                     Residential Nonresidential Public
Per foot of street frontage          n/a         2 sq. ft.      0.25 sq. ft.
Per linear foot of building frontage n/a         n/a            0.50 sq. ft.
Maximum on vacant land               32 sq. ft.  32 sq. ft.     12 sq. ft.
Absolute maximum                     32 sq. ft.  500 sq. ft.    300 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
   J.   Number And Dimension Of Individual Signs:
TABLE 3
  Zoning District Class
  Residential Nonresidential Public
                                         Zoning District Class
                                         Residential Nonresidential Public
Freestanding signs:                                                
 Maximum height                         6 ft.                     15 ft.
 Expressway1                                       40 ft.          
 Major arterial                                    30 ft.          
 Minor arterial                                    6 ft.           
 Maximum sign area                      30 sq. ft.  150 sq. ft.    60 sq. ft.
 Minimum setback2                       10 ft.                    10 ft.
 Expressway                                        40 ft.          
 Major arterial                                    20 ft.          
 Minor arterial                                    20 ft.          
Building signs:                                                    
 Maximum number                         n/a         n/a            n/a
 Maximum area (percent of the wall area n/a         10%            10%
  to which it is attached)
 Maximum area                           n/a         n/a            n/a
 
Notes:
1.   See table 4 of this section for street classifications.
2.   All signs shall be out of the public right of way and be at least 10 feet
from the right of way or side property line or set back from the pavement as
shown above. The greatest distance will be used.
   K.   Street Classification Table 1 :
TABLE 4
 
Class           Streets
Expressways     I-94, Tri-State Tollway1
Major arterials U.S. 41 - Skokie Highway1
               Illinois Route 173
               Green Bay Road
Minor arterials Wadsworth Road2
               Delany Road
 
Notes:
1.   Excluding the area within the gateway economic development area (see
subsection
10-10-7I of this title).
2.   Excluding the area within the Wadsworth historic overlay district (see
subsection
10-4-3B of this title).
   L.   Building Signs In Nonresidential Districts:
TABLE 5
 
Sign Type  Number Permitted         Maximum Area       Vertical Clearance
Canopy     1 per building entrance  16 sq. ft.         9 ft.
Projecting 1 per principal building 5% of wall area    9 ft.
Suspended  1 per building entrance  5% of wall area    9 ft.
Wall       No limit                 10% of wall area   n/a
Window     No limit                 25% of window area n/a
 
   M.   Permitted Sign Characteristics:
TABLE 6
 
Characteristic                      Zoning District Class
                                    Residential Nonresidential Public
Changeable copy                     No          Yes            Yes
Illumination, internal              No          Yes            Yes
Illumination, external              Yes         Yes            Yes
Illumination, exposed bulbs or neon No          Yes            No
 
   N.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Signs existing on the effective date hereof which do not conform to
the regulations set forth in this title shall be nonconforming signs.
      2.   Nonresidential signs on the premises of a nonconforming use or
building may be continued, but such signs shall not expand in number, area,
height or illumination. New signs shall conform to this title and will only be
created upon the complete removal of all signs that are nonconforming at the
time of adoption hereof. (Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008)
   O.   Obsolete Signs: Any sign that does not advertise an existing business
or product shall be taken down and removed by the business or property owner
within thirty (30) days after written notification from the village. Upon the
failure to comply with such notice within the specified time frame, the village
shall cause the removal of such sign and any expense incidental thereto shall
be paid by the business or property owner upon which such sign is located; any
unpaid expense incurred by the village following reasonable notice to the
business or property owner shall be grounds for a lien to be recorded against
the zoning lot upon which such sign is located. (Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
   P.   Permit And Sign Fees:
      1.   Any person proposing to erect any sign in a residential,
nonresidential or public district shall refer to table 1 of this section to
determine if a permit is required for that sign. If a permit is required, the
person shall make application to the zoning officer for a sign permit. The
application shall be accompanied by the following:
         a.   A site plan drawn to scale and dimensions showing the location of
all proposed signs.
         b.   An accurate drawing to scale; with dimensions, colors and
specifications of the sign.
         c.   The sign copy of message to be at scale including dimensions and
colors.
         d.   The required fee.
      2.   Fees for signs shall be as established by ordinance of the village
of Wadsworth.
   Q.   Illustrations:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1204.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1206.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1208.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1210.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1215.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1217.png]
(Ord. 2008-761, 7-1-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-802, 12-15-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. This street classification is adopted solely for the establishment and
  implementation of this section.
10-5-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent the
congestion of the public streets and to promote the safety and welfare of the
public by establishing minimum requirements for the off street parking and
loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which
property is put and the district in which it is located.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Procedure: An application for a building permit for a new, enlarged,
or modified building, structure or use shall include therewith a plot plan in
duplicate, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading
facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this title.
      2.   Extent Of Control: All buildings, structures, and uses and all
modifications of existing buildings, structures, and uses initiated after the
effective date hereof shall be provided with accessory off street parking or
loading facilities as required herein. A building, structure or use for which a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date hereof shall comply
with the requirement in effect at the time of issuance of the permit, until
such building, structure, or use is enlarged or otherwise modified, or a new
use is initiated, in which case the preceding sentence shall apply.
      3.   Existing Parking And Loading Spaces: Accessory off street parking
and loading spaces in existence on the effective date hereof may not be reduced
in number, except in compliance with the requirements of this section.
      4.   Permissive Parking And Loading Spaces: Nothing in this section shall
prevent the establishment of off street automobile parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to the
provisions of this section, except that existing off street parking areas
accessory to existing uses cannot be located off the lot containing the main
use unless on a lot adjacent thereto.
      5.   Joint Parking Facilities: Joint off street parking facilities may be
provided for different buildings, structures, or uses, or for mixed uses;
provided, however, that in no event shall joint parking facilities for
compatible uses be reduced below the number required for all uses. Joint
parking facilities for dissimilar uses which require parking at different times
during the day may be reduced by not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the
required number of spaces where the zoning officer finds that such a reduction
will not result in any increased congestion in the public streets and will not
otherwise violate the intent and purpose of this title. The zoning officer may
require a shared parking study to determine if a reduction is warranted.
      6.   Control Of Off Site Parking: When required accessory parking
facilities for existing uses are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which
the principal use served is located they shall be in the same possession as the
property occupied by such principal use, and the owner shall be bound by
covenants filed of record in the office of the recorder of deeds, Lake County,
Illinois, requiring the owner and his or her said heirs and assigns to maintain
the required number of parking spaces during the existence of said principal
use. Such off site parking facilities shall not be provided for new uses.
Further, such facilities shall not be located in any agricultural or
residential district.
   C.   Required Spaces: Off street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule of requirements:
Use Required Spaces
Use                                                     Required Spaces
Residential uses:                                        
   Bed and breakfast inn                             1 for each guestroom plus 2 for owner.
   Congregate Housing                                1 for every two 2 residents
   Daycare homes (adult and child)                   2 spaces for 1,000 square feet of area.
   Long term care facilities                         1for each 4 employees on the largest shift plus 1 for each 6 beds based
                                                        on design capacity.
   Multiple-family dwellings                         2 for each swelling unit.
   Senior citizen housing                            1 ½ for each dwelling unit plus 1 for every employee on the largest
                                                        shift.
   Single-family and two-family dwelling             2 for each dwelling unit.
Commercial uses:                                         
   Barber or beauty shop                             3 per operator chair.
   Bars, taverns and nightclubs                      14 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Convenience Store                                 6 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Fast food restaurant                              14 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus stacking spaces per
                                                        subsection F of this section.
   Financial institutions                            21/2 for 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus stacking spaces per
                                                        subsection F of this section.
   Funeral home                                      1 per 4 seats, plus 1 for each funeral home vehicle.
   General offices                                   4 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   General retail                                    4 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Grocery or supermarket                            4 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Hotel or motel                                    1per room, plus 1 per employee, plus spaces for accessory uses such as
                                                        restaurants, bars, and banquet facilities.
   Medical/dental offices                            3 for each examining room, plus 1 for each doctor and employee.
   Shopping center                                   5 for each 1,000 square feet fo floor area.
   Standard restaurant                               12 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Vehicle service and repair                        21/2 per 1,000 square feet of floor area.
   Vehicle sales                                     ½ per 1,000 square feet of display area, whether indoor or outdoor, plus
                                                        spaces for vehicle service and repair.
Industrial uses:                                         
   Manufacturing and production industrial sales and 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus 4 for each 1,000 square feet of
service                                                 floor area for office space.
   Public, civic and institutional uses:              
   College                                           1 per student, plus 1 per faculty/staff member
   Daycare                                           1 per teacher/staff member, plus 1 per 6 enrollees, or off street waiting
                                                        to accommodate at least 6 vehicles.
   Elementary school and junior high school          1 per faculty/staff member, plus 1 per classroom.
   Parks and open space                              1 per 4 person capacity or as determined by the zoning officer based on
                                                        anticipated usage.
   Physical fitness facilities                       4 per each one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   Religious institutions                            1 per 4) seats, plus 50% required for accessory uses such as daycare,
                                                        banquet rooms, etc.
   Senior high school                                1 per faculty/staff member, plus 1 per 5 students.
   Community service not otherwise classified        1 per 3 person capacity.
 
   D.   Rules For Computing Requirements:
      1.   Multiple Uses: Unless otherwise approved, lots containing more than
one use must provide parking in an amount equal to the total of the
requirements for all uses.
      2.   Fractions: When measurements of the number of required spaces result
in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less shall be rounded
down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-half (1/
2) shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
      3.   Area Measurements: Unless otherwise specifically noted, all square
footage based parking standards must be computed on the basis of gross floor
area.
      4.   Unlisted Uses: When a use is not listed in subsection C of this
section, the zoning officer shall determine the number of parking spaces
required, based upon the requirements of this code for similar uses.
   E.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Size: A required off street parking space shall be an area of not
less than one hundred sixty two (162) square feet nor less than nine feet (9')
wide by eighteen feet (18') long, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps,
columns or other obstruction, accessible from streets or alleys or from private
driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys. Lines demarcating parking
spaces may be drawn at various angles in relation to property lines, curbs, and
aisles according to the dimensional requirements in section
10-5-14, table 11 of this chapter. The dimensions in section
10-5-14, table 11 of this chapter are required dimensions to be used for off
street parking design.
      2.   Compact Cars: In parking lots that require more than fifty (50)
parking spaces for employees and where it is appropriate to facilitate parking
of compact automobiles, the dimensional standards may be reduced to allow up to
twenty percent (20%) of the required parking spaces for compact cars. A compact
car parking space shall be at least eight feet (8') wide and sixteen feet (16')
long. The zoning officer is responsible for approving the use of reduced
compact car parking spaces.
      3.   Handicapped Spaces: Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the
standards set in the state of Illinois accessibility code, as amended.
      4.   Landscaping: All off street parking lots will be landscaped
according to the requirements of title 12 of this code - the village of
Wadsworth landscape ordinance.
      5.   Open And Enclosed Spaces: Parking areas may be open or enclosed.
Each parking space and aisle shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven
feet (7').
      6.   Location On Lot: No parking space, or portion thereof, established
on the same zoning lot with a building, shall be located within a required
front yard except in the B business zone. In addition, no parking space shall
be located within any required landscaping nor within five feet (5') of any
property line on any lot.
      7.   Access: Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means
of vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as will least interfere
with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any district shall
exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, except that turning radii and divided
entrances/exits with island dividers may be permitted to exceed this distance.
Entrances/exits shall be approved and permitted by the Illinois department of
transportation and the Lake County division of transportation for access to
roadways under their respective jurisdictions.
      8.   Surfacing And Marking: All off street parking areas, lots, access
drives, and structures shall be surfaced with a paver, asphaltic paving, or
Portland concrete pavement providing an all weather, durable and dustless
surface. All pavement design shall be subject to review and approval by the
village engineer. Individual parking stalls shall be clearly identified by
white or yellow painted markings four (4) to six inches (6") in width. See
subsection E10 of this section for parking lot design requirements. Exceptions:
gravel driveways extensions to detached accessory structures three hundred
(300) square feet and larger in size are permitted.
      9.   Lighting: All required off street parking areas serving uses which
operate at night, other than parking for single-family homes, shall be lighted
as follows:
         a.   An average minimum illumination of two (2) foot-candles shall be
required on the lot with no more than one-half (0.50) foot- candle at the
property line.
         b.   Lighting fixtures shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
downward and away from adjoining properties with the light source not visible.
         c.   All lighting cables shall be placed underground in accordance
with the building code or other applicable ordinances.
         d.   All lighting system designs shall be reviewed for approval by the
zoning officer.
      10.   Parking Lot Design Requirements: Parking lot design shall be
compatible and efficient in relation to reasonable circulation of traffic
within the parking lot and the adjacent roadways and land uses. Design of
parking lots shall be conducive to the stormwater management of the site,
public convenience and safety, and be subject to review and approval by the
village engineer in accordance with current engineering design standards.
   F.   Vehicle Stacking Areas: Vehicle stacking shall be prohibited within
public rights of way. The following guidelines will be used in determining the
adequacy of vehicle stacking areas:
      1.   Number of spaces:
Activity Type Spaces Measured From
Activity Type                  Spaces Measured From
Automated teller machine (ATM) 3      Machine
Bank teller lane               4      Teller or window
Car wash - automatic           6      Entrance
Car wash - self-service        3      Entrance
Pharmacy/drugstore             4      Pick up window
Restaurant drive-through       5      Order box
Other uses                     3      Pick up window
 
      2.   Design and layout:
         a.   Size: Stacking spaces must be a minimum of eight feet by twenty
feet (8' x 20') in size.
         b.   Location: Stacking spaces may not impede on or off site traffic
movements or movements in or out of off street spaces.
         c.   Design: Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal
driveways with the design of raised medians, striping, and separate bypass
lanes if deemed necessary by the zoning officer.
   G.   Design And Location Of Loading Spaces: In all nonsingle-family
residential districts, there shall be provided off street loading facilities
for any building or structure which is erected or substantially altered, which
requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or
similar vehicles.
      1.   Loading Berth Description: An off street loading berth shall be a
hard surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or a public
way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks,
tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of
streets, sidewalks and alleys. A required loading space shall not be less than
twelve feet (12') in width, forty five feet (45') in length and fourteen feet
(14') in height exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as
otherwise specifically dimensioned hereafter.
      2.   Location: No permitted or required loading berth shall be closer
than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by solid building walls or fence or any combination thereof
not less than fourteen feet (14') in height and maintained in good condition.
No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet
(25') of the nearest point of street right of way or the intersection of any
two (2) street rights of way. Loading berths open to the sky may be located in
any required side or rear yards. Where unusual circumstances exist, the village
board may permit loading spaces to be closer to the right of way or may require
additional height of fence or screening.
      3.   Landscaping: All off street loading facilities will be landscaped
according to the requirements of title 12 of this code - the village of
Wadsworth landscape ordinance.
      4.   Standard Berths: Loading facilities/berths shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space, and shall in all cases have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14')
from grade:
 
Gross Floor Area Of Facility Required Number And Size Of Berths
   10,000 to 30,000          1 - 12'x45'
   30,001 to 60,000          2 - 12'x45', each
   60,001 to 100,000         2 - 12'x55', each
 
The zoning officer may require less or more loading berths if reasonably
necessary to satisfy off street loading requirements. (Ord. 2010-807, 3-16-
2010; amd. Ord. 2024-1146, 2-6-2024)
10-5-10: CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Criteria: Any home occupation, as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title, may be conducted in any dwelling unit, provided all of
the following criteria are met, as well as the regulations set forth in
subsections B through D of this section:
      1.   The home occupation is conducted as an economic enterprise or for
compensation by a full time occupant of a dwelling unit; and
      2.   The home occupation is incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure, as the case may be, for
residential purposes; and,
      3.   The home occupation does not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure.
   B.   Permitted Home Occupations: The following home occupations are examples
of uses that are customarily incidental to and compatible with residential
activities and, therefore, are allowed as a home occupation, subject to
compliance with all applicable regulations of this code:
      1.   Artist, writer, musician, teacher.
      2.   Salesperson or manufacturer's representative.
      3.   Professional office, including doctor, lawyer, engineer, architect,
surveyor, accountant, or other recognized profession.
      4.   Any other use similar to the uses listed above and determined by the
zoning administrator to be incidental to or compatible with residential
activities.
      5.   Home occupations shall require approval as a conditional use (as
recommended after hearing and approval as provided in this code) if the
proposed home occupation use would otherwise require a conditional use permit
if it were a principal use.
   C.   Prohibited Home Occupations: The following are prohibited home
occupations:
      1.   Automobile, truck, bus or recreational vehicle repair garage.
      2.   Any use involving the keeping of farm animals unless the property
meets the minimum acreage requirements. The keeping of exotic animals is
prohibited as a home occupation.
      3.   The sale of alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, firearms or other
weapons.
      4.   Contractors including excavating, landscaping and other tradesmen
who store business vehicles, equipment and materials, except as permitted by
subsection D3d of this section.
      5.   Use of a residential property as a "transfer station" in conjunction
with off site business operations.
      6.   Hospitals or medical centers.
      7.   Restaurants.
      8.   Any use that is not customarily incidental to the residential use,
as determined by the zoning administrator.
   D.   Regulations:
      1.   Employees: The entrepreneur of every home occupation must reside in
the dwelling unit on the lot where the home occupation is conducted. No persons
other than members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit may be
an employee of the home occupation.
      2.   Structural Limitations:
         a.   A home occupation shall not occupy more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the total floor area of all principal and accessory structures on a
lot.
         b.   No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit or
accessory structure where a home occupation is conducted that would change its
residential character, including the enlargement of public utility services
beyond that customarily required for residential use.
         c.   No separate entrance shall be provided in connection with the
conduct of any home occupation, except as required by federal, state, or local
law or regulation.
      3.   Operational Limitations:
         a.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit or accessory structure, except for outdoor play areas for legally
established home daycares.
         b.   No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment that produces
noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, emissions,
odor, or radiation outside the dwelling unit or any permitted accessory
structure that is greater or more frequent than that typical of equipment used
in connection with residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any
home occupation.
         c.   No outdoor storage or display of business equipment, materials,
merchandise, inventory, or heavy equipment shall be allowed in connection with
any home occupation.
         d.   Not more than one vehicle identified or advertised as a
commercial vehicle shall be permitted in connection with any home occupation.
         e.   Parking, receipt, and delivery of goods and equipment shall be in
keeping with the residential character of the property.
      4.   Signage And Visibility: No exterior display or signage shall be
permitted except as authorized in the respective residential district pursuant
to section 10-5-8 of this chapter.
      5.   Traffic Limitations: No home occupation shall generate more
vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of dwellings in the area.
      6.   Nuisance Causing Activities: In addition to the foregoing specific
limitations, no home occupation shall cause or create any nuisance, or be
noxious, offensive, or hazardous.
      7.   Licensing Requirements: Every home occupation shall be subject to
any applicable business or other licensing and inspection requirements. (Ord.
2014-924, 5-6-2014)
10-5-11: FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES:
This section is intended to provide for the maximum safety of persons using the
sidewalks and streets, and to provide for the maximum enjoyment of the use of
the property.
   A.   Clear View Of Intersecting Streets: On any corner lot, within the
triangular area formed by the two (2) street centerlines and a third line
connecting two (2) points, one of which is located on each of the two (2)
street centerlines, one hundred feet (100') from their junction, nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (2½') and
ten feet (10') above the plane surface formed by the centerline grades of the
aforementioned streets.
   B.   Height Of Fences, Walls And Hedges:
      1.   Non-Residential And Agricultural Zoning Districts: Fences, walls,
and hedges are permitted in any required yard in all non-residential and
agricultural zoning districts subject to the provisions of this Section.
Fences, walls, and hedges in non-residential and agricultural zoning districts
may not exceed eight feet (8') in height at any point.
      2.   Residential Zoning Districts: Fences, walls, and hedges are
permitted in any required yard in the Suburban Estate, Suburban Residential,
and Southeast District subject to this Section and the following height
limitations:
         a.   Fences, walls, and hedges in the rear yard may not exceed six
feet (6') in height at any point. For the purposes of this Section, rear yard
will mean the area running from the rear lot line to the front of the primary
residence, and includes fencing returning from the side yard to the primary
residence.
         b.   Fences, walls, and hedges in the front yard may not exceed four
feet (4') in height at any point.
   C.   Fence Construction And Maintenance:
      1.   Post hole depth for all fences and walls above four feet (4') must
be a minimum of forty two inches (42").
      2.   All fences, walls, and hedges must be maintained in good repair and
in structurally sound condition.
      3.   No fence may have any noticeable leaning or missing sections, broken
supports, non-uniform height or design, or peeling, flaking or chipped paint or
coating.
      4.   Damaged or missing posts, pickets, or other components of a fence or
wall shall be replaced within fourteen (14) days notice with material of the
same type and quality.
      5.   The finished side of the fence shall at all times face the exterior
of the property so as to be viewable from the outside of the property.
   D.   Fence Material In Residential Districts: Fences and walls may only
consist of wood, stucco, masonry, stone, decorative P.V.C., manufactured
fencing, or ornamental metal fencing, or welded wire mesh. Fences and walls
constructed of welded wire mesh must (1) consist of a minimum of ten (10)
gauge, powder coated wire; and (2) shall be secured to top and bottom support
rails and posts, and the rails and posts must be constructed of a permissible
fence material. Welded wire mesh less than ten (10) gauge may only be used for
interior rear yard fences not exceeding four (4) feet in height that are used
for protecting a garden. Fences and walls may not be constructed of chain link,
solid plywood, scrap lumber, or other noncustomary materials.
   E.   Fence Color: All fences, walls, and hedges must be of a color which
blends in with the natural surroundings or is consistent with the color of the
primary residence on the lot.
   F.   Dangerous Fences: No fence may be maintained or constructed of, in
whole or in part, barbed wire, razor wire, or other material that poses a
safety hazard.
   G.   Traffic Visibility: No fence, wall, or hedge may be erected or
maintained that creates a visual obstruction along a public or private street
or right-of-way that interferes with traffic visibility or safety.
   H.   Temporary Fencing: Temporary fences such as plastic silt fences, snow
fences, or temporary chain link fences are allowable as may be required for
active construction projects, as long as such fences comply with all applicable
building code requirements. Temporary fencing must be removed within thirty
(30) days of construction being completed or halted. Temporary garden fences
not exceeding forty-two (42) inches in height may be installed without a permit
but must be removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of installation.
   I.   Non-Conforming Fences: Fences, walls, and hedges that are existing,
legal non-conforming structures may only be used, maintained, remodeled,
enlarged, or otherwise altered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6
of this Title governing nonconformities. Any legal non-conforming fence, wall,
or hedge may be repaired if fifty percent (50%) or less of the fence, wall, or
hedge is damaged or in need of repair. If more than fifty percent (50%) of a
legal non-conforming fence, wall, or hedge is damaged or in need of repair, the
fence, wall, or hedge must be brought into compliance with this Section.
   J.   Governmental agencies; exceptions. Governmental agencies may erect
fences that exceed eight feet (8'). This section shall supersede any other
section of this Code. Prior to erecting such fence, such governmental agency
shall obtain a permit from the Village to do so.
   K.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move,
alter, or repair any fence within the Village without first obtaining a permit
from the Village. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 2022-1111, 2-1-2022; Ord.
2022-1113, 3-1-2022; Ord. 2024-1163, 11-6-2024; Ord. 2025-1175, 9-2-2025)
10-5-12: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Application: Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to
the zoning officer, approved by the village board (except as otherwise provided
in subsection B9 of this section) and shall contain the following information:
      1.   A survey or legal description, street address or other accurate
description of the property to be used, rented or leased for the temporary use,
including all information necessary to accurately portray including adjacent
zoning.
      2.   A description of the proposed use.
      3.   Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary
facilities and availability of parking space to service the proposed use. (Ord.
2009-794, 11-3-2009)
   B.   Uses Permitted As Temporary Uses: The following are temporary uses and
are subject to the following specific regulations and time limits in addition
to the regulations of any zoning district in which the use is located. See
section
10-4-1 of this title.
      1.   Carnival Or Circus: A temporary use permit may be issued for a
carnival or circus for a period not longer than fifteen (15) days.
      2.   Christmas Tree Sales: A temporary use permit may be issued for the
display and open lot sales of Christmas trees for a period of not longer than
forty five (45) days. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      3.   Contractor's Office, Yard And Sheds: In any zoning district, a
temporary use permit may be issued for a contractor's temporary office, yard
and equipment sheds, provided that in a residential zoning district such use
must be incidental to a construction project. The office or shed shall not
contain sleeping or cooking accommodations. The permit shall be valid for not
more than one year, but is renewable. Storage of flammable liquids, explosives,
combustibles or other similar hazardous materials is prohibited, unless
authorized in writing by the village. The office or shed shall be removed upon
completion of the construction project, if applicable, or termination of the
temporary use permit, whichever occurs first. The village board may impose
conditions to address noise, odors, vibrations, or any type of emission
produced on the property, the screening of vehicles, equipment, and material
stored on the property, or any other condition or limitation deemed appropriate
by the board in connection with the temporary use permit. (Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-
2013)
      4.   Real Estate Sales Office: In any zoning district, a temporary use
permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new
subdivision or planned unit development which has been approved by the village.
The permit shall be valid for not more than one year, but is renewable. The
office shall be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision
or planned unit development. A model home or other structure may be used as a
temporary sales office except that sleeping and cooking facilities shall not be
used.
      5.   Religious Tent Meeting: In any zoning district, a temporary use
permit may be issued for a tent or other temporary structure to house religious
meetings for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
      6.   Seasonal Sale Of Farm Products: In any zoning district, a temporary
use permit may be issued for the operation of a roadside stand for the sale of
farm produce grown exclusively on the premises. The permit shall be valid for
not more than three (3) months per year. No sales shall be made within thirty
feet (30') of any highway or street right of way.
      7.   Special Promotions: Where one or more businesses undertake special
promotion for the sale of goods outside or in a tent erected for the event, a
temporary use permit shall be required. Such permit shall be for a period of
not more than seventy two (72) consecutive hours (3 days) in any one calendar
month.
      8.   Tent Theater: A temporary use permit may be issued for a tent
theater. The permit shall be valid for not more than three (3) months per year.
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      9.   Other Events: Fundraising events in support of local institutions
such as schools or churches which are to be held on property other than the lot
upon which such institution is located shall be required to have a temporary
use permit showing the location, date and hours of operation. Notwithstanding
the provisions of subsection A of this section, fundraising events are subject
to the approval of the zoning administrator and the fee for temporary use
permits as required by section
13-1-1 of this code shall be waived. (Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
10-5-13: EXCEPTIONS TO DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The following exceptions are established to provide relief from the zone
regulations where applicable: (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
   A.   Height Exceptions: The following structures or parts thereof are exempt
from the height limitations set forth in the several zones except as limited by
any height restriction imposed by any airport authority, port district or other
municipal corporation operating an airport.
      1.   All districts:
         a.   Church steeple;
         b.   Public utility poles, towers and wires.
      2.   AG (agriculture), PL (public land), B (business), OR (office and
research), LI (light industry), LI-1 (light industry-1), and LI-2 (light
industry-2):
         a.   Agricultural buildings, but not dwellings;
         b.   Bulk storage silos and towers;
         c.   Gravity feed apparatus;
         d.   Radio and television antennas and towers;
         e.   Towers, fire, mechanical and smoke, not to exceed sixteen feet
(16');
         f.   Water tanks and standpipes. (Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
   B.   Yard And Building Setback Exceptions: The following structures shall be
allowed to project into or to be constructed in any required yard within the
area otherwise prohibited by a building setback line:
      1.   Awnings and canopies not to exceed three feet (3');
      2.   Bay windows not to exceed two feet (2');
      3.   Chimneys not to exceed two feet (2');
      4.   Clothesline post;
      5.   Driveways and curbs provided that any drive located in a side yard,
other than a common driveway, shall be set back from such side lot line a
distance of at least five feet (5');
      6.   Fences, walls and hedges in accordance with section
10-5-11 of this chapter;
      7.   Flagpoles;
      8.   Garbage disposal equipment, nonpermanent;
      9.   Guardhouse or gatehouse;
      10.   Islands including canopies, pumps and underground fuel storage
tanks for gasoline service stations, minimum setback of twenty feet (20');
      11.   Landscape features;
      12.   Mailboxes;
      13.   Overhanging roofs, eaves, gutters, cornices or other architectural
features, not to exceed three feet (3');
      14.   Planting boxes;
      15.   Recreational equipment (except swimming pools);
      16.   Septic systems wells and underground utilities;
      17.   Sidewalks and steps;
      18.   Signs as provided in section
10-5-8 of this chapter;
      19.   Steps or stairs to a dwelling, nonenclosed, not to exceed four feet
(4');
      20.   Terraces, decks or porches (nonenclosed), not to exceed four feet
(4');
      21.   Trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants, in accordance with the
vision requirements of section
10-5-11 of this chapter;
      22.   Yard and security lighting fixtures, provided that no such fixture
or pole exceeding a height of eight feet (8') shall be located in a required
front yard. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-5-14: TABLE 3 THROUGH TABLE 11:
TABLE 3
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
Octave Band Frequency   OR, LI Decibels
Cycles Per Second       Series A
Octave Band Frequency    OR, LI Decibels
Cycles Per Second        Series A
                       
   0 - 74            67
   75 - 149          59
   150 - 299         52
   300 - 599         46
   600 - 1,199       40
   1,200 - 2,399     34
   2,400 - 4,799     32
   4,800 and over    32
 
TABLE 4
MAXIMUM PERMITTED STEADY-STATE VIBRATION DISPLACEMENT
Frequency          Zone LI, OR
Cycles Per Second  Inches
Frequency           Zone LI, OR
Cycles Per Second   Inches
                   
   Less than 10 0.0008
   10 through 1 0.0005
   20 through 2 0.0003
   30 through 3 0.0002
   40 through 4 0.0001
   50 and over  0.0001
 
TABLE 5
MAXIMUM PERMITTED IMPACT VIBRATION DISPLACEMENT
Frequency          Zone LI,OR
Cycles Per Second  Inches
Frequency           Zone LI,OR
Cycles Per Second   Inches
                   
   Less than 10 0.0016
   10 through 1 0.0010
   20 through 2 0.0006
   30 through 3 0.0004
   40 through 4 0.0002
   50 and over  0.0002
 
TABLE 6
PERMITTED RATE OF PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSION IN POUNDS PER HOUR, PER ACRE
Height Of Emission  Zone LI, OR
(Feet)               (Pounds)
Height Of Emission  Zone LI, OR
(Feet)               (Pounds)
                    
   0 - 49        1.00
   50 - 99       1.01
   100 - 149     1.06
   150 - 199     1.10
   200 - 299     1.16
   300 - 399     1.30
   400 and over  1.50
 
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
TABLE 7
SITE CAPACITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
         Minimum Open Maximum Density Maximum Gross Maximum       Maximum Floor
Zone Use Space Ratio  Factor          Density       Impervious    Area Ratio
                                                    Surface Ratio
                  Minimum Open Maximum Maximum Maximum       Maximum Floor
Zone Use          Space Ratio  Density Gross   Impervious    Area Ratio
                               Factor  Density Surface Ratio
     Single-
AG   family       -            0.20    0.20    0.10          -
     subdivision
    Planned unit 0.80         1.40    0.30    0.08          -
     development
    All other    -            -       -       -             0.20
     uses
     Single-
SE   family       -            0.50    0.50    0.15          -
     subdivision
    Planned unit 0.20         1.40    0.65    0.08          -
     development
    All other    -            -       -       0.15          0.30
     uses
     Single-
SR   family       -            0.95    -       0.20          -
     subdivision
    Planned unit 0.20         1.20    1.00    0.15          -
     development
    All other    -            -       -       0.20          0.40
     uses
B    All uses     -            -       -       0.80          0.50
CR   All uses     -            -       -       0.20          0.20
OR   All uses     -            -       -       0.80          0.50
LI   All uses     -            -       -       0.80          0.50
PL   All uses     -            -       -       0.80          0.50
 
(Ord. 2009-794, 11-3-2009)
TABLE 8
LOT SIZE, YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
         Lot Size   Yard                                            Bulk
         Area                    Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot          Height Of Height Of
Zone Use (Sq. Width Front1 Rear  Side  Side    A        Residential Coverage FAR Principal Accessory
         Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)   Street1  Zone (Ft.)  (%)          Use       Use
                                               (Ft.)                             Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
1    2   3    4     5      6     7     8       9        10          11       12  13  14    15  16
             Lot Size      Yard                                            Bulk
             Area                       Total Minimum Abutting Abutting A  Lot           Height Of Height Of
Zone Use     (Sq.    Width Front1 Rear  Side  Side    A        Residential Coverage FAR  Principal Accessory
             Ft.)    (Ft.) (Ft.)  (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.)   Street1  Zone (Ft.)  (%)           Use       Use
                                                      (Ft.)                              Ft. Stor. Ft. Stor.
1    2       3       4     5      6     7     8       9        10          11       12   13  14    15  16
AG   Any SFD 12,000  70    30     30    15    5       30       *           50       1.00 *   *     *   *
     Any
     other   200,000 250   60     30    80    40      60       *           10       0.10 *   *     *   *
     use
SE   Any SFD 12,000  70    30     30    15    5       30       *           50       1.00 *   *     *   *
     Any
     special
     farm
     use,
     other
    farm    200,000 250   60     30    80    40      60       *           50       1.00 *   *     *   *
     use,
     school
     or
     medical
     use
     Any
    other   80,000  160   60     30    40    20      60       *           15       1.50 *   *     *   *
     use
SR   Any SFD 12,000  70    30     30    15    5       30       *           50       1.00 *   *     *   *
     Any
     special
     farm
     use,
     other
    farm    200,000 250   60     30    80    40      60       *           10       0.10 *   *     *   *
     use,
     school
     or
     medical
     use
     Any
    other   40,000  100   30     20    20    10      30       *           20       0.20 *   *     *   *
     use
B    All     20,000  75    60     20    12    0       30       *           20       0.20 *   *     *   *
     uses
CR   All     40,000  100   75     20    20    10      30       *           20       0.20 *   *     *   *
     uses
OR   All     80,000  160   100    100   40    20      50       *           30       0.30 *   *     *   *
     uses
LI   All     40,000  100   75     50    40    20      50       *           40       0.40 *   *     *   *
     uses
PL   All     40,000  100   75     50    40    20      50       *           40       0.40 *   *     *   *
     uses
 
Notes:
The above standards are established for planned unit developments located in
the wastewater management planning area subsequent to the establishment of or
approval of wastewater treatment facility. In all other areas the standards and
regulations established in section
10-4-4, table 2, "Lot Size, Yard And Bulk Regulations", of this title shall
apply.
   *   See standards established in section
10-5-6 of this chapter, generally.
   1.   Setback established from right of way line of any interior public
street. For exterior public streets, see section
10-5-6 of this chapter, generally.
(Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
TABLE 9
This table is intentionally left blank and is reserved.
TABLE 10
This table is intentionally left blank and is reserved. (Ord. 2008-771, 11-18-
2008)
TABLE 11
PARKING CHART
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1219.png]
 
TABLE OF DIMENSIONS
(In Feet)
 
O*  S   P    A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H    J
0° 8.0 22.0 Parallel parking space
30°9.0 18.0 30.0 18.0 16.3             13.5 6.0  42.6
45°9.0 18.0 19.8 12.7 18.5 16.6 15.0 16.0 6.4  9.0  49.0
60°9.0 19.0 12.1 10.4 19.0 17.0 19.0 15.0 2.6  12.0 57.0
90°9.0 18.0 0.0  9.0  18.0 18.0 24.0 18.0 0.0  5.0  60.0
 
*Other angles of parking allowed subject to village review and approval
Notes:
   O   Parking angle
   S   Parking space width
   P   Parking space length
   B   Curb length of parking space width
   A   Curb length of parking space depth
   C   Perpendicular length of stall (against wall)
   D   Perpendicular length of stall (overlap)
   E   Aisle width
   F   Turnaround aisle width
   G   Overhang of curb length at periphery
   H   Setback
   J   Wall to wall dimensions
(Ord. 2010-807, 3-16-2010)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose And Intent
10-6-2: Nonconforming Lots
10-6-3: Nonconforming Structures
10-6-4: Nonconforming Uses
10-6-5: Nonconforming Accessory Uses
10-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
In addition to and in support of the purpose and intent for which this Title is
enacted generally, this Chapter is enacted for the following specific purposes
and intent:
   A.   To establish standards for the continued maintenance and operation of
existing nonconforming buildings and structures where the outright or gradual
elimination of such buildings and structures would cause undue hardship.
   B.   To provide for the elimination, over time, of nonconforming uses of
lots, structures and buildings which are adaptable to conforming uses.
   C.   To encourage the preservation and restoration of landmark buildings and
places of historic interest and aesthetic merit.
   D.   To establish procedures for the inspection and restoration of
nonconforming uses which are in violation of the provisions of this Title and
the other land development ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-6-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
Any vacant lot established prior to the adoption of the Ordinance codified in
this Title and which was in compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance
in effect at the time of its establishment but which now fails to meet the
minimum area or width requirements of this Title or of the district in which it
is located may be used, developed, maintained or redeveloped in conformance
with the following standards:
   A.   A nonconforming lot may be used for any use in the district in which it
is located except that any use for which there is an extraordinary area
requirement or width requirement shall not be permitted use for a nonconforming
lot. Such extraordinary area or width requirement may be found in Table 2,
Section
10-4-4, or in Sections
10-5-4,
10-5-5 or
10-5-6 of this Title. A permit for an on-site waste water disposal system as
issued by the Lake County Health Department shall be required prior to the
establishment or enlargement of a use on a nonconforming lot.
   B.   All regulations and standards of this Title other than those
established for area and width shall be met.
   C.   The provisions of the other land development ordinances of the Village,
including but not limited to the Flood Plain Ordinance, Title 9, and the
Subdivision Control Ordinance, Title 11, shall also apply to the use of
nonconforming lots.
   D.   No subdivision, plat, vacation or other division of a lot or other
parcel of land shall be made that would result in establishment of a
nonconforming lot.
   E.   Relief from these provisions shall only be granted by the issuance of a
variation as provided by this Title.
   F.   A nonconforming lot shall not be entitled to the establishment,
enlargement or extension of either a nonconforming use or a nonconforming
structure solely by virtue of its nonconformance.
   G.   With respect to the provisions of this Chapter regarding the
regulations and restrictions upon nonconforming uses and structures,
nonconforming lot shall be entitled to the same consideration as conforming
lots except that practical difficulties arising from the nonconformance or the
degree of nonconformance may be considered in the regulation of any use or
structure thereon.
   H.   A lot which is or was illegally created shall not become a legal
nonconforming lot solely by virtue of the enactment of this Title. (Ord. 91-
341, 4-2-1991)
   I.   Within the Southeast District, the following special provisions shall
apply:
      1.   A nonconforming recorded lot is a tract of land, designated on a
duly recorded subdivision plat or by other lawful means which has less than the
minimum lot area or width or other dimension prescribed for the Southeast
District, and which met the lot area, width and other dimensions for the zone
in which it was located at the time of such recording.
      2.   A nonconforming recorded lot shall be subject to the following
provisions:
         a.   Permitted Uses: A nonconforming recorded lot may only be used for
a single-family dwelling and accessory uses.
         b.   Side And Rear Yards: Each side yard and rear yard for principal
building shall be ten percent (10%) of the lot width except that any yard shall
be a minimum of four feet (4'). For corner lots, the minimum side yard abutting
the side street shall be thirty feet (30').
         c.   Front Yard Requirements: The minimum front yard requirement of
twenty percent (20%) of the depth of a nonconforming recorded lot shall be
required.
         d.   Buildable Width On Corner Lots: On a nonconforming recorded
corner lot the buildable width shall be at least equal to twenty two feet (22')
plus one foot (1') for each two feet (2') that the width of the lot exceeds
twenty four feet (24') less than the area required for the interior yard.
         e.   Setback Of Accessory Buildings: A new or relocated accessory
building need not be set back from the main front wall of the nearest existing
accessory building or principal structure more than one foot (1') for each four
feet (4') of distance between such adjoining buildings.
         f.   Nonconforming Recorded Subdivisions: It is the intent of this
Section to regulate the development of subdivisions where substantial portions
of the blocks or lots, or the entire subdivision, are nonconforming and
undeveloped without adequate access.
         g.   Regulation: Where platted subdivisions existed on or before March
31, 1966, containing nonconforming lots where roads have not been installed,
and where these lots do not have direct access to an improved and approved
street, and are held in common ownership, these lots shall be combined to meet
the minimum requirements of the Lake County Health Department for septic
systems and individuals wells, but in no case shall the lot size be less than
the minimum requirements of the NC/UR-3 zone of the Lake County Zoning
Ordinance in effect as of April 11, 1997.
         h.   Exception: Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein,
if the applicant can prove that he would have qualified for a building permit
for the desired structure had such a permit been applied for to the Lake County
Building Department after January 1, 1997, but prior to February 4, 1997, then
in that event, such use shall not be prohibited by this District provided that
said use is confined to a single-family residence or related accessory
structure. (Ord. 97-476, 4-15-1997)
10-6-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Any building or other structure established, built, remodeled or enlarged prior
to the adoption of this Title, or any building or other structure established,
built, remodeled or enlarged in compliance with the regulations in effect at
the time, but which now fails to meet the yard, height, bulk or similar
requirements of the district in which it is located, shall only be used,
maintained, remodeled, enlarged or otherwise altered in conformance with the
following standards:
   A.   Repairs And Alterations:
      1.   Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or
structure, provided that no structural alteration which increases the bulk of
the building or structure shall be made in or to a nonconforming building or
structure; all or substantially all of which is designated or intended to
accommodate a use not currently allowed in the district in which it is located,
except those required by law or except to make the building or structure and
the use thereof, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located. For the purpose of this Section, repairs shall include the replacement
or of substitutions for, building machinery or other mechanical equipment not
involving structural alterations to the building or structure, except as
hereinabove provided.
      2.   Repairs, alterations and structural changes may be made to a
nonconforming building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, provided said repairs, alterations or structural changes conform to
the regulations of the district in which said building or structure is located.
   B.   Additions And Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure which
is nonconforming as to the yard, lot or bulk regulations and is designed or
intended for a permitted use, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner
unless such additions or enlargements thereto are made to conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located and unless such
nonconforming building or structure, including all additions and enlargements
thereto, shall conform to the following:
      1.   Applicable regulations concerning the amount of lot area provided
per dwelling unit, as established in this title.
      2.   The allowable floor area ratio as provided in this title.
      3.   The allowable gross floor area per establishment, as provided in
this title.
      4.   The parking space requirements contained in section
10-5-9 of this title.
   C.   Relocation Of Building Or Structure: No building or structure shall be
moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot
unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved, and the use
thereof, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which
it is to be located. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
   D.   Restoration Of Damaged Structure: A nonconforming building or structure
which is destroyed or damaged by fire, other casualty or act of God to the
extent that the estimated restoration of the building to its condition before
the occurrence exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the original square footage of
the entire building in the opinion of the village, shall not be restored unless
said building or structure, and the use thereof, shall conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event that the
restoration of such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of
the original square footage of the entire building in the opinion of the
village, the building may be restored to its original condition; however, no
such repair or reconstruction shall be made unless started within one year from
the date of partial destruction and completed within one year thereafter. If
the restoration is not started within one year of the occurrence and diligently
prosecuted to completion, then the owner shall cause the building or structure
to be removed and the area cleared. (Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
   E.   Dilapidated Structure: Any nonconforming structure which remains
unoccupied for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months and is in a
dilapidated condition or in an unsafe condition as provided in the building
code shall be removed.
   F.   Existing Parcels: To avoid extreme hardship, any parcel which is
situated within the agricultural, suburban estate or suburban residential
zoning district, which existed as of April 2, 1991, shall be deemed to be a
conforming parcel, provided that the total square footage area of the parcel
equals not less than ninety percent (90%) of the square footage required within
the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-6-4: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any use other than a conditional use which was established prior to the
adoption of this title or which was a permitted use in the district in which it
was established at the time of its establishment, but which is not now a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, may be continued, maintained,
enlarged, relocated or discontinued only in accordance with the following
standards and regulations:
   A.   Additions Or Enlargements: A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or
expanded. For the purpose of this subsection, "enlargement or expansion" shall
mean any increase in the floor area occupied by the use beyond building in
which it is located or any expansion onto a lot in any district in which the
use would also be a nonconforming use.
   B.   Alterations To Structure: There shall be no enlargement, expansion,
structural alteration or increase in the bulk of a building or structure
containing a nonconforming use except that such enlargement shall be in all
respects conforming to the regulations of the district in which it is located
and the use of such enlarged portion of the structure is a permitted use
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
   C.   Damaged Or Destroyed Buildings:
      1.   Any building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is
destroyed or damaged to the extent that the restoration to its condition before
the occurrence exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the original square footage of
the entire building in the opinion of the village, shall only be restored for
use as a permitted use or a conditional use subject to the issuance of a
conditional use permit. Such restored building shall conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
      2.   Any building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is
destroyed or damaged to the extent that the restoration to its condition before
the occurrence is less than fifty percent (50%) of the original square footage
of the entire building in the opinion of the village, may be restored to its
original condition and may be used to continue the nonconforming use subject to
the provisions for nonconforming uses herein.
      3.   No damaged or destroyed nonconforming use permitted to be
reestablished as provided herein shall be reestablished without the issuance of
an occupancy permit. (Ord. 2013-898, 6-18-2013)
   D.   Discontinued Use:
      1.   If the nonconforming use of any building or structure is
discontinued for a period of one year or if a building or structure containing
a nonconforming use remains vacant for whatever reason for a period of one
year, the nonconforming use of such a building or structure shall be considered
abandoned and the building or structure thereafter shall only be used for a
permitted use or a conditional use subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, except as provided in subsection D2 of this section.
      2.   The nonconforming use of a unique structure, if abandoned as
provided above, may be reestablished as the same nonconforming use or as
another nonconforming use requiring no physical adaptation of the structure
provided that such use shall not be expanded or enlarged beyond the size of the
original nonconforming use.
      3.   A discontinued or abandoned nonconforming use permitted to be
reestablished as provided herein shall not be reestablished without the
issuance of an occupancy permit.
   E.   Change Of Use:
      1.   The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended to accommodate a use not
currently allowed in the district in which it is located, may be changed to a
use allowed in the most restrictive district in which the nonconforming use
which presently occupies the building or structure is a permitted or a
conditional use or to a use permitted in a more restrictive district. For the
purpose of this subsection, the AG district shall be considered the most
restrictive and the LI district the least restrictive district. Such a change
of use shall not result in the enlargement of the nonconforming use or
structure.
      2.   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming
use when such nonconforming use is located in a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a
permitted use.
      3.   The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure
thereon which is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land shall
not be changed to any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in
which the land is located.
   F.   Industrial Uses: Any industrial use which is a nonconforming use in the
district in which it is located shall comply with the industrial performance
standards established in section
10-5-1 of this title. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-6-5: NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY USES:
Any accessory use either permitted or required by this title which was
established prior to the adoption of this title or which was a permitted
accessory use at the time of establishment of such accessory use shall be
continued, enlarged, replaced or removed only in accordance with the following
regulations and standards:
   A.   Signs: All nonconforming signs shall be removed or relocated to a
permitted location within one year of the adoption of this title or any
amendment hereto which results in the nonconformance.
   B.   Parking And Loading: The off street parking and loading requirements
and standards established in section
10-5-9 of this title are equally applicable to conforming and nonconforming
uses. Failure to provide adequate off street parking and loading facilities
shall not establish a use as a nonconforming use. The following regulations
shall apply:
      1.   Any use for which off street parking and loading standards are
established by this title which is a nonconforming use shall either provide or
expand the parking in conformance with the requirements for such use as a
permitted use or as otherwise approved by the village board or shall reduce the
area, extent, number of employees or other appropriate measure to conform to
the parking available. The nonconforming status of the principal use shall not
be used as a basis for determining a lesser parking requirement than that
established by this title.
      2.   Any permitted use in a district for which off street parking and
loading standards are established by this title shall provide parking in
conformance with such standards or as otherwise approved by the village board
within one year of the adoption of this title or any amendment thereto which
results in the nonconformance.
   C.   Other Accessory Uses And Buildings: Any other nonconforming structure
or use accessory to either a permitted or a nonconforming use shall be
regulated by the provisions of this chapter as they otherwise apply to
nonconforming principal structures and uses. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Organization
10-7-2: Permits
10-7-3: Interpretation
10-7-4: Procedures
10-7-4-1: Additional Notice
10-7-5: Penalties
10-7-1: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Zoning Officer: The office of the zoning officer is established and the
building inspector or other person appointed by the corporate authorities shall
be the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this title and shall:
      1.   Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
      2.   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
      3.   Issue and renew where applicable all temporary use permits and
maintain records thereof;
      4.   Issue all conditional use permits granted by the village and make
and maintain records thereof;
      5.   Conduct inspections as prescribed by this title and such other
inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various provisions
of this title;
      6.   Make a determination from public records of sufficient information
concerning nonconformance to properly enforce this title;
      7.   Maintain in the offices of the village the official copy of the
zoning map as provided in section
10-3-5 of this title;
      8.   Perform such other duties as are assigned by this title;
      9.   Perform such other duties as are assigned from time to time by the
village board.
   B.   Zoning Board Of Appeals 1 :
      1.   Creation And Membership: The zoning board of appeals of the village,
as created in accordance with the statutes of the state of Illinois 2 , is the
zoning board referred to in this title.
      2.   Jurisdiction: The zoning board shall hold public hearings on request
for conditional use permits, amendments to this title and variations and
appeals and shall make reports and recommendations to the village board.
      3.   Meetings And Rules: All meetings of the zoning board shall be held
at the call of the chairman and at such times as the zoning board may
determine. All meetings conducted by the board shall be open to the public. Any
person may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney. The chairman, if absent or the acting chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The zoning board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every
rule or regulation, every amendment and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the zoning board shall be filed immediately in the office of
the clerk and shall be a public record. The zoning board shall adopt its own
rules and procedures not in conflict with this title or with the applicable
Illinois statutes. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
      4.   Terms Of Office: The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven
(7) members who are appointed by the village president subject to confirmation
by the village board. Members are appointed for five (5) year terms after the
expiration of the initial terms prescribed by law. (Ord. 2002-603, 6-4-2002)
   C.   Plan Commission: The Plan Commission is the Plan Commission of the
Village. The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties under
this Title:
      1.   Initially seven (7) members are appointed. Three (3) members are
appointed for a one-year term. Appointments are made in May by the Village
President after consultation with the Village Board. After the initial term
expires, members are then appointed for only two (2) year terms.
      2.   Establish rules of procedures as necessary to the performance of its
functions.
      3.   Review, modify and recommend approval or disapproval of planned unit
development and report same to the Village Board.
      4.   Review this Title and suggest amendments at least every five (5)
years. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13/12.
10-7-2: PERMITS:
The following regulations shall govern the issuance of permits and
certificates:
   A.   Zoning Certificates: Upon request and the submission of a survey, legal
description or other acceptable and accurate description of the property in
question the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning certificate. Such certificate
shall indicate the date, the property and zoning classification including any
variation, conditional use or other regulation, condition or zoning restriction
applicable to the development and use of the property.
   B.   Conditional Use Permits: Upon action of the Village Board approving a
conditional use the Zoning Officer shall issue to the owner a conditional use
permit which shall include:
      1.   Date.
      2.   The location of the property.
      3.   The zoning classification.
      4.   All conditions on the use and development of the property as
approved by the Village Board.
      5.   A certified copy of any approved development plan, preliminary
development plans, site plans or other plans or drawings as approved by the
Village Board.
   C.   Variance: Upon action of the Village Board approving a variance, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a permit which shall include:
      1.   Date.
      2.   Property description.
      3.   The restriction to be varied and the extent of variation allowed.
   D.   Temporary Use Permits: Upon action of the Village Board approving a
temporary use, the Zoning Officer shall issue a temporary use permit including:
      1.   Date of issuance.
      2.   Property description or other accurate location.
      3.   The use permitted.
      4.   Beginning date and closing date.
      5.   Any other conditions of operation as approved by the Village Board.
   E.   Building Permits: Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the
Zoning Officer shall determine the zoning classification of the property in
question and shall either affix a zoning certificate to such building permit or
shall show such applicable zoning information on the face thereof. No building
permit shall issue except in conformance with the requirements of this Title.
   F.   Occupancy Permits: Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, the
Zoning Officer shall determine the zoning classification of the property in
question and shall either affix a zoning certificate to such occupancy permit
or shall show such applicable zoning information on the face thereof. No
occupancy permit shall issue except in conformance with the requirements of
this Title.
   G.   Denials: Where the Village Board fails to approve an application or
petition, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant or petitioner in
writing. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-7-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   General Provisions: The Zoning Officer shall interpret this Title
strictly and in accordance with the standards set forth below. Decisions of the
Zoning Officer shall be subject to appeal as provided herein:
      1.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of this
Title, the provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
welfare.
      2.   Overlapping Or Contradictory Regulations: Whenever a provision of
this Title or any other provisions of law, whether set forth in this Title or
established by any other ordinance, regulations statute or rule or any kind,
imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations or contains any restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, the provision which is more
restrictive or which imposes higher standards or requirements shall control.
   B.   Existing Building Permits: Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to
require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
or other structure if a building permit for such building or other structure
was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of the relevant portion of this
Title; and such permit has not, by its own terms, expired prior to such
effective date; and actual construction pursuant to such permit was begun prior
to the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this Title and has been
diligently carried on.
   C.   Existing Private Agreements: This Title is not intended to abrogate,
annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private
agreement or legal relationship. If the regulations of this Title are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than any such easement,
covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, the regulations of
this Title shall control.
   D.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer in
the interpretation of this Title may appeal the decision to the Village Board.
The Village Board shall decide such appeals only upon receipt of a written
report and recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
E.   Unlisted uses are prohibited by this title. The listing of a use as
"prohibited" or "not permitted" in this title shall not be construed to permit
unlisted uses by interference. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; Ord. 2019-1068, 9-17-
2019)
10-7-4: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Conditional Use Permits: Except for specific procedures established in
Section
10-5-5 of this Title, the following procedures shall be used in issuing all
conditional use permits:
      1.   Public Hearing: Upon application, the Zoning Board shall schedule a
public hearing after giving fifteen (15) days' notice as provided by law.
      2.   Recommendations: The Zoning Board may recommend approval or
disapproval of the petition and may recommend that conditions be imposed
consistent with the standards of Section
10-5-5 of this Title.
      3.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon receipt of the report and recommendation by
the Zoning Board, the Village Board shall either approve or disapprove the
application, and where approved shall establish the specific conditions under
which the application is approved. If the Village Board approves the
application, the Zoning Officer shall issue the conditional use permit subject
to all applicable rules, regulations and conditions.
      4.   Validity Of Plans: All approved plans, conditions, restrictions and
rules made a part of the conditional use permit shall constitute certification
on the part of the applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such
regulations at all times.
      5.   Time Limit And Notification: All applications for conditional use
permits shall be decided within sixty (60) days of the date of the public
hearing and the applicant shall be provided with either a conditional use
permit or written notice of the denial.
   B.   Variations: It is the intent of this Title to use the variation only to
modify the application of this Title to achieve a parity among properties
similarly located and classified. Specifically, it is to be used to overcome
some exceptional physical condition which poses practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship in such a way as to prevent an owner from using his
property as intended by this Title.
      1.   Application: After denial of a building permit by the Zoning
Officer, a property owner may apply to the Zoning Board for a variation, using
forms obtainable from the Zoning Officer.
      2.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of an application and fee, the Zoning
Board shall hold a public hearing after giving fifteen (15) days' notice as
provided by law. The Zoning Board shall consider and make recommendations to
the Village Board on all applications for variations within thirty (30) days of
such public hearing. The Village Board shall decide all applications for
variations within thirty (30) days after transmittal from the Zoning Board.
      3.   Standards For Variations: The Village shall grant a variation
whenever, and only when, it shall have determined, recorded in writing and
placed in its records on forms to be provided by the Zoning Officer, that all
of the following conditions have been met:
         a.   That the variation does not permit a use otherwise excluded from
the particular zone in which requested.
         b.   That special circumstances or conditions such as exceptional
narrowness, topography or siting, fully described in the report of the Zoning
Board, apply to the land for which a variation is sought and that those
conditions do not apply generally in the zone.
         c.   That special circumstances or conditions have not resulted from
any act of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this Title, whether or
not a violation of the provisions thereof.
         d.   That, for reasons fully set forth in the report of the Zoning
Board, the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this Title results in the loss of any
reasonable use of land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variation; there
must be a deprivation of beneficial use of land.
         e.   That the variation granted is the minimum adjustment necessary
for the reasonable use of the land.
         f.   That the granting of any variation is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this Title and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare or in conflict with the
Comprehensive Plan for development of the Village.
   C.   Amendments: This Title may be amended from time to time as conditions
warrant, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Application: An application for a proposed amendment shall be filed
with the Zoning Board, using forms available from the Zoning Officer.
Amendments to rezone any property may be instituted by the owner of the
property, an appropriate governmental agency or the Village Board.
      2.   Public Hearing: Upon application, the Zoning Board, after giving
fifteen (15) days' notice as provided by law, shall schedule a public hearing.
The Zoning Board shall consider and make recommendation on all proposed
amendments, taking into account:
         a.   The testimony at the hearing;
         b.   A site inspection of the property in question;
         c.   The recommendations from interested official bodies; and
         d.   The standards provided below.
      3.   Report To Village Board And Voting Requirements: The Zoning Board
shall make a report to the Village Board. No amendment shall be passed except
by a majority vote of all members of the Village Board or as otherwise provided
by statute.
      4.   Standards For Amendments: A proposed amendment shall be considered
on its own merits using the following criteria as a guide:
         a.   Text Or Map Amendment: The following conditions shall be met for
all amendments:
            (1)   The proposed amendment shall correct an error or meet the
challenge of changing conditions in the area and the zones affected;
            (2)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the intent of
this Title and with its various provisions;
            (3)   The proposed amendment shall not be detrimental to the
development of the Village.
         b.   Map Amendments: In addition to the above conditions, the
following shall be met for all map changes:
            (1)   Every use permitted under the new classifications must be a
suitable use for the further development of the area in the vicinity of the
rezoning and must be compatible with uses already developed in the vicinity;
and
            (2)   Adequate public facilities, sewer and water lines, other
needed services of facilities must exist or must be capable of being provided
prior to the development of the uses which would be permitted on the property
if it were reclassified. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
10-7-4-1: ADDITIONAL NOTICE:
In addition to all other notices prescribed by the Village Code or otherwise
required by law, properties which are the subject of a zoning petition
requiring a public hearing before the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals, such as zoning map amendments, variances, or conditional uses, shall
be posted with a sign or signs indicating that a zoning petition is pending
before the Village.
The sign shall be installed by the Village not less than fifteen (15) days nor
more than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing. A sign shall be
installed along each public street frontage and additional signs shall be
posted in the discretion of the Village if the frontage distance exceeds one-
fourth (1/4) mile, provided that only one sign shall be required for single-
family lots which are corner lots on two (2) public streets. (Ord. 98-510, 9-1-
1998; amd. 2025-1177, 9-2-2025)
10-7-5: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this Title shall subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code. For the purposes of this Title, a person shall mean and
include an individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other legal
entity. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991; amd. 1996 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FEES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Application Fees
10-8-1: APPLICATION FEES:
   A.   The Village Board shall from time to time establish application fees
for the following:
      1.   Amendment to the text of this Title.
      2.   Amendment to the existing Zoning Map.
      3.   Amendment establishing zoning on annexed land (zoning map).
      4.   Conditional use.
      5.   Variance.
      6.   Temporary use.
      7.   Appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer.
      8.   Zoning certificate.
   B.   No application shall be received and no public hearing shall be held
without payment of such fee. (Ord. 91-341, 4-2-1991)
CHAPTER 9
COMMUNICATION TOWERS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Definitions
10-9-2: Applicability
10-9-3: General Guidelines And Requirements
10-9-4: Permitted Uses
10-9-5: Administration
10-9-6: Conditional Use Permits
10-9-7: Deviations
10-9-8: Removal
10-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Natural or manmade trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
APPLICANT: The person who applies for a permit for an installation.
CTC: The Communication Tower Committee, which shall consist of the Village
President and chairman of zoning and plat committee of the Village Board, or
such other persons as are so designated from time to time by the Village Board.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from ground level to the highest point on the antenna, tower or other
structure.
INSTALLATION: The combination of antenna, tower, support building, and related
structures and improvements which collectively permit the reception and
retransmission of telephonic, radio, or television communications through the
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
PERMITTEE: The person who receives a permit for an installation.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
VILLAGE: The Village of Wadsworth. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   District Height Limitations: The requirements set forth in this Chapter
shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are
installed at, a height in excess of the height limitations specified for each
zoning district.
   B.   Public Property: Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the Village shall be exempt from the requirements of
this Chapter, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has
been approved by the Village.
   C.   Amateur Radio Antennas: This Chapter shall not govern any tower, or the
installation of any antenna, that is under seventy feet (70') in height and is
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator for
that purpose only. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-3: GENERAL GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose; Goals:
      1.   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish general guidelines for
the siting of towers and antennas.
      2.   The goals of this Chapter are to:
         a.   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
         b.   Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
         c.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
         d.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and
         e.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently.
   B.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing
structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot or parcel. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or
parcel shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on
leased parcels within such lots or parcels. Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and or tower
shall provide to the Village an inventory of its existing towers that are
either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design
of each tower. The Village may share such information with other applicants
applying for permits under this Chapter or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas within the Village, provided, however, that the Village is not,
by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such
sites are available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetics: The guidelines set forth in this Section shall govern the
location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this
Chapter; provided, however, that the Village may waive these requirements to
the extent necessary if it determines that the goals of this Chapter are better
served thereby.
      1.   Finish: Towers shall have a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   Design: At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural
setting and existing structures.
      3.   Supporting Structure: If an antenna is installed on a structure
other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the
antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
      4.   Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required
by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the Village
shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that
would cause the least visual disturbance. No illumination system may be
utilized to illuminate the support building or the balance of the installation,
except as explicitly required by Federal law.
   E.   Federal Requirements: All installations must comply with the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969, all other applicable Federal and State laws
and regulations, as well as the standards contained in the Wadsworth Building
Code 1  and must specifically meet or exceed current standards and regulations
of the FAA, the FCC, and any other applicable Federal or State regulations. If
such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this Chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling Federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
   F.   Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with the Village Building Codes 2  and the applicable standards for towers that
are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to
time. If, upon inspection, the Village concludes that a tower fails to comply
with such codes and standards, and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If
the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30)
days, the Village may remove such tower at the owner's expense.
   G.   General Criteria For All Installations:
      1.   A cash bond to be deposited equivalent to one hundred twenty five
percent (125%) of the estimated cost of maintenance for a ten (10) year period
and the cost of removal and disposal of the entire installation, as determined
by the Village Engineer or such other expert designated by the Village from
time to time.
      2.   As to each installation, the entire site, including the tower and
outbuilding, must be kept maintained and in good condition, as reasonably
determined by the Village Engineer. If the owner of the installation fails to
maintain the site, the Village, upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice, or
in the event of an emergency such prior notice, if any, which is practicable,
may perform the necessary repairs, maintenance, or removal of the installation,
as it deems appropriate, and all costs so incurred shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the installation.
      3.   No installation may be situated within five hundred feet (500') of
residence situated in an SE, SR, or SD District. No installation shall be
permitted in the Historic Overlay District or within any scenic corridor.
      4.   Sufficient vegetative screening shall be installed so that within
ten (10) years of planting, the base portion of the site, to a height of twenty
five feet (25'), shall not be visible from any adjacent parcel, or a public
right of way, when viewed from six feet (6') above existing grade on the
adjacent parcel or right of way. All trees to be planted shall be of approved
type as specified in the Wadsworth Landscape Ordinance 3 .
      5.   No permit shall be issued if another technology is reasonably
available that eliminates the need for a communication tower.
      6.   The base support building shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in
height nor shall the footprint of the building be larger than twelve feet by
fifteen feet (12' x 15'). For multiple user installations, the footprint may be
expanded if reasonably necessary, provided that the footprint shall be no
larger than absolutely necessary and shall be subject to the prior review and
approval of the Plan Commission. Each such building must have a conventional
peaked roof, as opposed to a flat roof, to facilitate its melding into the
community.
      7.   For all new installations, the tower shall be constructed in such a
fashion to accommodate three (3) antenna/transmitter devices. Competitors shall
be required to collocate their respective facilities on the same installation
to the extent reasonably possible, with each party responsible for its
proportionate share of the cost of the facilities. In the event that said
parties cannot agree on the appropriate allocation of costs, then each party
shall appoint an arbitrator, who collectively shall select an additional
arbitrator, who shall thereafter as a panel arbitrate the dispute and issue a
binding decision on the respective parties.
      8.   No tower shall be located in such a fashion that if it were to
collapse it could fall on any structure which is occupied by humans, excluding
the support building, or could fall off-site from the parcel upon which it is
located.
      9.   The installation must be operated in such a fashion so that it does
not disrupt television or radio signals to residents or occupants within the
Village, impact on hearing aid operation or other medical devices such as
pacemakers, or otherwise disrupt or have a harmful effect on any existing
operations, installations, or technologies existent within the Village.
      10.   No installation may be installed in any wetland or flood plain, nor
in any other location where it is likely to harm or cause damage to human or
animal life or to property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tower portion of
the installation may be located in a conservancy district area if no damage
would occur to the conservancy district area and the tower would be
structurally sound.
      11.   The permittee must indemnify and hold harmless the Village from any
and all liability on a Village-approved form.
      12.   The permittee shall post and maintain in full force and effect a
general liability policy with the Village as named insured in an amount no less
than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence and five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
      13.   The maximum height of the tower shall not exceed one hundred twenty
five feet (125') above existing grade at the situs of the tower.
      14.   The permittee must obtain and maintain all required Federal
licenses and permits, and effectuate and maintain all required registrations.
      15.   A landscape plan must be reviewed and approved by the CTC, or the
Plan Commission, if a conditional use permit is required.
      16.   The permittee must demonstrate that other facilities are not
reasonably available for intended installation, such as, but not limited to,
towers of competitors and other available towers or sites such as Commonwealth
Edison transmission towers.
      17.   The permittee must demonstrate sufficient financial resources to
install, maintain, and operate the installation and associated tower grid.
Towers built on speculation by applicants who do not have the ability to
provide service are prohibited.
   H.   Permit Fee: The permit applicant shall pay a permit fee of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) at the time of permit application. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8, Chapter 1 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 8, Chapter 1 of this Code.
3 1. See Title 12 of this Code.
10-9-4: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   General: The uses listed in this Section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require a conditional use permit. Nevertheless, all such
uses shall comply with subsections
10-9-3D through H of this Chapter and all other applicable chapters of this
Code.
   B.   Specific Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted:
      1.   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) that is fifty feet (50') in height or greater, so
long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the
height of the existing structure; and
      2.   Installing an antenna on any tower existing as of February 1, 1998,
of any height, so long as the addition of the antenna adds no more than twenty
feet (20') to the height of the existing tower; provided, however, that such
specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with the antenna. (Ord. 98-
494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   CTC Authority: This Chapter shall be administered by the CTC. All
decisions of the CTC to approve or deny a permit shall be in writing.
   B.   Appeals: The decision of the CTC shall be subject to appeal to the
Village Board by the applicant or any other interested party. Any such appeal
must be in writing, be captioned "notice of appeal", and be filed with the
Village Clerk no later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the
CTC's written decision. The failure to file a timely notice of appeal shall
forever bar any appeal to the Village Board.
   C.   Review And Evaluation: The Village may retain a consulting engineer
and/or other experts to review and evaluate applications for permits, necessary
maintenance, and for general enforcement of this Chapter.
   D.   Specific Administrative Approved Uses: The following uses may be
approved by the CTC after conducting an administrative review:
      1.   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) that is less than fifty feet (50') in height, so long
as such addition does not add more than twenty feet (20') to the height of the
existing structure;
      2.   Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, and
further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting
equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said
antenna adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the height of said existing
tower;
      3.   Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other
than SE, SR, or SD Districts that in the judgment of the CTC is in conformity
with the goals set forth in subsection
10-9-3A of this Chapter;
      4.   No conditional use permit required if installation is to be located
in the CR, OR, LI, or PL Districts, and satisfies the criteria in subsection D3
of this Section and the following criteria:
         a.   Located at least two hundred feet (200') from perimeter of parcel
upon which it is to be situated.
         b.   All-year screening presently exists which will screen
installation from view from adjacent property when viewed from grade level on
adjacent site immediately adjacent to parcel upon which will be situated the
installation.
         c.   No installation shall be located within one mile of any other
installation. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   General: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing and
make its recommendation to the Village Board thereafter. The conditional use
permit process shall conform to the requirements of Section
10-5-5 of this Title except as otherwise explicitly set forth in this Chapter.
The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use permits:
      1.   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section
10-9-4 of this Chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to
Section
10-9-5 of this Chapter, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      2.   In granting a conditional use permit, the Village may impose
conditions to the extent the Village concludes such conditions are necessary to
minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
      3.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
      4.   A conditional use permit shall only be issued if the applicant
establishes that no other viable alternatives exist and all reasonable
alternatives have been thoroughly studied and considered.
      5.   A conditional use permit shall be permitted in the SE, SR, or SD
Districts only as a last resort when all other alternatives have been studied
and determined to be not feasible.
   B.   Information Required: Each applicant requesting a conditional use
permit shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed
by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of
all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency
coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing,
landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the Village to be
necessary to assess compliance with this Chapter.
   C.   Factors Considered: The Village shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, although the Village may
waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if
the Village concludes that the goals of this Chapter are better served thereby:
      1.   Height of the proposed tower;
      2.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
      3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      4.   Surrounding topography;
      5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      6.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      7.   Proposed ingress and egress; and
      8.   Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as
discussed in subsection D of this Section.
   D.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers Or Other Structures: No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Village that no existing tower or structure can accommodate
the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna
may consist of any of the following:
      1.   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
      2.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
      3.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
      4.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
      5.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
      6.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   E.   Setbacks And Separation: The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a conditional use
permit is required:
      1.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower
from any off-site residential structure.
      2.   Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
      3.   In zoning districts other than CR, OR, LI, LI-1 or PL, towers over
ninety feet (90') in height shall not be located within one-quarter (1/4) of a
mile from any existing tower that is over ninety feet (90') in height.
   F.   Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by approved security fencing
not less than six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the Village may waive
such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
   G.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a conditional use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Village may waive such requirements if the goals of this
Chapter would be better served thereby:
      1.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent
residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip
at least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the compound. The
perimeter of the installation site shall be planted with canopy trees to screen
towers from view from off-site.
      2.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
      3.   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers
sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may
be sufficient buffer. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-7: DEVIATIONS:
If the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Village Board that any
provision or combination of provisions of this Chapter individually or
collectively render it not reasonably possible to install a functioning
installation and all other possibilities have been exhausted, the Village Board
may waive, reduce, or substitute from the requirements of this Chapter to
permit a functioning installation which will still be consistent with the
purpose and goals of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-494, 2-17-1998)
10-9-8: REMOVAL:
   A.   If the installation is maintained or operated in such a fashion to be
in violation of subsection
10-9-3E or F or any other provisions of this Chapter and the owner has failed
to eliminate the violation within thirty (30) days of the mailing of written
notice of violation to its last known address, the Village may remove such
antenna or tower at the owner's expense, and may use the posted bond to the
extent necessary with the owner responsible for any costs exceeding the
available bond.
   B.   Any installation that is not operated for a continuous period of six
(6) months shall be considered abandoned, provided that if there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, the tower shall not be considered abandoned until
all users cease using the tower. The owner of such installation shall remove
same within thirty (30) days of the mailing of written notice of abandonment to
its last known address. If the owner fails to remove the installation within
the thirty (30) day period, then the Village may remove such installation at
the owner's expense, and may use the posted bond to the extent necessary with
the owner responsible for any costs exceeding the available bond. (Ord. 98-494,
2-17-1998)
CHAPTER 10
GATEWAY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREA
SECTION:
10-10-1: Introduction
10-10-2: Boundaries
10-10-3: Zoning
10-10-4: Development Review
10-10-5: Allowed Land Uses
10-10-6: Development Standards
10-10-7: Building And Site Design Standards
10-10-1: INTRODUCTION:
This chapter contains detailed land use and development recommendations for the
Route 173/I-94 interchange area, of the "gateway economic development area", as
shown on the Wadsworth zoning map as the gateway overlay zoning district. The
gateway economic development area is based on the intergovernmental agreement
between the village of Old Mill Creek, the village of Wadsworth, and Lake
County regarding the Route 173/I-94 interchange (the "Route 173
intergovernmental agreement").
The gateway plan is intended to create a cohesive entry, or gateway, into Lake
County and the adjacent communities. It promotes high quality economic
development that will provide desirable jobs, a strong diversified tax base and
convenient community services for local residents. The gateway plan establishes
land use, zoning and development standards. It also establishes criteria for
providing sewer, water and other infrastructure and services within the gateway
area. (Ord. 2007-723, 4-3-2007)
10-10-2: BOUNDARIES:
The boundary of the gateway economic development area is depicted as the
gateway overlay zoning district on the village of Wadsworth zoning map. (Ord.
2007-723, 4-3-2007)
10-10-3: ZONING:
All development applications for the allowed land uses of office/research,
office/light assembly, retail service and residential as shown on the gateway
economic development area proposed land use map for either a rezoning or a
subdivision approval will be done as a planned unit development based on the
village of Wadsworth planned unit development section of the Wadsworth zoning
ordinance.
Any development request will be in substantial conformance with the underlying
land use as depicted on the gateway economic development area proposed land use
map.
The development request will follow the following land use and development
standards as part of the planned unit development process. (Ord. 2007-723, 4-3-
2007)
10-10-4: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
As part of any processing of a development application with respect to the
development of any parcel within the gateway economic development area:
   A.   The village of Wadsworth, when receiving a development application (the
"approving party") shall ensure that the other parties to the intergovernmental
agreement (the "commenting parties") receive five (5) sets of the application
and all relevant plans relating to such application. The development
application shall be delivered to the commenting parties upon receipt by the
approving party but, at a minimum, no less than thirty (30) days prior to any
binding consideration by the approving party or, if a public hearing is
required in connection with the development application, no less than ten (10)
days before the commencement of such hearing. The development application shall
be delivered to the individuals identified in section 10 under the notice
provisions of the intergovernmental agreement.
   B.   The commenting parties shall have "agency status" for review of the
development application and shall be allowed to provide verbal and/or written
comments, within reason, throughout the decision making process of the
approving party.
   C.   The approving party shall require the developer to provide the
necessary on site and off site infrastructure to serve the proposed development
with sanitary sewer in a manner acceptable to the Lake County department of
public works. The Lake County department of public works may deem it necessary
for such infrastructure to be designed and sized to allow its extension and/or
expansion to serve all other properties within the subject area, to the use
level contemplated by the plan. Where oversizing is required, rights for
recapture may be provided to the extent permitted by Illinois law.
   D.   The approving party shall require the developer to provide the
necessary on site and off site infrastructure to serve the proposed development
with water supply in a manner acceptable to the Lake County department of
public works. The Lake County department of public works may deem it necessary
for such infrastructure to be designed and sized to allow its extension and/or
expansion to serve all or a portion of the other properties within the subject
area, to the use level contemplated by the plan. Where oversizing is required,
rights for recapture may be provided to the extent permitted by Illinois law.
Upon completion of installation of sanitary sewer and public water supply
infrastructure, to the satisfaction of the Lake County department of public
works, Lake County may require such infrastructure to be transferred to the
Lake County department of public works for ownership, operation and
maintenance. (Ord. 2007-723, 4-3-2007)
10-10-5: ALLOWED LAND USES:
These land use and development standards are intended to accommodate the
following allowed uses:
Office/light assembly.
Office/research.
Residential.
Retail/service. (Ord. 2007-723, 4-3-2007)
10-10-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
For each of the allowed commercial uses, development standards, including
maximum floor area ratios (FAR), building heights, and impervious surface
ratios (ISR), are provided below. Residential uses are defined based on minimum
lot sizes and densities.
   A.   Office/Research Development Standards:
      1.   Permitted uses:
         Financial institutions.
         Office.
         Office park.
         Research park developments.
      2.   Auxiliary uses:
         Retail or service uses that serve only the principal use.
      3.   Prohibited uses:
         Assembly.
         Heavy manufacturing.
         Warehouse uses.
      4.   Maximum floor area: Forty percent (40%) per individual lot; thirty
percent (30%) for the development.
      5.   Maximum ISR: Sixty percent (60%) per individual lot; forty five
percent (45%) for the development.
      6.   Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
      7.   Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres.
      8.   Minimum lot width: Two hundred twenty feet (220').
      9.   Building setbacks:
         a.   Front/corner: Fifty feet (50') (note: no parking in front yard
setback).
         b.   Interior side: Thirty feet (30').
         c.   Rear: Thirty feet (30').
Note: "Heavy manufacturing" refers to basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from raw material with the potential for
significant external effects to the community and environment.
   B.   Office/Light Assembly Development Standards:
      1.   Permitted uses:
         Light assembly uses.
         Office.
         Office park.
         Research park developments.
      2.   Auxiliary uses:
         Auxiliary uses should not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the
gross building area.
         Distribution.
         Retail or service uses that serve only the principal use.
         Warehouse.
         Wholesale.
      3.   Prohibited uses:
         Heavy manufacturing.
         Motor freight terminals.
      4.   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): Forty percent (40%).
      5.   Maximum ISR: Sixty percent (60%).
      6.   Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
      7.   Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres.
      8.   Minimum lot width: Two hundred twenty feet (220').
      9.   Building setbacks:
         a.   Front/corner: Thirty five feet (35') (note: no parking in front
yard setback).
         b.   Interior side: Twenty feet (20').
         c.   Rear: Twenty five feet (25').
      10.   Minimum construction value: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
square foot.
         Note: "Heavy manufacturing" refers to basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from raw material with the
potential for significant external effects to the community and environment.
         Note: "Light assembly" refers to processing, compounding, assembling,
and packaging finished or semifinished products in a manner which produces
little effects to the community or the environment.
   C.   Retail/Services Development Standards:
      1.   Permitted uses: All types of retail sales and service uses that
serve the public.
      2.   Nonsales tax generating uses (office, financial, clinic, government)
are limited to twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area; nonsales tax
generating office service uses may occupy one hundred percent (100%) of the
upper floors.
      3.   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): Forty percent (40%).
      4.   Maximum ISR: Seventy percent (70%).
      5.   Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
      6.   Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      7.   Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100').
      8.   Building setbacks:
         a.   Front/corner: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Interior side: Twelve feet (12').
         c.   Rear: Twelve feet (12').
   D.   Residential Development Standards: The average range of residential
density for the entire area is anticipated to be between 0.2 and 0.3 units per
acre. In these areas, typical lots will range from two (2) to five (5) acres
with additional open space areas, which may include agriculture uses to
preserve the rural character of the area. In extremely unique circumstances
caused by environmental opportunities or constraints, two (2) acre lots may be
allowed with provisions that the remainder of the land subdivided is retained
for open space and/or agriculture uses. (Ord. 2007-723, 4-3-2007)
10-10-7: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Natural Resources And Open Space: Each development should protect and
enhance existing natural resource areas and provide open space areas in keeping
with the semirural nature of the surrounding communities. In addition to
natural open space areas, it may also be appropriate to provide formal open
space, such as a village square or building courtyards, as a focal point of the
development. All open space areas should feature amenities such as benches and
walkways. Buildings should be oriented to take advantage of open space views
and access. The protection of natural resources and provision of open space
should be addressed early in the planned unit development design process.
   B.   Storm Water Management: A unified storm water management system should
be designed for the entire development area. To the greatest extent possible,
storm water conveyance and storage should utilize the naturally occurring
drainage patterns and wetlands. Additional storage capacity should provide
through wet bottom detention basins. Detention basins with native wetland
vegetation are encouraged; basins with hard, manmade edges are discouraged. Dry
bottom detention basins should also be avoided. Storm water management should
be addressed early in the planned unit development design process and not as an
afterthought.
The storm water management system should be integrated into the open space and
pedestrian circulation plan. Incorporation of fountains to create water
features is encouraged. Buildings should be oriented to take advantage of views
of attractive water features and wetlands.
   C.   Circulation:
      1.   Automobile Circulation: The northeast quadrant will have a new
access point to Route 173, roughly centered between the existing Mill Creek
Road and the tollway. The northeast quadrant will have one primary access point
onto Mill Creek Road and a secondary access point primarily intended to serve
truck traffic to the office/light assembly/warehouse uses.
The southeast quadrant will have a new access point onto Route 173 directly
parallel to the northeast quadrant access point. The southeast quadrant will
also have one primary access point onto Mill Creek Road. A secondary access
point for truck traffic may also be permitted.
Roadways should be designed to allow circulation between various buildings and
uses within the entire subject area without exiting onto Route 173. Roadways
should be designed to minimize conflicts between automobile and truck traffic.
The primary access roads will be designed as boulevards for a distance of at
least two hundred (200) yards from the intersections with Route 173. The
central median should be planted with a variety of deciduous and evergreen
plantings to ensure year round foliage. Use of annuals is encouraged to ensure
maximum color during spring, summer and fall.
A well designed entrance monument is encouraged for both the north and south
primary access roads. The entrance monuments should be designed to complement
the building architecture and be consistent with the signage and landscaping
requirements established in this section.
      2.   Pedestrian Circulation: Walking within and between the various uses
contained within the overall development plan should be encouraged through the
provision of sidewalks along internal roadways and/or footpaths through the
open space element. The sidewalk and footpath network should be designed to
provide for future possible connections to adjacent developments.
   D.   Building Design: The architectural guidelines for buildings are
intended to require development that is compatible in scale and appearance with
the semirural, open space character of the Route 173 interchange. A uniform
design pallet of building materials, colors, and architectural design should be
applied throughout the entire subject area. Building elements and other uses,
such as vehicle parking, that are incompatible with the surrounding character,
should be screened from view from adjacent properties and roadways, including
I-94. These guidelines are not all-inclusive; it may be necessary to address
additional design elements during the review of individual project proposals.
   E.   Building Facades: All building facades that are visible from adjacent
major roadways should be designed to be aesthetically pleasant. This includes
the side and rear facades of buildings that are visible from Route 173, I-94,
and U.S. 41. Aesthetically pleasing design can be accomplished by employing the
same design elements to the side and rear facades that are often only given to
front facades. Visible building facades should have a defined base, middle and
top.
      1.   Building Massing: Big box architecture, whether on retail or office/
light assembly/warehouse buildings, is discouraged. Large wall expanses
(whether long or tall) should be eliminated through vertical and horizontal
articulation (changes so the wall is not a straight horizontal or vertical
line) and the use of architectural projections, such as porticoes and recesses.
Large wall expanses can also be broken through the use of pilasters, columns,
canopies, and windows. Changes in building heights and rooflines can also be
utilized to soften the visual impacts of long building walls. Changes in facade
materials and colors can improve the appearance of large buildings, but, alone,
these changes are not sufficient to eliminate the visual impacts of large wall
expanses.
      2.   Building Height: Building heights should gradually transition from
low buildings to tall buildings. Where necessary, this transition can occur
within a single building by designing the building with a larger, single-story
base and a taller (multi-story or high ceilinged warehouse) center.
      3.   Building Entrances And Windows: Building entrances should allow for
easy access from parking areas and public open space. Primary building
entrances should be easily identifiable through the use of design elements such
as canopies, porticoes, recesses, or archways. Building doors and windows
should be pedestrian scaled.
In addition to providing natural lighting for occupants, windows should be
utilized to soften building appearances, displaying merchandise and inviting
customers into buildings. Windows should be appropriately sized, arranged, and
designed to enhance the overall appearance of the building. Multipaned windows,
windows with a vertical orientation and windows with a well defined frame or
sill are preferred.
      4.   Facade Materials And Colors: In order to complement the semirural,
open space character of the Route 173 interchange area, the use of natural
building materials and colors is encouraged. Desirable building materials
include brick, terra cotta and natural stone, such as limestone and river
stone. The exclusive use of synthetic materials, such as EIFS/drivit and
precast concrete is discouraged.
Building colors should be natural, earth tones. Dark tones should be utilized
at building base and lighter tones for upper levels. The color selection for
architectural elements such as roofs, awnings, cornices, eaves and sills should
complement the main building color.
      5.   Roof Styles And Materials: Roof styles and variations can add visual
interest to all buildings, but should remain consistent with the overall
building design. Buildings should be designed with a fascia and cornices that
provide a transition between the wall and roof. Flat rooflines are discouraged.
Arched and pitched roofs and roof features such as dormers and cupolas are
encouraged.
      6.   Mechanical And Service Area Screening: All rooftop mechanical
equipment should be visually screened from sight from all public access areas
and adjacent to properties and roadways. Ground level mechanical equipment,
trash collection and loading areas should be appropriately screened from view
from all public access areas and adjacent properties and roadways.
   F.   Lighting Standards: Lighting should be provided to ensure the safety
and security of building occupants and customers. A uniform lighting plan,
including buildings and pole lights, should be designed for the entire subject
area. Lighting should be designed and scaled to create an attractive, friendly
pedestrian environment. Pathways should be lit with low bollard lights.
Lighting intensity should be differentiated based on the location and uses. All
light fixtures should be shielded. All lighting should be designed to minimize
glare on adjacent properties.
   G.   Parking: Parking spaces should be provided for each building in
accordance with the off street parking standards established in the Lake County
unified development ordinances as now in effect or modified in the future.
Parking lots should be located to the side and rear of buildings, when
possible. Parking is not allowed in the required front/corner building
setbacks. Shared parking is encouraged. Parking lots should provide well
defined walkways that minimize pedestrian-vehicle conflicts.
Parking should be clustered in sections separated by building and landscape
islands. Landscape islands should be sufficient in area to accommodate a
variety of plant species. Parking lot landscaping that balances deciduous and
evergreen plantings to ensure year round foliage is encouraged. Parking lots
should also have adequate perimeter landscaping to screen them from adjacent
properties and roadways.
   H.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage is discouraged. All storage of
materials, equipment, and commercial vehicles should occur within approved
structures designed for that purpose.
   I.   Signage Standards: Signage should meet all standards provided in the
Lake County unified development ordinance, as now in effect or in the village
of Wadsworth zoning ordinance, as amended. Whichever ordinance is more
restrictive will prevail.
      1.   Sign Types: Each building tenant should only be allowed one wall
sign. Corner tenants may have a sign on each facade facing the street. The sign
should be mounted on the wall or on an awning or other entrance feature. Wall
signs should not extend above the roofline (eave).
Freestanding signs should be of a monument type. Pole signs are discouraged.
Freestanding signs should emphasize horizontal rather than vertical massing.
The surface of monument signs should contain visible indentations or see
through spaces of appropriate dimensions at appropriate intervals to avoid
overt massing, where applicable. Landscaping should be provided around the base
of freestanding signs.
      2.   Signage Composition: Softer, subtler alternatives to prominent
corporate logos are preferred. For multi-tenant buildings and developments,
consistent lettering, colors and sign designs should be used on all wall signs
and monument signs.
The sign text should consist of no more than two (2) fonts or sizes.
Italicized, bold and plain text should not be mixed. The use of images,
pictures and logos should be minimized, but, if used, should be simplified in
appearance and integrated into the site's overall architectural and color
schemes. Solid lettering is preferred over highlighted or accented lettering.
      3.   Signage Colors: The sign and any background should together consist
of no more than two (2) colors or shades of the same color. The signage color
scheme should match or complement the color scheme of the building. Primary,
white and "Day-Glo" colors should be avoided.
      4.   Signage Materials: Polished, glossy, shiny, or reflective sign
surfaces are discouraged. Matte, natural, brushed, patina like or burnished
surfaces are preferred. Plastic or glass surfaces are discouraged. Wood, stone,
brick, masonry or metal materials are preferred.
      5.   Signage Lighting: Natural (soft halogen or incandescent) lighting is
preferred. Overbright or fluorescent lighting should be avoided. Internal
illumination and protruding overhead lights or lamps should be avoided.
Lighting devices should be hidden or integrated into architectural features or
landscaping. Lighting should be focused and only so bright as to effectively
illuminate the sign surface. For mounted letters, backlighting is preferred.
For freestanding signs, ground based external lighting is preferred, subject to
the above guidelines. Ground based light surfaces should be concealed within
landscaping.
   J.   Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening should meet all
standards provided in the Lake County unified development ordinance, as now in
effect or amended in the future. The guidelines presented below represent
additional guidelines. The guidelines are not all-inclusive; future discussions
may elicit additional requirements for landscaping based on new concerns or
changing conditions.
All developments should contain adequate exterior buffer yards that are bermed
and landscaped so as to preclude views of buildings, loading areas, truck
parking lots and other undesirable views from adjacent uses, properties and
roadways. For screening purposes, fences may be used in conjunction with berms
and landscaping.
Desirable views of office and retail buildings should be preserved from
adjacent roadways and properties with compatible uses. Partial views of well
designed office/light assembly/warehouse building front facades as well as side
and rear facades that achieve aesthetically pleasing three hundred sixty degree
(360°) design, may be permissible from adjacent roadways and properties with
compatible uses.
Loading docks and truck parking areas should be screened from view from all
public (customer) access areas, including public access areas on the same
property or development. In order to minimize undesirable views, locating
loading docks and truck parking area back to back between adjacent office/light
assembly/warehouse buildings is encouraged.
The view of parking lots should be partially obscured or softened through
landscaping, staggered landscaped berms or preserved natural vegetation.
Extensive area of mowed or manicured turf grass should be avoided.
Existing woodlands should be preserved and enhanced. Trees should be planted in
random clusters, rather than straight rows. Like species should be grouped only
to maintain continuity. Formal landscaping should be limited to small areas.
Landscape areas should incorporate a complementary mix of deciduous and
evergreen species, while emphasizing deciduous species.
Cluster varieties of species sizes (canopies interspersed with understories,
bushes and ground cover). Emphasize hardy native species (limit predominance of
nonnative or ornamental species). Minimize the use of formal hedges.
Incorporate ground cover and/or bushes into landscaping, while limiting the
predominance of ground cover and/or bushes.
Landscaping should maximize seasonal colors by including perennial flowers and
opportunities for planting annual flowers that bloom in spring, summer and
fall.
Earthen berms should undulate naturally and have varying heights and setbacks.
Berms should be landscaped with a variety of plant species, as otherwise
required in these landscaping guidelines. Extensive areas of turf grass on
berms should be avoided.
At intersections, provide soft massings of landscaping to complement signage
and to provide a focal point while not impairing visibility of buildings nor
impairing traffic safety. Bike and pedestrian pathways should be integrated
into landscaping to soften visibility, separate from vehicle traffic, and
promote safety.
   K.   Supplemental Performance Standards; Noise: All on site equipment should
operate in accordance with the Illinois environmental protection agency's noise
regulations (title 35, subtitle H, chapter 1 of the Illinois administrative
code) as now in effect or the village of Wadsworth noise standards. (Ord. 2007-
723, 4-3-2007)
CHAPTER 11
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Definitions
10-11-2: Conditional Use
10-11-3: Setback Requirements
10-11-4: License Required
10-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall
have the meanings given herein:
ADULT BOOTH: Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from the
remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or
partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials
or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following commercial
establishments, as defined herein:
   A.   Adult Cabaret: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business regularly features any of the following:
      1.   Persons who appear seminude.
      2.   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   B.   Adult Store: Any commercial establishments:
      1.   That contains one or more adult booths;
      2.   That as a substantial or significant portion of its business offers
for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials; or
      3.   That has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
adult materials.
   C.   Adult Theater: Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation films,
motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays, or other
visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   D.   Substantial Or Significant Portion Of Its Business: For purposes of the
definitions in subsections A, B, and C of this definition, the phrase
"substantial or significant portion of its business" shall be deemed to apply
to any commercial establishment that satisfies one or more of the following
criteria:
      1.   Gross Sales: Twenty five percent (25%) or more of the retail dollar
value of the commercial establishment's annual gross sales derived from the
sale, rental, or viewing of adult materials.
      2.   Floor Area: Twenty five percent (25%) or more of the floor area of
the commercial establishment is devoted to the display, viewing, or
presentation of adult materials, not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, basements, or any other portion of the commercial establishment not
open to the public.
      3.   Merchandise Displayed: Twenty five percent (25%) or more of the
retail dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any one time is
attributable to adult materials.
      4.   Inventory: Twenty five percent (25%) or more of all inventory of the
commercial establishment (whether measured by retail dollar value or number of
items) consists at any one time of adult materials.
      5.   Stock In Trade: Twenty five percent (25%) or more of the stock in
trade at the commercial establishment consists at any one time of adult
materials.
      6.   Live Performances: Live performances by persons appearing seminude,
or live performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities, and that are
taking place twenty five percent (25%) or more of the time during which the
commercial establishment is open for business.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE: Any individual, including entertainers, who work
in or at, or render any services directly related to the operation of, an adult
entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition shall not
include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food
and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE: A license issued for an adult entertainment
establishment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT PATRON: Any individual, other than an adult establishment
employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment at any time
when such adult entertainment establishment is open for business; provided,
however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods,
materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing
maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
ADULT MATERIAL: Any of the following, whether new or used, if they are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or
description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities:
   A.    1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
digitally stored materials; or
      2.   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind; or
      3.   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   B.   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or describe
specified anatomical areas.
NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress or undress that exposes to view: a)
less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus;
or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, but
not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided
the areolae is not exposed; or b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that,
when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor accessory
apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region;
buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed.
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   Actual physical touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breasts.
   B.   Actual physical sexual acts, normal or perverted, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
   C.   Actual masturbation.
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
   E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsection A, B, C, or D of this definition. (Ord.
2010-810, 4-6-2010)
10-11-2: CONDITIONAL USE:
Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and subject to
the setback requirements of section
10-11-3 of this chapter, adult entertainment establishments shall be a
conditional use only on properties located along Illinois Route 41, north of
Edwards Road, and zoned in the LI-1 district. Adult entertainment
establishments shall not be a permitted use in any district. (Ord. 2010-810, 4-
6-2010)
10-11-3: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property boundary of any other adult entertainment
establishment and from any: a) place of religious worship; b) public or private
nursery, elementary, or secondary school; c) a childcare facility; d) a public
park, playground, playing field, forest preserve, or other recreational area;
e) a public or private cemetery; f) a public housing facility; g) any lot zoned
for residential purposes and within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any lot
used for residential purposes. For the purposes of this section, distances
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the
adult entertainment establishment is located to the nearest point on a property
line of: a) any residential property; or b) any lot on which a protected use or
other adult entertainment establishment, as the case may be, is located,
established, maintained, or operated. An adult entertainment establishment
lawfully operating under this code and under the village adult use licensing
regulations shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions
set forth herein solely because: a) a protected use subsequently locates within
the minimum required distance of the adult entertainment establishment; or b)
property within the minimum required distance subsequently becomes residential
property. This entry shall not apply to an adult entertainment establishment at
a time when an application for an adult entertainment license under the adult
use ordinance for that establishment is submitted after the license has
previously expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension.
(Ord. 2010-810, 4-6-2010)
10-11-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No adult entertainment establishment shall operate within the village unless
and until an adult entertainment establishment license has been issued pursuant
to title 3, chapter 11 of this code. (Ord. 2010-810, 4-6-2010)
CHAPTER 12
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Authority
10-12-2: Purpose And Intent
10-12-3: Definitions
10-12-4: Indemnification
10-12-5: Sound Level Limitations For BWES And SWES
10-12-6: Requirements For Building Mounted Wind Energy Systems (BWES)
10-12-7: Requirements For Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES)
10-12-8: Large Wind Energy Systems (LWES) And Wind Farms
10-12-1: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by the constitution and
laws of the state of Illinois, including the statutory authority granted in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-26. (Ord. 2010-816, 5-18-2010)
10-12-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   To establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the location,
installation, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of building mounted,
small and large wind energy systems.
   B.   To assure that any development and production of wind generated
electricity in the village of Wadsworth is safe and to minimize any potentially
adverse effects on the community.
   C.   To promote the supply of sustainable and renewable energy resources, in
support of national, state, and local goals.
   D.   To facilitate energy cost savings and economic opportunities for
village of Wadsworth residents and businesses. (Ord. 2010-816, 5-18-2010)
10-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONMENT: Any wind energy system (WES) that has not been repaired to
operating condition within ninety (90) days.
AMBIENT SOUND: The all encompassing sound at a given location, usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this
chapter, the "ambient sound level" shall mean the quiescent background level,
that is, the quietest of ten (10) 10-second average sound levels measured when
there are no nearby or distinctly audible sound sources (e.g., dogs or jets).
Daytime ambient measurements should be made during midmorning, weekday hours
while nighttime measurements should be made after twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight.
APPLICANT: The owner, who is in the process of submitting or has submitted an
application to install a wind energy system project in the village of
Wadsworth.
BUILDING MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (BWES): Wind energy systems that are
structurally attached either onto the roof, to the side of a building, or
anchored to the ground within three feet (3') of a building with support
attached to the side of the building, not exceeding forty five feet (45') in
height above the ground.
DAYTIME HOURS: The hours of the day from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., local time.
DECIBEL (dB): The unit of sound level based on a reference where zero dB
represents the threshold of hearing at one thousand (1,000) Hz for a healthy
young adult.
DECOMMISSIONING: Once a WES has been deemed inoperable or abandoned its
components must be disassembled and removed from the premises, including the
foundation. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its original
preconstruction condition.
FAA: The federal aviation administration of the United States department of
transportation.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FINANCIAL ASSURANCE: A reasonable assurance from a creditworthy party, examples
of which include a surety bond, trust instrument, cash escrow or irrevocable
letter of credit.
GRID INTERTIE WES SYSTEM: A system that converts wind energy to electrical
energy that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility
company.
HIGH QUALITY AQUATIC RESOURCE: Waters of the United States or isolated waters
of Lake County that are determined to be critical due to their uniqueness,
scarcity, function and/or value.
HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (HAWT): This is the most typical type of turbine
used. They have the main rotor shaft and generator at the top of the tower, and
must be pointed into the wind. Small turbines are pointed by a simple wind
vane, while large turbines generally use a wind sensor coupled with a
servomotor. Most have a gearbox, which turns the slow rotation of the blades
into a quicker rotation that is more suitable to drive an electrical generator.
IDNR: The Illinois state department of natural resources.
LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (LWES): Wind energy systems with turbine towers and
fully extended blades measuring taller than one hundred seventy five feet
(175') from the ground. LWES include one or more wind turbines, electronic
conversion and distribution systems. They typically produce energy to be sold
commercially and have a nameplate capacity of seven hundred fifty (750) kW to
2.5 MW.
LOW FREQUENCY SOUND: Sound with frequencies below one hundred (100) Hz,
including audible sound and infrasound, as opposed to broadband which has sound
frequencies above one hundred (100) Hz. Infrasound has frequencies below twenty
(20) Hz, which if sufficiently intense, can be perceived by many individuals,
and must be measured by a sound level meter using the C-weighted system.
MET TOWER: A meteorological tower with an anemometer, used for the measurement
of wind speed.
NACELLE: The part containing the shaft, gearbox, and generator in a typical
horizontal axis turbine.
NAMEPLATE WATTAGE: The amount of energy produced from a wind energy system at
maximum or optimum wind speeds within one hour, as indicated by the
manufacturer.
NEIGHBORING PROPERTY: Any property within five hundred feet (500') of a BWES or
SWES, or within 1.5 miles of an LWES.
NIGHTTIME HOURS: The time of the day after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M., local time.
NOISE: Sound that adversely affects the psychological or physiological well
being of people. Sound is a disturbance or oscillation that propagates
outwardly as acoustic waves through the air.
NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY: A property that is not owned by the owner of the
property on which the WES is proposed or installed.
OPERATIONAL CONDITION:   WES facilities being capable of operating at full
capacity while meeting all sound, shadow flicker and other permit conditions.
OPERATOR: The entity responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance
of the WES, including any third party subcontractors.
OWNER: A. The person(s), who hold(s) title of the property on which a BWES or
SWES facility is installed.
   B.   The entity or entities with an equity interest in the LWES facilities,
including their respective successors and assigns.
PARTICIPATING PROPERTY: A property that is owned by the owner of the property
on which the WES is proposed or installed.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A qualified individual who is licensed as a professional
engineer in the state of Illinois.
SHADOW FLICKER: The on and off strobe light effect caused by the shadow of
moving blades cast by the sun passing above the turbine. "Shadow flicker
intensity" is defined as the difference or variation in brightness at a given
location in the presence and absence of a shadow.
SILHOUETTE: The area covered by moving blades of WES turbine, as viewed from
the front elevation, described in square feet.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES): Freestanding, tower mounted wind energy
systems with a system height measuring less than one hundred seventy five feet
(175') from the ground. SWES facilities are accessory structures that generate
power for local distribution and consumption. Generators typically range from
one kW to one hundred (100) kW in nameplate wattage.
SOUND: A disturbance or oscillation that propagates outwardly as acoustic waves
through the air.
SOUND FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second expressed in hertz (Hz).
How we perceive sound is partly dependant on frequency. High frequency sound
has more oscillations per second, whereas low frequency sound has fewer.
   A.   Audible Or Tonal Sound: Sound frequencies between twenty (20) and
twenty thousand (20,000) Hz. With WES, this may include mechanical sounds from
rotating machinery experienced as "hum" or "pitch" occurring at distinct
frequencies.
   B.   Broadband: A wide range of frequencies above one hundred (100) Hz. With
WES, the aerodynamics from the displacement of air from the turning blades of a
wind turbine creates a "swishing" or "whooshing" sensation.
   C.   Low Frequency: Sound with frequencies below one hundred (100) Hz,
including audible sound and infrasound.
      1.   Infrasound: Sound frequencies below twenty (20) Hz, which if
sufficiently intense, can be perceived by many individuals.
SOUND LEVEL: The A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels (dB) (or the C-
weighted level if specified) as measured using a sound level meter that meets
the requirements of a type 2 or better precision instrument according to ANSI
S1.4. The "average" sound level is time averaged over a one to two (2) minute
period using an integrating sound level meter that meets the requirements of
ANSI S12.43.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: An engineer who is licensed and registered to practice
structural engineering in the state of Illinois under the Illinois structural
engineering act and whose principal professional practice is in the field of
structural engineering.
STRUCTURAL WEIGHT: The combined weight of the tower, wind turbine generator,
and any other component(s) otherwise supported by the base foundation.
SUBSTATION: The apparatus that connects the electrical collection system of the
WES facilities and increases the voltage for connection with the utility's
transmission lines.
SUN GLINT: The reflection of sunlight off of a surface of the blades, tower, or
other component of the wind energy system.
SYSTEM HEIGHT: The distance from the ground to the highest point of the WES,
including the highest reach of the blades.
TOWER: A tall structure, mounted in the ground, on which a wind turbine is
mounted.
TURBINE: The parts of a wind energy facility including the blades, nacelle and
tail.
TURBINE HEIGHT: The distance from the structure's average ground elevation to
the highest point of the wind turbine, including the highest reach of the
blades.
VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (VAWT): A small scale wind turbine, in which the
main rotor shaft is arranged vertically creating an "egg beater" appearance.
The generator and gearbox are located near the ground so the tower does not
have to support it and it is more accessible for maintenance.
WATT (Symbol: W): A derived unit of power in the international system of units
(SI). It measures rate of energy conversion. One watt is equivalent to one
joule (J) of energy per second. The kilowatt (symbol: kW) is equal to one
thousand (1,000) watts. The megawatt (symbol:   MW) is equal to one million
(1,000,000) watts.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (WES): A wind energy production, conversion and distribution
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower, and associated electronics
equipment. In other publications this is known as wind energy conversion system
(WECS).
WIND FARM: Two (2) or more large wind energy systems (LWES), operated by a
common owner or operator, for aggregating their collective energy supply, in
whole or in part for resale purposes, and which share a common connection to
electric transmission facilities. (Ord. 2010-816, 5-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2010-
824, 9-7-2010)
10-12-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
The owner of the BWES, SWES, or LWES project shall defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the village of Wadsworth and their officials from and against any and
all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs,
expenses and liabilities whatsoever including attorney fees arising out of the
acts or omissions of the owner concerning the operation of the WES project
without limitation, whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort.
(Ord. 2010-816, 5-18-2010)
10-12-5: SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS FOR BWES AND SWES:
   A.   Average Sound Level: The average sound level for wind facilities shall
not exceed fifty (50) dBA during the daytime and forty (40) dBA during the
nighttime at any point within neighboring, residentially zoned or used
property. The average sound level from wind facilities shall not exceed sixty
five (65) dBA on neighboring industrial properties and sixty (60) dBA on other
neighboring nonresidential properties at any time of day. Measurements can be
taken at any location on nonparticipating properties and must account for
ambient sound contributions.
   B.   Operation Of WES With Average Sound Level More Than Five dBA Above
Level: No WES shall operate with an average sound level more than five (5) dBA
above the nonoperational ambient level, as measured within one hundred feet
(100') of any neighboring residential dwelling.
   C.   Limitation Of Low Frequency Sound: To limit the level of low frequency
sound, the average C-weighted sound level during facility operation shall not
exceed the A-weighted ambient sound level by more than twenty (20) dB.
   D.   Sound Level Measurement:
      1.   Sound Measurement Worksheet: The wind energy facilities sound
measurement worksheet is intended to determine the average sound level (i.e.,
source sound level) from operating wind energy facilities by correcting for the
ambient sound levels. This measurement will determine whether the sound exceeds
the limits indicated in this section.
      2.   Sound Level Meters: Sound level meters (SLM) must meet the type 2
grade or better per the latest revision of ANSI S1.4 "American National
Standard Specification For Sound Level Meters" and must have an integrating
feature that meets ANSI S1.43 "American National Standard Specifications For
Integration Averaging Sound Level Meters".
      3.   Basis Of Procedures: The procedures outlined herein are based in
essences on applicable portions of ANSI S12.9 "American National Standard
Quantities And Procedures For Description And Measurement Of Environmental
Sound" and part 910 of title 35: environmental protection, subtitle H: noise,
chapter 1: Illinois pollution control board.
      4.   Frequency Measurement:
         a.   The A-weighted scale is most often utilized for the measurement
of tonal or audible sound levels. These are sounds that range from twenty (20)
to twenty thousand (20,000) Hz and that the human ear can typically hear.
         b.   The C-weighted scale is utilized especially for measurement of
low frequency sound, i.e., more bass tones or infrasound, which may or may not
be audible to the human ear. Low frequency sounds can travel farther and may be
enhanced in different locations such as in buildings.
      5.   Instrumentation Setup:
         a.   Ensure the battery is in good condition.
         b.   Measurements may be taken at any position on a nonparticipating
property, provided the location is not within:
            (1)   Five feet (5') of small surfaces (e.g., trees, posts, etc.);
            (2)   Twenty five feet (25') of a large reflective surface (e.g.,
shed, building, etc.); or
            (3)   Fifty feet (50') of a large reflective surface if the sound
is tonal in nature.
         c.   A tripod for the microphone or SLM is required if the sound is
high pitched. If the sound is low frequency in nature, a handheld meter is
acceptable as long as the arm is extended.
         d.   The microphone on the SLM must be aimed toward the noise source
and oriented at an angle recommended by the manufacturer (usually 45 to 70
degrees off the ground). (Ord. 2010-816, 5-18-2010)
10-12-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (BWES):
   A.   Building Mounted Wind Energy Systems (BWES) Building Permit Application
Requirements:
      1.   Zoning Districts: One building mounted wind energy system (BWES)
shall be allowed on a lot as a permitted use in any zoning district, provided
that all building permit requirements and general regulations are met, as
defined in the village of Wadsworth building and zoning codes and in this
section below. A conditional use permit shall be required for any additional
BWES on a lot.
      2.   Project Proposal:
         a.   Name, address and phone number of owner and applicant.
         b.   Project summary including the manufacturer information and number
of proposed turbines.
         c.   Photos of the proposed location of BWES.
         d.   A front elevation depiction of the building showing location and
proposed height of the top of the turbine from the top of the building.
      3.   Engineering:
         a.   Manufacturer's engineering specifications of the turbine,
nameplate wattage capacity, dimensions of the turbine unit, mounting
mechanisms, expected load and expected sound level production that must fit
within the sound level standards below.
         b.   All BWES facilities shall be designed to withstand a minimum wind
velocity of one hundred (100) miles per hour, with an impact pressure of forty
(40) pounds per square foot.
         c.   Each BWES shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants
shall submit certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers
have obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), National Renewable Energy
Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie
(GL), or an equivalent third party.
      4.   Braking Systems:
         a.   BWES facilities shall be equipped with automatic and manual
braking systems.
         b.   The owner shall be required to immediately cease operations as
reasonably requested by the village of Wadsworth.
      5.   Insurance: Proof of homeowner or business liability insurance, as
appropriate.
      6.   Electric Utility: Approval letter from the local electric utility
company, if the system is to be connected to the energy grid.
   B.   Additional Standards (BWES):
      1.   Installation:
         a.   BWES facilities must be installed according to manufacturer
specifications.
         b.   BWES devices may be structurally attached either on the roof,
side of a building, or anchored to the ground within three feet (3') of a
building with support from the side of the building (but only in the side or
rear yard of a lot), in accordance with the village of Wadsworth's building
code.
         c.   Electrical connections must be made by a licensed electrician.
         d.   BWES facilities shall not be located on any accessory building or
structure that is located in front of (in relation to the front building line)
the primary building located on the property.
      2.   Height: As measured from its highest point, BWES facilities may
extend up to a height of fifteen feet (15') above the highest point of the
building structure, but in no case shall exceed forty five feet (45') above the
ground in a residentially zoned district.
      3.   Shadow Flicker: The BWES' shadow flicker shall not fall on any
residential building. Further, shadow flicker shall not fall within the
buildable areas (as defined by current zoning setbacks) of nonparticipating
properties that are residentially zoned or used at the time of approval for
more than fifty (50) hours in a calendar year. The owner must commit to a
schedule for turning the turbine off during period exceeding that limit.
      4.   Silhouette:
         a.   As measured at its widest point, the diameter of the BWES shall
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the width of the building's front elevation
for residential buildings and nonresidential buildings abutting residentially
used properties.
         b.   The diameter of the BWES shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the width of a nonresidential building, not abutting residentially used
properties.
      5.   Sun Glint:   BWES' surface finish shall be flat or matte, so as to
reduce incidence of sun glint. The required coloration and finish shall be
maintained throughout the life of the system.
      6.   Electronic Interference:   BWES facilities shall not violate federal
communication commission (FCC) or state or local laws by causing
electromagnetic interference with communication systems. The determination of
degradation of performance and of quality and proper design shall be made in
accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles
and standards of the American Institute Of Electrical Engineers, the Institute
Of Radio Engineers And Electrical Industries Association.
      7.   Signage: No BWES shall have any advertising material, writing,
picture, or signage, other than warning information or manufacturer
identification.
      8.   Accessory Use:
         a.   The primary purpose of the BWES shall be the production of energy
for local distribution and consumption.
         b.   BWES facilities shall not be constructed for the sole purpose of
energy production for wholesale or retail sale purposes.
         c.   It is permissible to sell excess energy that is produced by a
BWES to the local electric utility company.
   C.   Maintenance, Complaints And Decommissioning:
      1.   Maintenance And Complaints:
         a.   BWES facilities shall be maintained in operational condition at
all times, except for reasonable maintenance and repair outages.
         b.   Should a BWES become inoperable, or should any part of the BWES
become damaged, or should a BWES violate a permit condition, the owner shall
cease operations immediately and remedy the condition promptly.
      2.   Decommissioning Plan:
         a.   If a BWES has not been in operable condition and has been
abandoned as defined by this chapter, the village of Wadsworth zoning officer
shall notify the owner of the finding of abandonment. The owner shall remove
all BWES structures within ninety (90) days of receipt of the finding of
abandonment.
         b.   If such abandoned facility is not removed within ninety (90)
days, the village of Wadsworth may remove all structures at the owner's
expense. In the case of such removal, the village of Wadsworth has the right to
file a lien against the property for reimbursement, following reasonable notice
to the owner, to pay for the removal of the facility(ies). Any and all expenses
incurred by the village of Wadsworth as part of this effort, which include,
without limitation, facility removal costs, attorney fees, accrued interest and
recording costs may be sought after by the village.
         c.   Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its original
preconstruction condition. See photos presented with project proposal.
   D.   Historic Districts And Landmarks:   BWES facilities within a local
historic district or landmark, a state historic district or landmark or a
national historic district or landmark must receive a recommendation from the
plan commission and approval by the village board prior to any permit being
issued for said facility(ies). Approval letters from state or nationally
recognized historic preservation agencies may be required. (Ord. 2010-816, 5-
18-2010)
10-12-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (SWES):
   A.   Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES) Building Permit Application
Requirements:
      1.   Zoning Districts: One SWES may be allowed on a lot in any zoning
district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, provided that all
building permit requirements and general regulations are met, as defined in the
village of Wadsworth building and zoning codes and in this section below. No
SWES shall be permitted on residentially zoned or used properties containing
less than three (3) acres (120,000 square feet) in area.
      2.   Project Proposal:
         a.   Name, address and phone number of owner and applicant.
         b.   Photos of existing conditions for proposed SWES tower.
         c.   Project summary including the manufacturer information, number of
proposed turbines, and proposed height to the top of the turbine.
      3.   Engineering:
         a.   Manufacturer's engineering specifications of the tower, turbine
and foundation, detailed drawing of electrical components and installation
details, and expected sound level production (see sound level standards below).
         b.   For turbines greater than twenty (20) kilowatts of nameplate
capacity, an Illinois licensed structural engineer's seal shall be required.
         c.   All SWES facilities shall be designed to withstand a minimum wind
velocity of one hundred (100) miles per hour, with an impact pressure of forty
(40) pounds per square foot.
         d.   Each SWES shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants
shall submit certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers
have obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), National Renewable Energy
Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie
(GL), or an equivalent third party.
      4.   Braking Systems:
         a.   SWES facilities shall be equipped with automatic and manual
braking systems.
         b.   The owner shall be required to immediately cease operations as
reasonably requested by the village of Wadsworth.
      5.   Soil Studies: Turbines greater than one hundred feet (100') total
height or greater than five thousand (5,000) pounds structural weight shall
require a soil analysis at base of the tower and a stamped drawing by an
Illinois licensed structural engineer. Structural weight shall be defined as
the tower, wind turbine generator, and any other component(s) otherwise
supported by the base foundation.
      6.   Insurance: Proof of homeowner, farm or business insurance, as
appropriate.
      7.   Electric Utility: Approval letter from the local electric utility
company, if the system is to be connected to the energy grid.
      8.   Wildlife Impacts:
         a.   For proposed SWES over one hundred twenty five feet (125') in
height, the applicant shall request a natural resource inventory of the
proposed small wind facility area from the Lake County soil and water
conservation district.
         b.   For SWES over one hundred twenty five feet (125') in height, the
applicant shall consult with the Illinois department of natural resources and
the U.S. fish and wildlife service on all proposals for small wind facilities
regarding potential impacts from the proposed facility on sensitive natural
resources. Proof of such consultations shall be provided to the village.
         c.   For SWES over one hundred twenty five feet (125') in height,
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a Lake County forest preserve
property or Illinois natural area inventory lands, the applicant shall provide
notice to the appropriate agency(ies); proof of such notices served shall be
provided to the village.
         d.   The village may develop an environmental plan for the applicant
to mitigate any adverse impacts, based on any environmental studies and
determination from consultation and noticed parties, as available.
   B.   Site Planning And Site Capacity (SWES):
      1.   Site Plan: Site plan, drawn to scale, including:
         a.   Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two foot (2')
intervals.
         b.   Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square footage of all
structures on the owner's property and abutting properties within one hundred
feet (100').
         c.   Location and size of existing waterways, wetlands, 100-year
floodplains, sanitary sewers, storm sewer systems, field drain tiles, water
distribution systems, septic fields and wells. A property alteration permit
issued by the Lake County health department may be required.
         d.   Location of any overhead or underground power lines and utility
easements.
         e.   The locations and the expected duration of shadow flicker caused
by the SWES facility.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Setbacks shall be measured from the base of the SWES tower.
         b.   SWES facilities may not be constructed within or over (including
the blades) any utility, water, or sewer easement, or any other easement or
right of way.
         c.   SWES facilities may not be constructed within fifty feet (50') of
all water bodies and wetlands and one hundred feet (100') of high quality
aquatic resources.
         d.   SWES facilities shall be set back a distance equal to one hundred
ten percent (110%), or 1.1 times the system height, from base to all property
lines, third party transmission lines, and communication towers.
         e.   The blade tip, at its lowest point, shall have ground clearance
of not less than fifteen feet (15').
         f.   Guywires and anchoring systems shall not extend closer than
thirty feet (30') from the property line or public right of way.
      3.   Height:
         a.   Unless otherwise specified, the system height for SWES shall be
as follows:
            (1)   SWES on residentially zoned or used properties between three
(3) acres (120,000 square feet) and five (5) acres (200,000 square feet) shall
be limited to sixty feet (60') in height.
            (2)   SWES on residentially zoned or used properties over five (5)
acres (200,000 square feet) shall be limited to one hundred twenty five feet
(125') in height.
            (3)   SWES on nonresidentially zoned or used properties shall be
limited to one hundred seventy five feet (175') in height; provided, however,
that SWES facilities on nonresidentially zoned or used properties that are
located within five hundred feet (500') of a residentially zoned or used
nonparticipating property shall be further limited to one hundred twenty five
feet (125') in height. Rezonings and subsequently constructed residences shall
not compromise the existing approval and operation of the SWES, as a legal
nonconforming use, subject to the applicable regulations.
         b.   WES facilities exceeding one hundred seventy five feet (175') in
height shall be considered large wind energy systems (LWES).
      4.   Accessory Use:
         a.   The primary purpose of the SWES shall be the production of energy
for local distribution and consumption.
         b.   SWES facilities shall not be constructed for the sole purpose of
energy production for wholesale or retail sale purposes.
         c.   It is permissible to sell excess energy that is produced by an
SWES to the local electric utility company.
   C.   Additional Standards (SWES):
      1.   Installation:
         a.   SWES facilities must be installed according to manufacturer
specifications.
         b.   Electrical connections must be made by a licensed electrician.
         c.   SWES facilities shall be located behind the primary building/
structure on the property and shall not be located in the front (in relation to
the front building line) of the primary building/structure on the property.
      2.   Shadow Flicker: The SWES' shadow flicker shall not fall on any
residential building. Further, shadow flicker shall not fall within the
buildable areas (as defined by current zoning setbacks) of nonparticipating
properties that are residentially zoned or used at the time of approval for
more than fifty (50) hours in a calendar year. The owner must commit to a
schedule for turning the turbine off during period exceeding that limit.
      3.   Sun Glint:   SWES' surface finish shall be flat or matte, so as to
reduce incidence of sun glint. The required coloration and finish shall be
maintained throughout the life of the system.
      4.   Electronic Interference:   SWES facilities shall not violate federal
communication commission (FCC) or state or local laws by causing
electromagnetic interference with communication systems. The determination of
degradation of performance and of quality and proper design shall be made in
accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles
and standards of the American Institute Of Electrical Engineers, the Institute
Of Radio Engineers and Electrical Industries Association.
      5.   Signage:
         a.   No SWES shall have any advertising material, writing, picture, or
signage other than warning, turbine tower identification, or manufacturer or
ownership information.
         b.   This prohibition shall include the attachment of any flag,
decorative sign, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or waving, fluttering
or revolving devices, but not including meteorological/weather devices.
         c.   One warning sign, no less than eighteen (18) square inches and no
greater than two (2) square feet in area, shall be posted at the base of the
tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of high
voltage, and 911 and the phone number of the owner to call in case of
emergency.
         d.   Manufacturer's identification or ownership information signs
shall be no larger than one square foot.
      6.   Climb Prevention: The base of the tower shall not be climbable for a
vertical distance of fifteen feet (15') from the base, unless enclosed with an
eight foot (8') tall locked fence.
      7.   Lighting:
         a.   SWES facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except as
required by the federal aviation administration (FAA) or necessary for workers
involved in maintenance or repairs. Any required lighting shall be shielded so
that no glare extends beyond the property line of the facility.
         b.   Security lighting and any emergency lighting should be kept to
the minimum required.
         c.   To reduce potential wildlife impacts, the facility should employ
only red, or dual red and white strobe, strobelike, or flashing lights, not
steady burning lights to meet FAA requirements for visibility lighting of wind
turbines, permanent meteorological towers and communication towers.
   D.   Maintenance, Complaints And Decommissioning (SWES):
      1.   Maintenance And Complaints:
         a.   SWES facilities shall be maintained in operational condition at
all times, except for reasonable maintenance and repair outages.
         b.   Should an SWES become inoperable, or should any part of the SWES
become damaged, or should an SWES violate a permit condition, the owner shall
cease operations immediately and remedy the condition promptly.
      2.   Decommissioning Plan:
         a.   If an SWES has not been in operable condition and has been
abandoned as defined by this chapter, the village of Wadsworth zoning officer
shall notify the owner of the finding of abandonment. The owner shall remove
all SWES structures within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice.
         b.   If such abandoned facility is not removed within ninety (90)
days, the village of Wadsworth may remove all structures at the owner's
expense. In the case of such removal, the village of Wadsworth has the right to
file a lien against the property for reimbursement, following reasonable notice
to the owner, to pay for the removal of the facility. Any and all expenses
incurred by the village of Wadsworth as part of this effort, which include,
without limitation, facility removal costs, attorney fees, accrued interest and
recording costs may be sought after by the village.
         c.   Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its original
preconstruction condition. See photos presented with project proposal.
   E.   Historic Districts And Landmarks:   SWES facilities within a local
historic district or landmark, a state historic district or landmark or a
national historic district or landmark must receive a recommendation from the
plan commission and approval by the village board prior to any permit being
issued for said facility(ies). Approval letters from state or nationally
recognized historic preservation agencies may be required. (Ord. 2010-816, 5-
18-2010)
10-12-8: LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (LWES) AND WIND FARMS:
LWES and wind farms are not permitted in the jurisdictional limits of the
village of Wadsworth and within a 1.5 mile radius surrounding its zoning
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-824, 9-7-2010)
CHAPTER 13
SOLAR AND GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Authority
10-13-2: Purpose And Intent
10-13-3: Definitions
10-13-4: Solar Energy Systems
10-13-5: Geothermal Energy Systems
10-13-1: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by the constitution and
laws of the state of Illinois, including the statutory authority granted in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13. (Ord. 2010-834, 12-7-2010)
10-13-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   To establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the location,
installation, operation and maintenance of solar and geothermal energy systems.
   B.   To assure that any development and production of solar and geothermal
energy systems is safe and to minimize any potentially adverse effects on the
community.
   C.   To promote the supply of sustainable and renewable energy resources, in
support of national, state and local goals.
   D.   To facilitate energy cost savings and economic opportunities for
residents and businesses situated within the village of Wadsworth. (Ord. 2010-
834, 12-7-2010)
10-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A type of building mounted solar
energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building,
rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
architectural or structural part of the building. Building integrated systems
include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and
similar architectural components.
BUILDING MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is mounted on
the facade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure. A building
mounted solar energy system shall include building integrated solar energy
systems and flush mounted solar energy systems.
FLUSH MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A type of building mounted solar energy
system that is mounted flush with a finished surface at no more than six inches
(6") in height above that surface.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM: A sealed, watertight loop of pipe buried outside of a
building foundation, intended to recirculate a liquid solution through a heat
exchanger. This includes, but is not limited to: vertical closed loop,
horizontal closed loop and body of water closed loop systems.
GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is not attached
to another structure and is ground mounted.
PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL: A semiconductor device that converts solar energy into
electricity.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A system for which the primary purpose is to convert solar
energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy for storage and use. Solar
energy systems include building mounted solar energy systems (building
integrated and flush mounted), ground mounted solar energy systems, and utility
solar energy systems.
SOLAR PANEL: A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel or thermal
collectors for air and water heating. Panels are assembled on site into solar
arrays.
UTILITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is used in order to
produce energy for commercial distribution. (Ord. 2010-834, 12-7-2010)
10-13-4: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Compliance With Regulations: Solar energy systems must comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, as well as all federal, state, county,
and village laws, ordinances, and regulations. No solar energy system shall be
constructed or installed without first filing an application for and being
issued a permit in accordance with this chapter and the building code.
   B.   Application Requirements: An application for a permit for a solar
energy system must contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation constructing and installing the solar energy system.
      3.   Elevation drawings (and/or photographs) and site plans showing the
location, size and design details of the proposed solar energy system.
      4.   Manufacturer specifications of the solar collectors and devices
including: wattage capacity, dimensions of collectors, mounting mechanisms and/
or foundation details and structural requirements.
      5.   A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the proposed solar
energy system conforms to applicable industry standards including those of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
      6.   A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the solar energy
system has been tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or other
approved independent testing agency.
      7.   For ground mounted and utility solar energy systems, a property
alteration permit for said installation.
      8.   Any other information to show full compliance with this chapter and
other applicable ordinances.
      9.   For ground mounted and utility solar energy systems only, the
applicant shall also submit scaled site plan drawings that include the
following information:
         a.   Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two foot (2')
intervals.
         b.   Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square footage of all
existing and proposed structures.
         c.   Location and size of existing waterways, wetlands, 100-year
floodplains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drain tiles and water distribution
systems.
         d.   Location of any overhead or underground utilities and easements.
   C.   Requirements For Building Mounted Solar Energy Systems (Including
Building Integrated And Flush Mounted Solar Energy Systems):
      1.   Use: The primary purpose of a building mounted solar energy system
is to produce energy to support the permitted uses on the lot; provided,
however, that excess energy produced by a building mounted solar energy system
may be sold to the local electric utility company.
      2.   Location: Building mounted solar energy systems are allowed on
permitted principal and accessory structures in any zoning district in the
village.
      3.   Setback: Building mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the
setback regulations of the applicable zoning district. In addition, building
mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the roofline of the
building on which the system is mounted or built. Only building integrated or
flush mounted solar energy systems may be installed on any street yard building
elevation.
      4.   Height: A building mounted solar energy system shall not extend more
than five feet (5') above the highest point on the roofline of the building on
which it is mounted and, in no event shall the building mounted solar energy
system exceed the maximum allowable height for the building on which it is
mounted, as measured vertically from the lowest edge of the panel to the
highest edge of the system.
   D.   Requirements For Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Use: The primary purpose of a ground mounted solar energy system is
to produce energy to support the permitted uses on the lot; provided, however,
that excess energy produced by a ground mounted solar energy system may be sold
to the local electric utility company.
      2.   Location: Ground mounted solar energy systems are allowed in any
zoning district in the village.
      3.   Setback: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the
setback regulations of the applicable zoning district. No ground mounted solar
energy system shall be located in any front or corner side yard in a
residential zoning district.
      4.   Height: A ground mounted solar energy system shall not exceed the
maximum allowable height for accessory structures in the applicable zoning
district, as measured from adjoining grade at the base of the ground mounted
solar energy system to the highest elevation of the ground mounted solar energy
system.
      5.   Lot Coverage: The total solar panel surface area shall be included
in calculating the maximum allowable lot coverage under the applicable zoning
district regulations.
   E.   Requirements For Utility Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Use: The primary purpose of a utility solar energy system shall be
to produce energy for commercial distribution. A utility solar energy system
shall be classified as a principal use on a lot.
      2.   Location: Utility solar energy systems are only allowed on lots
zoned in the LI, LI-1 and LI-2 zoning districts, subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit. Utility solar energy systems are not permitted on lots
in any other village zoning district.
      3.   Setback: Utility solar energy systems shall comply with the setback
regulations of the applicable zoning district.
      4.   Height: A utility solar energy system shall not exceed twenty feet
(20') in height, as measured from adjoining grade at the base of the utility
solar energy system to the highest elevation of the utility solar energy
system.
      5.   Lot Coverage: The total solar panel surface area shall be included
in calculating the maximum allowable lot coverage under the applicable zoning
district regulations.
      6.   Fencing Required: Utility solar energy systems shall be enclosed
with a fence that restricts direct access to the public. Such fencing shall, at
a minimum, encompass the entire systems facility, contain a locking mechanism,
and comply with the village's fence regulations. The fencing requirement may be
waived at the sole discretion of the zoning administrator if it is determined
that such fencing would result in reduced security or is not necessary. (Ord.
2010-834, 12-7-2010)
10-13-5: GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Compliance With Regulations: Geothermal energy systems must comply with
all applicable requirements of this chapter, as well as all federal, state,
county, and village laws, ordinances, and regulations. No geothermal energy
system shall be constructed or installed without first filing an application
for and being issued a permit as required by this chapter and the building
code.
   B.   Application Requirements: An application for permit for all geothermal
energy systems shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation installing and constructing the geothermal energy system.
      3.   Project summary including site plan and manufacturer information
with specifications of materials and devices.
      4.   A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the proposed
geothermal energy system conforms to applicable industry standards including
those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
      5.   A certificate of compliance demonstrating that the geothermal energy
system has been tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or other
approved independent testing agency.
      6.   A property alteration permit issued by the Lake County health
department for said installation.
      7.   Any other information to show full compliance with this chapter and
other applicable ordinances.
   C.   Requirements For Geothermal Energy Systems:
      1.   Use: The primary purpose of a geothermal energy system is to produce
energy to support the permitted uses on the lot.
      2.   Location: Geothermal energy systems are allowed in any zoning
district in the village.
      3.   Setback: Aboveground equipment or facilities related to a geothermal
energy system shall comply with the setback regulations of the applicable
zoning district. No equipment, piping, or facilities related to a geothermal
energy system shall be located in any easement or right of way. (Ord. 2010-834,
12-7-2010)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISIONS
General Provisions; Definitions   1
Design Standards   2
Required Improvements   3
Plat Approval Procedure   4
Plat Certificates   5
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Subdivision Control
11-1-2: Planned Unit Developments
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-4: Plat Invalid Without Approval
11-1-5: Suitability Of Land For Subdividing
11-1-6: Acceptance Of Public Improvements By The Village
11-1-7: Changes And Amendments To Regulations
11-1-8: Division Of Lands Without Platting Unlawful
11-1-9: Village Board Waiver Of Subdivision Requirements
11-1-10: Deviations From Standards
11-1-11: Professional Fees
11-1-12: Penalty
11-1-13: Subdivision Exemption
11-1-1: SUBDIVISION CONTROL:
For the purposes of the present and future development of the Village, and for
the promotion of the public health, and the safety, comfort, morals and welfare
of its citizenry, the provisions and regulations hereinafter contained shall
govern all new subdivisions and planned unit developments which are created
within the corporate limits of the Village and also to all new subdivisions and
planned unit developments which are created within unincorporated areas
situated within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the territorial limits of the
Village, in accordance with the authority vested in the Village, under the
provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code and all other applicable authority.
Said subdivisions and planned unit developments shall, in all respects, be in
full compliance with the applicable requirements hereinafter set forth. The
provisions of this Title shall apply to all types of planned developments,
whether residential, commercial, or otherwise in nature. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-
1996)
11-1-2: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Planned unit developments within the Village shall be governed first by the
applicable provisions of Section
10-5-6 of this Code. As to such planned unit developments, the standards
contained in this Title shall be considered directory, not mandatory. To permit
flexible development, consistent with the site, and in exchange for a greater
level of site amenities, such as extraordinary landscaping, ponds, and oversize
parks, planned unit developments may deviate from these subdivision standards
to the extent consistent with sound planning and the health and welfare of the
citizenry. The approved final development plan, as provided in Section
10-5-6 of this Code shall consist of the final planned unit development plat
and the final planned unit development ordinance. To the extent reasonably
possible, planned unit developments shall comply with the provisions of this
Title, except for normal and customary deviations, such as lot size, but not
overall density. Planned unit developments, which are located outside of the
territorial limits of the Village, shall strictly comply with the applicable
standards of this Title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of
this Title:
BUILDABLE AREA OF A LOT: That portion of a lot which is available for
construction and structures, and is bounded by the required front, rear, and
side yards, and excluding any areas which are use-restricted such as scenic
corridor areas, deed-restricted areas, drainage or other types of easement, and
any other natural resource protection areas.
FLOOD PLAIN: Flood plains are areas identified as such on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) maps. Flood plains may be either riverine or inland
depressional areas. Riverine flood plains are those areas contiguous to a lake,
pond, stream, or stream bed, whose elevation is greater than the normal
waterpool elevation, but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood
elevation. Inland depressional flood plains are flood plains not associated
with a stream system, into which surrounding lands drain, causing periodic
inundation by storm waters.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
LCDOT: Lake County Division of Transportation.
LCHD: Lake County Health Department.
LCSMC: Lake County Stormwater Management Commission.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS: The following street classifications shall apply:
   A.   Freeways And Expressways: I-94 and U.S. Route 41 south of I-94.
   B.   Major Arterial: U.S. Route 41 north of I-94, Delany Road, Green Bay
Road, Wadsworth Road, and Illinois Route 173.
   C.   Minor Arterial: Dilleys Road, Kelly Road, Kilbourn Road, Mill Creek
Road, Yorkhouse Road, 21st Street, 9th Street, and Russell Road.
   D.   Collector Street: The entrance street to subdivision or planned unit
development. The length of the collector street shall be determined by the Plan
Commission and Village Engineer, consistent with sound engineering and planning
standards.
   E.   Industrial Streets: All streets within an industrial, office, or
commercial subdivision or planned unit development.
   F.   Local Streets: All other streets which are designed and intended for
local use only, not through traffic.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person subdividing land.
SUBDIVISION: The dividing of any tract, parcel, or any lot into two (2) or more
tracts, parcels, or lots, or a resubdivision for any such purpose, and shall
include planned unit developments.
SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT: A contract between the subdivider and the Village in
form approved by the Village, which specifies among other things the
improvements to be constructed as a part of the subdivision and the time-table
for the installation of the improvements. All improvements shall be in
accordance with all applicable requirements of this Title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-
1996)
11-1-4: PLAT INVALID WITHOUT APPROVAL:
From and after the passage of this Title, no plat of subdivision shall be valid
unless and until it has been approved by the Village Board, and duly signed by
the Village President, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter provided.
All plats of a subdivision shall comply with this Title as hereinafter set
forth, and all other applicable Village ordinances, except as herein otherwise
provided. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-5: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVIDING:
Lands subject to flooding, and land which is topographically unsuitable should
not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate erosion or flood
hazard. The Plan Commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if upon
adequate investigation conducted by the Plan Commission and the opinion of the
Village Engineer, it has been determined by the Plan Commission that in the
best interest of the public the site is not suitable for subdivision and
development of the kind proposed. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-6: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS BY THE VILLAGE:
Approval by the Village Board and recording of the final plat of subdivision of
any land situated within the Village shall be deemed to be an acceptance by the
Village of all dedications, such as parks and streets, as to the underlying fee
simple title. However, all public improvements of the subdivision, including
the road and drainage improvements, shall only be accepted by the Village
Board, by duly approved resolution, after they are completed according to the
approved plans and specifications, and upon recommendation of the Village
Engineer. Unless and until the public improvements are accepted by the Village
Board, they shall remain strictly the responsibility of the subdivider. Until
the improvements are so accepted, the subdivider shall be responsible for all
maintenance, including snow plowing. In addition, the subdivider shall be
responsible to repair or replace any public improvements, which are damaged or
fail to operate properly, for any reason, unless and until said improvements
are duly accepted by the Village Board. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-7: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS:
The Plan Commission shall from time to time prepare and recommend in writing to
the Village Board such changes or additions to the provisions and regulations
herein contained for subdivision control, as the Plan Commission may deem
necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become effective after
their adoption by the Village Board by its passage of an amendment to this
Title. Proposed changes to this Title may be initiated by the Village Board, or
requested by a citizen or other interested party. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-8: DIVISION OF LANDS WITHOUT PLATTING UNLAWFUL:
No lot or tract of land located within the Village or within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the territorial limits of the Village shall be divided,
subdivided, or developed through a planned unit development without complying
with the terms and conditions of this Title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-9: VILLAGE BOARD WAIVER OF SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Board, when it deems it appropriate, such as when no public
improvements are necessary, can waive the application of the various
subdivision requirements to the extent it determines it necessary or
appropriate, and provided that such waiver shall not be contrary to the purpose
and intent of this Title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-10: DEVIATIONS FROM STANDARDS:
When the subdivider can show that a provision of Chapter 2 or Chapter 3 of this
Title would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and when,
because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site or
surrounding conditions, the Plan Commission finds that a deviation may be
permitted without compromising the quality of the subdivision or the efficacy
of the subdivision standards, the Village Board may approve a deviation. A
petition for any such deviation shall be submitted to the Plan Commission. The
petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts
relied upon by the petitioner. The Plan Commission shall include its findings
and the specific reasons therefor in its report and recommendation to the
Village Board. The Village Board may grant deviations whenever it determines
that all the following conditions have been met:
   A.   The granting of the deviation will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located;
   B.   The deviation is the least deviation from this Title which will
mitigate the hardship or practical difficulty;
   C.   The deviation will not in any manner vary the provisions of Title 10 of
this Code. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-11: PROFESSIONAL FEES:
Any person seeking the Village's approval or consideration for any plat of
subdivision shall be responsible for any professional fees incurred by the
Village in reviewing the matter, including, but not limited to, engineering
fees, planner fees, and attorney fees. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed to
occur for each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-1-13: SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this Title do not apply and no subdivision plat is required
for the division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of ten (10)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets, easements of
access, or public improvements. (Ord. 97-487, 10-21-1997)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Minimum Standards Adopted
11-2-2: Standards Of Design
11-2-3: Street And Road Requirements
11-2-4: Blocks And Lots
11-2-5: Easements
11-2-6: Public Land And Open Space
11-2-7: Natural Features
11-2-8: Field Tiles
11-2-9: Fire Hydrants
11-2-10: Scenic Corridors
11-2-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The following requirements are hereby adopted as the minimum standards of
design for a subdivision and of improvements required to be constructed or
installed therein. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-2: STANDARDS OF DESIGN:
"Standard specifications" or "specifications" means the specifications in the
current editions of the IDOT "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction" (RBC), along with any supplementation thereto and the "Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" (WSC) as
adopted by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers. All roadway
improvements shall conform to the applicable standards of IDOT and this Title.
The design and specifications shall be set forth in the engineering improvement
plans, which must be submitted to and be approved by the Village prior to final
plat approval. In the event of a conflict between the standards set forth in
RBC, WSC, and/or this Title, the most stringent provision shall govern. (Ord.
96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-3: STREET AND ROAD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Streets: A public street or streets shall be provided to afford
convenient access to all property within the subdivision. Each lot must have
direct access to a public street.
      1.   The arrangements of streets shall provide for the continuation of
streets between and to adjacent properties, when, as determined by the Plan
Commission, such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic,
effective fire protection, and for the efficient provision of utilities.
      2.   No private street or thoroughfare shall be permitted.
      3.   When adjoining an area not platted, the arrangements of streets in
new subdivisions shall be extended either by construction or dedication, as
determined by the Plan Commission, to the boundary lines of the tract, to make
provision for the future connection of streets with adjacent areas. When the
Plan Commission determines that it is not desirable to provide for street
access to adjoining property, extension of streets to the boundary lines of the
tract shall not be required.
      4.   Minor residential streets shall be designed to discourage their use
by through traffic.
   B.   Improvement Of Existing Adjacent Roads: Whenever land adjacent to an
existing road is subdivided and the existing road is not improved to a standard
equal to or better than that required for the subdivision streets, the
subdivider, if so determined by the Plan Commission, shall be required, except
when not reasonably practical, to improve the existing road to a comparable
standard. Any improvement of an existing road shall be subject to the approval
of the public authority having jurisdiction.
   C.   Alleys: Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots or tracts
intended for business, commercial, or industrial use, and multiple-family
building use, but shall not be provided in residential blocks, except when
required by the Plan Commission.
   D.   Street Widths: The minimum right of way of a street, alley, or
thoroughfare shall not be less than the following:
      1.   Major Arterial: One hundred twenty feet (120').
      2.   Minor Arterial: One hundred feet (100').
      3.   Collector Streets And Industrial Streets: Eighty feet (80'), or such
lesser width as determined by the village engineer, but not less than sixty six
feet (66').
      4.   Local Streets: Sixty six feet (66'). (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
      5.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the end of permanent
dead end streets. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be one thousand
three hundred feet (1,300'). The length of such street shall be measured from
the centerline of the street of origin to the terminus. The cul-de-sac shall
have a seventy foot (70') radius as center point of right of way with a fifty
foot (50') radius of road surface for local streets. Collector streets and
industrial streets shall have an eighty foot (80') radius as center point of
right of way with a sixty foot (60') radius of road surface. No center islands
will be allowed. Where circumstances warrant, a "T" turnaround may be approved
by the village. (Ord. 2005-679, 10-18-2005)
      6.   Temporary Cul-De-Sac: A temporary cul-de-sac (standard or "T") shall
be provided if required by the village. The right of way lines shall be
extended to the boundary line of the proposed development if the adjacent
property is undeveloped. A notation shall be placed on the subdivision plat to
the effect that the temporary cul-de-sac shall be removed upon the extension of
the road.
      7.   Alleys: Alleys shall be thirty three feet (33').
      8.   Additional Right Of Way Required: When the subdivision is located on
only one side of an existing right of way, which is less than the required
width, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right of way to meet the
requirements, but not exceeding one-half (1/2) of the total required width.
      9.   Modify Requirements: In cases where topography or other conditions
make the dedication of a street or part thereof of the required minimum width
impractical, the plan commission, with the concurrence of the village engineer,
may modify the above requirements, provided that suitable access for all
reasonable purposes, such as, but not limited to, fire protection, school bus
travel, and snow plowing, shall be maintained.
   E.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted, if the same can be
reasonably avoided.
   F.   Street Names: Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment or
continuation of existing streets, shall bear the name of such existing streets.
In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive,
place or court, or an abbreviation thereof. All street names must be approved
by the plan commission. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-4: BLOCKS AND LOTS:
   A.   Blocks: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots,
except when fronting upon a major or minor arterial, or collector street or
prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case
the plan commission may approve a single tier of lots.
   B.   Lots:
      1.   Lot dimensions and building setback requirements shall conform to
the applicable requirements of the zoning title. Setback requirements shall be
depicted on the final plat. A lot area greater than that specified in the
zoning title may be required if, in the opinion of the Lake County health
department, additional area is necessary for a safely functioning septic field
and reserve field area.
      2.   The size of lots or tracts laid out and intended for business use
shall be adequate to provide for off street service and parking facilities
required by the zoning title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-5: EASEMENTS:
Where no alleys are provided, there shall be dedicated easements of not less
than ten feet (10') in width for wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewer,
gas, water or other utility pipes or lines, along the rear, front or side of
each lot line, as necessary. The easements shall be laid out so that utility
easements are contiguous and create a functional utility grid to ensure
adequate access through the subdivision. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-6: PUBLIC LAND AND OPEN SPACE:
The subdivider shall comply with the terms of the provisions of the park
donation requirements prior to approval or as part of the final plat of
subdivision. Reservation of public lands or other open spaces may be required
where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission for preservation of historic
sites and scenic areas or for a particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision but not anticipated in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. Bufferyards
may be required by the Plan Commission in areas where they are desirable to
separate and protect residential subdivisions from adjacent commercial
developments, highways, streets, railroads, or any incompatible use. (Ord. 96-
445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-7: NATURAL FEATURES:
In all subdivisions every effort shall be made to maximize the preservation of
natural resources such as large trees, water courses, and other natural site
amenities, and as otherwise required by the Zoning Title. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-
1996)
11-2-8: FIELD TILES:
All existing field tiles shall be located and provisions made to relocate
around building sites and to perpetuate existing drainage. To avoid the
potential erosion caused by long period flows, field tiles shall not discharge
overland except in a wetland or detention area. No field tile shall be
permitted to remain under a street. It shall be replaced with load bearing pipe
and, when determined to be feasible or desirable by the Village Engineer, shall
be incorporated into the subdivision storm sewer or drainage system. (Ord. 96-
445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-9: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Where land to be subdivided contains or will contain a pond or lake, a dry fire
hydrant system shall be installed, as approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord.
96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-2-10: SCENIC CORRIDORS:
Where land to be subdivided includes land in a Scenic Corridor Overlay
District, the applicable requirements must be satisfied. Any subdivision of
land within a scenic corridor requires extra design attention to preserve the
rural landscape, including prairie vistas, open fields, wetlands, and hardwood
groves or forests. The location of pedestrian trails, bicycle paths and bridle
paths in scenic corridors is encouraged. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
CHAPTER 3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Lake County Stormwater Management Commission
11-3-2: Drainage And Storm Sewer Facilities
11-3-3: Water Storage Areas
11-3-4: Submittal Of Engineering Design Data
11-3-5: Ownership And Maintenance Of Storm Water Storage Areas
11-3-6: Drainage Structures And Ditches
11-3-7: Bridges
11-3-8: Flood Plain Areas
11-3-9: Drainage Easements
11-3-10: Utilities
11-3-11: Street Construction
11-3-12: Pedestrian Circulation System
11-3-13: Street Lighting
11-3-14: Street Signs
11-3-15: Trees
11-3-16: Inspection
11-3-17: Approval Of Public Improvements
11-3-1: LAKE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT COMMISSION:
Copies of all submittals to the LCSMC shall be simultaneously submitted to the
Village. Copies of all correspondence from LCSMC shall be promptly filed with
the Village. Prior to or at final plat approval, the subdivider shall file with
the Village the required permit and approval from the LCSMC. When such approval
and permits are not required, written confirmation from the LCSMC shall be
filed with Village. In the event of a conflict between the Village ordinances,
including this Subdivision Control Title, and the rules and regulations of the
LCSMC, the more stringent provision shall govern. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-2: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWER FACILITIES:
   A.   Storm Water Drainage: Adequate facilities shall be provided in all
subdivisions for the proper drainage of storm water runoff from the ground
surface.
   B.   Ditches And Drainage Swales: In subdivision comprising forty thousand
(40,000) square foot or larger lots, storm water runoff may generally be
handled by roadside ditches and side or rear yard drainage swales along with
adequate cross road and driveway culverts. Roadside ditches and swales shall
have a minimum bottom width of two feet (2') and maximum side slopes of 3:1 and
shall be a minimum of two feet (2') below the crown of the road. The minimum
gradient of roadside ditches and swales shall be one percent (1%). Where
topography or other conditions, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, so
warrant, the Village may require that storm sewer facilities be provided in
conjunction with overland drainage improvements described above.
   C.   Storm Sewers: Storm sewers may be required, where deemed necessary by
the Village Board and Village Engineer. Storm sewer materials shall be limited
to reinforced concrete pipe and shall be not less than twelve inches (12") in
diameter. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-3: WATER STORAGE AREAS:
   A.   Dry Bottom Storm Water Storage Area: A dry bottom storm water storage
area is a facility that is designed to be normally dry and contains water only
when excess storm water runoff occurs. These are commonly known as detention
areas or ponds.
      1.   Secondary Purpose: Dry bottom storm water storage areas shall be
designed to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space, or other
types of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent
flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains, if deemed necessary by the Village,
and both shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel
or storm sewer.
      2.   Maximum Depth: Maximum depth of planned storm water storage shall
not exceed four feet (4'), unless the existing natural ground contours and
other conditions lend to greater storage depth, and a greater depth is approved
by the Village Engineer.
      3.   Minimum Grades: Minimum grades for the bottom of the basin shall be
two percent (2%). Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the
natural land contours as practical and a 4:1 slope or less shall be used
wherever possible. If slopes greater than 4:1 are necessary to meet storage
requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the Village
Engineer and suitable erosion control provided, in addition to the protection
required to ensure public health, safety and welfare, and provided that the
slopes shall not exceed 3:1.
      4.   Dams And Impoundment Structures: Dam for water impoundments, pools,
ponds, reservoirs and small lakes shall be planned, designed and constructed
under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and/or registered
structural engineer and shall meet the approval of the Village Engineer.
Minimum requirements for earth dams capable of impounding water shall be as
follows:
         a.   Foundations: A minimum depth of at least twenty four inches (24")
of impervious clay layer or equivalent thereof is required for dams. The entire
area in which the dam is located shall be free from all top soil, roots,
vegetation, stones rock or debris, and shall be plowed and roughened to provide
an interlocking tight bond with new fill.
         b.   Clay Core: A clay core shall be constructed within the middle
third of the dam, and shall extend into a ten foot (10') wide trench excavated
at least twelve inches (12") into impervious clay. The clay core shall be
compacted to ninety five percent (95%) standard density.
         c.   Crest: The crest shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and shall
have sufficient height above the high water level to prevent waves from going
over the dam. The height of the free board shall not be less than one and one-
half feet (11/2') above the high water level.
         d.   Emergency Overflow: The emergency overflow shall be located one
foot (1') below the crest.
      5.   Outlet Control Structures: Outlet control structures shall be
designed to require no, or as little, maintenance as is reasonably possible for
proper operation. Each storm water storage area shall be provided with a method
of emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of a 100-year
frequency storm occurs. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without maintenance and shall become part of the "natural" or surface
channel system. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer to substantiate all design features. Both outlet control structures
and emergency overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed to fully
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Storm water runoff velocities
shall be kept at a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall control
structure will not be permitted without complete protection for the public
safety and rip-rap or similar measures to protect against erosion. The use of
restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort
when no other method is feasible.
   B.   Wet Bottom Storage Areas: Wet Bottom Storage Area is a facility that is
designed to be maintained as a free water surface or pond. These are commonly
known as combination storm water detention-retention areas or ponds. Wet bottom
storm water storage areas shall be designed in accordance with all of the
requirements for dry bottom storm water storage areas. A safety ledge,
consistent with sound engineering practices, shall be required for each such
pond. The following additional conditions shall be satisfied:
      1.   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave
action.
      2.   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet (4'). A minimum of
twenty five percent (25%) of the pond area shall have a minimum depth of ten
feet (10').
      3.   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation may be required.
Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration
facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the
perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to
the satisfaction of the Village. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-4: SUBMITTAL OF ENGINEERING DESIGN DATA:
Plans, specifications, and all calculation for storm water runoff control shall
be submitted to the Village Engineer for review and approval prior to the
Village's approval of a final plat. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-5: OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER STORAGE AREAS:
Prior to final plat approval, arrangements satisfactory to the Village shall be
made by the subdivider to ensure the proper care, operation, maintenance,
liability, and ownership of storm water storage areas. A homeowners association
or similar body may be the responsible party, if approved by the Village. If
the Village deems that it would be in its own best interest to own and control
a specific storm water storage area, appropriate agreements to effect such
ownership and control may be required. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-6: DRAINAGE STRUCTURES AND DITCHES:
   A.   Related Structures: Catch basins, manholes, inlets, frames, and grates
shall conform to the Highway Standards Manual and the Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois (latest revision). The spacing of
pavement drainage structures shall be a maximum intervals of three hundred feet
(300').
   B.   Culverts: The size and capacity of all drainage structures shall be
computed using the "Rational Method". The minimum length of culverts shall be
at least equal to the distance from edge of shoulder to edge of shoulder, plus
four (4) times the vertical distance from the edge of shoulder to the flow line
of the culvert, less the flared end section length. No driveway culvert shall
have a diameter of less than fifteen inches (15"), and no crossroad culvert
shall have a diameter of less than eighteen inches (18"). In no case shall a
driveway culvert be less than the width of the driveway, plus four feet (4') on
each side of the driveway. Material for crossroad culverts shall be limited to
reinforced concrete culvert pipe (RCCP). All culverts shall have approved end
protection. Approved grating shall be provided for crossroad culverts and storm
sewer end sections.
   C.   Ditches: Roadside ditches shall be designed based on a 10-year storm
frequency and ditch protection shall be provided, if calculations indicate
erosive velocities will be reached. A driveway culvert sizing schedule shall be
included as part of the approved improvement plans. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-7: BRIDGES:
All bridges and culverts having a span of more than twenty feet (20') shall be
approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-8: FLOOD PLAIN AREAS:
All developments shall be subject to the Wadsworth flood plain regulations 1 .
(Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
11-3-9: DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
When a development is traversed by a waterway or intermittent stream, there
shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right of way conforming
substantially with the lines of same, and such easement shall include an
additional area at least fifteen feet (15') in width adjoining one edge of the
waterway or intermittent stream that measures twenty feet (20') or less from
bank to bank. Where the distance from bank to bank is more than twenty feet
(20'), such easement shall include an additional area at least fifteen feet
(15') in width adjoining both edges of the waterway or intermittent stream.
Where ditch drainage is used in lieu of storm sewers, the easement shall be of
sufficient width to allow future construction of a storm sewer main adequate to
carry the ultimate runoff of the watershed. Such easement shall be not less
than twenty feet (20') in width. The fifteen foot (15') working area adjoining
a stream shall be continuous through the development and adjoin existing
easements. Public walk ways may be permitted within the easement areas. (Ord.
96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-10: UTILITIES:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers: When located within the service area of a public
sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed and
connected throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as to adequately
serve all lots and tracts. Where lots cannot, economically or for other
reasons, be connected with a public sewerage system, sanitary sewerage
facilities, as approved by the Lake County Health Department, shall be
utilized.
   B.   Water Supply: When located within the service area of a public water
system, water mains not less than eight inches (8") in diameter, shall be
constructed and connected throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as
to adequately serve all lots and tracts, together with shut-off valves and fire
hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire water system,
at intervals not exceeding three hundred feet (300'). All fire hydrants shall
be approved by the fire protection district. Where lots cannot, economically or
for other reasons, be connected with a public water system, a water supply
suitable for domestic use, as approved by the Lake County health department,
shall be utilized.
   C.   Utility Connections: All building services shall be constructed to
connect with the utility service mains constructed within any street or
thoroughfare, to serve such adjoining lot, tract or building site; such
building services shall extend from the main to the lot line. Upon completion
of the construction in place of all such building service connections with
utility mains, an accurate map or maps showing the exact location of all such
mains, together with manholes, shutoff valves and other similar facilities
being a part thereof, by distances in feet from street lines, and of all such
building service connections in distance in feet from the side lot lines, as
approved by the village engineer, shall be filed in the office of the village
clerk. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-11: STREET CONSTRUCTION:
The following criteria shall be adhered to for the design and construction of
new streets or reconstruction of old streets. The criteria as set forth are the
minimum desired and shall not be considered restrictive to the use of higher
standards if so desired by the subdivider.
   A.   Location: Streets shall be constructed parallel to and centered within
the dedicated right of way.
   B.   Surface Width: Streets shall be improved to the following widths of
pavement surface according to their classification:
      1.   Major or minor arterial: Not less than twenty eight feet (28').
      2.   Industrial streets: Not less than forty eight feet (48').
      3.   Collector streets: Not less than twenty four feet (24').
      4.   Local streets: Not less than twenty two feet (22').
      5.   Alleys: Not less than sixteen feet (16').
   C.   Pavement Design: All local streets shall be improved to a structural
number of 3.0 in accordance with the state of Illinois highway design manual.
Streets with higher classification shall be designed to a 3.6 structural
number.
   D.   Surface Crown: The surface of all roadways shall have a uniform slope
from the centerline to the edge of said roadway of one-fourth inch (1/4") per
foot.
   E.   Street Grades: The maximum grades for collector streets and streets of
higher classification shall not exceed six percent (6%). The maximum grade for
all other streets shall not exceed eight percent (8%). In no case shall the
grade of any street be less than one-half percent (0.5%). Grades shall be shown
on the plans at a minimum of fifty foot (50') intervals.
   F.   Preparation Of Subgrade: All organic material must be removed. Subsoil
must be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor before
installation of base material.
   G.   Street Geometrics: Street geometrics shall conform to the design
standards established in the highway design manual. All design standards are
subject to the minimum requirements as specified herein. Streets shall be
designed on the basis of the following design speeds:
      1.   Collector Streets: Fifty (50) miles per hour.
      2.   Local Streets: Thirty (30) miles per hour.
      3.   Horizontal Curvature: Centerline radii shall be as follows:
Collector streets and higher classifications shall conform with the state of
Illinois highway standards based on the design speed for the roadway. Local
streets shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') radii.
      4.   Intersection Radii: Radii at intersections shall be not less than
thirty feet (30') measured at the edge of the street surface for local streets
and thirty five feet (35') for higher street classifications. The right of way
radii shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') for local streets and twenty
five feet (25') for higher street classifications. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
      5.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the end of permanent
dead end streets. The maximum length of a cul-de- sac shall be one thousand
three hundred feet (1,300'). The length of such street shall be measured from
the centerline of the street of origin to the terminus. The cul-de-sac shall
have a seventy foot (70') radius as center point of right of way with a fifty
foot (50') radius of road surface for local streets. Collector streets and
industrial streets shall have an eighty foot (80') radius as center point of
right of way with a sixty foot (60') radius of road surface. No center islands
will be allowed. Where circumstances warrant, a "T" turnaround may be approved
by the village. (Ord. 2005-679, 10-18-2005)
      6.   Vertical Curvature: Length of vertical curves shall be in accordance
with state of Illinois highway standards based on the desirable sight distance
for the design speed. Minimum length shall be based on stopping distance of two
hundred seventy five feet (275') with k = 0.55. No vertical curve shall be less
than one hundred feet (100') in length except at street intersections. In no
case shall vertical curve at a street intersection be less than fifty feet
(50'). Vertical curves will be required at all locations where the algebraic
difference of grades is two percent (2%) or greater.
   H.   Half Streets: No half streets will be allowed. All streets surface
improvements shall be to full width.
   I.   Pavement Materials: All flexible pavement streets shall consist of at
least one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete surface course and
two inches (2") of bituminous concrete binder course as a minimum. The binder
course shall be constructed one year prior to the installation of the surface
course. It is required that the subdivider engage a third party, unrelated to
the contractor, to take core samples of the pavement to establish that the
minimum thickness and compaction of the pavement have been met. The pavement
cores will be required prior to the placement of the surface course. Cores are
to be taken at one hundred foot (100') intervals in alternate lanes or at
sufficient intervals to establish that the pavement meets the specifications.
Aggregate base course and aggregate shoulders shall be CA-6 gradation limited
to crushed stone or crushed gravel. Bituminous aggregate mixture base course
shall have a minimum Marshall Stability of 1500. Bituminous concrete binder
course and bituminous concrete surface course shall be limited to Class I, Type
2.
   J.   Shoulders: All streets constructed with a rural cross section (no curb
and gutter) within the Village shall have a gravel shoulder three feet (3') in
width and a total compacted thickness of not less than six inches (6") or as
otherwise approved by the Village Engineer.
   K.   Combination Concrete Curb And Gutter: All streets within a business
district shall be bounded on each side by a concrete curb and gutter conforming
to the State of Illinois Standard section B-6:12. All streets that will serve a
residential area that required combination concrete curb and gutter shall
conform to the Village standard combination concrete curb and gutter typical
section.
   L.   Maintenance During Construction:
      1.   Snow Removal: The subdivider shall be required to maintain all
improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on
all roads until acceptance of the improvements by the Village. The subdivider
may enter into an agreement with the Village, with approval of the Village
Board, whereby the Village will provide snow removal service to the
subdivision. The Village will charge the cost of such snow removal to the
subdivider.
      2.   Emergency Work: The Village may, on twelve (12) hours' notice or
such shorter notice as is practical, plow snow or effect emergency repairs on a
road not yet dedicated or not yet accepted by the Village and charge the cost
of such work to the subdivider.
      3.   Roadway: All exposed earth surfaces lying within the road right of
way shall be properly protected by riprap, sod, or be seeded with rapid growing
grass to prevent erosion.
      4.   Drainage Facilities: All culverts, storm sewers, drainage
structures, ditches, slopes, shoulders and roads shall be maintained until
seeding of the exposed area has been accomplished and satisfactory growth
established. All exposed surfaces in which turf or sod has not been developed,
shall be reseeded or sodded.
      5.   Debris Removal: The subdivider shall clean and maintain, or cause to
be cleaned and maintained, all public ways, sewers and drains, free from debris
and trash or other extraneous material, prior to acceptance, and at such other
times during construction as the Village may deem necessary to prevent the
creation of a public nuisance.
      6.   Existing Facilities: Any damage during construction to existing
roads, culverts, storm sewers, drainage structures, ditches, slopes and
shoulders shall be repaired at the expense of the subdivider to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
      7.   Alley Pavement: All alleys shall be improved with a roadway
consisting of not less than five inches (5") when thoroughly compacted of
crushed stone or gravel, of the following widths:
         a.   Through residence blocks not less than twelve feet (12').
         b.   Through business areas, not less than sixteen feet (16'). (Ord.
96-445, 7-2-1996; amd. Ord. 2024-1160, 10-1-2024)
11-3-12: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION SYSTEM:
Subdivisions shall provide a pedestrian circulation system to connect
individual dwelling units with neighboring dwelling units, and to connect
groups of dwelling units with schools, parks, commercial facilities, and other
community facilities. The circulation system shall be located within public
rights of way, public easements, or common areas maintained by a homeowners'
association, parks, or school sites. The Plan Commission shall recommend the
type, including material required and width of the pedestrian circulation
system appropriate for the subdivision and for the Village, which may require
the physical separation of pedestrian circulation from the vehicular
circulation system, depending upon:
   A.   The size of the subdivision.
   B.   The pathway system, if any, used on adjacent property.
   C.   The topography of the property.
   D.   The Comprehensive Plan for the Village.
   E.   The location of the schools, parks, and community focal points.
   F.   The layout of the system should have a reasonable relationship to
foreseeable desired movements, connecting residential areas with schools, area-
wide parks, commercial facilities, work areas, existing or potential public
transportation points, and other community facilities in a convenient and
logical fashion. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-13: STREET LIGHTING:
Street lighting shall be provided by the subdivider throughout the subdivision.
Street light standards shall be installed within the street parkways and shall
be served by appropriate wiring with connections to a power supply of an
electric utility. A standard shall be located at each street intersection, at
the turnaround of each cul-de-sac and elsewhere at intervals of not more than
five hundred feet (500'). Street light standards, luminaries, lamps and wiring
shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board. Only those street light
standards which qualify, after acceptance by the Village, for the lowest rate
available from an electric utility supplier for municipalities for operation
and maintenance of lighting shall be permitted. No other lighting standards or
structures shall be utilized. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-14: STREET SIGNS:
An appropriate street sign shall be erected at each street intersection within
the subdivision. The type and the location of the sign shall be subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission. The subdivider shall provide all required
traffic regulation signs. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-15: TREES:
If any trees are required to be planted on any part of the subdivision by the
subdivider, the species of trees and the location thereof shall be subject to
the approval of the Plan Commission. If it is necessary to remove any existing
trees during construction of a subdivision, such tree removal and required
replacement of trees shall be performed in accordance with the Village
ordinances. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-16: INSPECTION:
All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this Title shall be
inspected during the course of construction by the Village Engineer or his duly
authorized representative. The cost of all inspections shall be paid by the
subdivider in accordance with Village professional fees ordinance. (Ord. 96-
445, 7-2-1996)
11-3-17: APPROVAL OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
All plans, specifications, details, contracts, insurance, financial guarantees,
etc., for paving, water distribution systems, sewer systems, curbs, sidewalks,
street name signs, and the like shall be approved by the Village Engineer and
the Village Board before construction is begun. In addition, approval of the
Village Attorney and the Village Board of the subdivision agreement, financial
guarantees, and all covenants and conditions shall be required, prior to final
plat approval. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
CHAPTER 4
PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-4-1: Subdivision Approval Procedure
11-4-2: Land Planning Conference
11-4-3: Proposed Development Discussions With Appropriate Agencies
11-4-4: Preliminary Plat And Preliminary Engineering
11-4-5: Final Plat
11-4-6: Final Engineering
11-4-7: Dedication Of Park Lands And School Sites Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu
Thereof
11-4-1: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The procedure established by this Chapter shall apply to the approval of a
subdivision of lands. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
11-4-2: LAND PLANNING CONFERENCE:
The purpose of the land planning conference is to familiarize the subdivider
with procedural and regulatory provisions of Wadsworth ordinances and other
applicable regulations to which a development may be subject, prior to the
expenditure of large sums of money. The land planning conference shall be
scheduled with representatives from the Village Board, the Plan Commission, the
Village Planner, the Village Engineer and, where a change in zoning is
required, a representative from the Zoning Board of Appeals. It is recommended
that the subdivider be represented by his land planner and engineer. The land
planning conference shall be scheduled after deposit of any fees required by
the Village, in accordance with Section
1-7-1 of this Code. The land planning conference shall include a discussion of
the procedures for approval of a subdivision plat, as well as the existing and/
or proposed zoning and other applicable regulations. The conference shall also
include consideration of the Comprehensive Plan, general layout of the site,
including roads, road improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, park
sites, and other relevant matters. The subdivider may, at his option, elect to
submit a sketch plan at the land planning conference. The purpose of a sketch
plan is to permit the subdivider to receive advice and comments on the general
design of his proposed subdivision. Although the sketch plan is optional, the
Village encourages the submittal of sketch plans. Only a subdivider who is
thoroughly familiar with all Village requirements and procedures affecting the
subdivision of land should consider proceeding directly to the preliminary plat
stage without submitting a sketch plan. It is the responsibility of the
subdivider to:
   A.   Become familiar with the Zoning Ordinance 1 , the Subdivision Control
Ordinance codified in this Title, engineering specifications, and other
ordinances or controls relating to the subdivision and improvement of land.
   B.   Investigate the adequacy of existing schools, open space, recreation
areas, and other public facilities to serve the proposed subdivision.
   C.   Review the relationship of the proposed subdivision with existing
street systems and the governing street or highway safety and construction
standards. Where the property fronts on a State or County road, investigate the
State and County regulations controlling access, as necessary.
   D.   Investigate the Lake County standards for sewage disposal and water
supply and the standards of the public utility companies.
   E.   Investigate the requirements of the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
11-4-3: PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT DISCUSSIONS WITH APPROPRIATE AGENCIES:
Subsequent to the land planning conference and prior to preparation of the
preliminary plat and preliminary engineering, the subdivider is encouraged to
discuss the proposed development with all appropriate agencies, such as the
Army Corps of Engineers, to avoid undue expense or delay. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-
1996)
11-4-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING:
The preliminary plat is a detailed set of drawings and supporting material
which will enable the Village to make an informed decision as to the merits of
the proposed subdivision. Preliminary approval of the subdivision can be
obtained at this stage, in reliance upon which the subdivider can prepare his
final engineering drawings and the final plat. The preliminary plat should be
prepared in general conformance with the approved sketch plan, if submitted.
   A.   Procedure: Filing of the preliminary plat, notice to owners and
disclosure of interest.
      1.   The subdivider shall file the application for a preliminary plat
with the Village Board of Trustees along with twenty (20) copies of all
required maps, illustrations, drawings, reports and studies, and required
filing fees. The Village Board of Trustees shall by motion refer the
application to the Plan Commission for its consideration, study, and
recommendation.
      2.   A notice of each application for preliminary plat approval shall be
given by the petitioner by registered or certified first class mail, at least
fifteen (15) days before the date of the Plan Commission meeting at which it
will be considered, to the owners of record of all parcels of land to a depth
of three (3) separate owners but not to exceed within one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') from the perimeter of the proposed subdivision;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall require a subdivider to give
notice to the owners of land, which is located outside the Village.
      3.   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall indicate on
its face the names of all directors and corporate officers of the corporation
and also the names of all shareholders who own individually five percent (5%)
or more of the outstanding stock of the corporation.
      4.   If the applicant is a general partnership, the application shall
contain a list of all the general partners who own a five percent (5%) or
greater interest in the partnership.
      5.   If the applicant is a limited partnership, the application shall
contain a list of all the names of general partners and of all limited partners
having a five percent (5%) or greater interest in the partnership.
      6.   If the applicant is a land trust or any other trust, the application
shall contain the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust
together with their respective interests in the trusts.
   B.   Action By The Plan Commission:
      1.   The Plan Commission shall study the merits of the preliminary plat
for a reasonable period of time. This review may be continued to subsequent
meetings of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall approve or
disapprove the application for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days, or
such longer time permitted by statute, from the date of the application or the
filing by the subdivider of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If
such plat is disapproved, then within said ninety (90) days the Plan Commission
shall furnish to the subdivider in a written statement setting forth the
reasons for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which
the proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances.
      2.   The Plan Commission shall forward all information filed by the
subdivider to the Village Planner and Village Engineer for their review,
comment, and recommendation.
      3.   If a zoning change or variance is requested by the subdivider, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on such application, in
conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Title.
      4.   The Plan Commission shall submit its recommendation in writing to
the Planning, Zoning, and Plats Committee indicating approval of the
application, approval subject to additional conditions and modifications, or
denial of the application. This recommendation shall specify the reasons for
the recommendations of the Plan Commission. A copy of such recommendation,
which may include the recommendations of the Village Planner and Village
Engineer, shall be sent to the subdivider.
   C.   Action By The Planning, Zoning, And Plats Committee:
      1.   After meeting with the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall contact
the chairman of the Planning, Zoning, and Plats Committee to arrange a meeting
date.
      2.   If any changes to the initially submitted preliminary plat have been
made, the subdivider shall submit seven (7) copies of the revised preliminary
plat to the Village at least five (5) working days before the meeting date.
      3.   The subdivider shall meet with the Committee to discuss the
preliminary plat, the recommendations of the Plan Commission, the Village
Planner, and the Village Engineer. The Committee may request additional
information for the proper consideration of the proposed subdivision.
      4.   The Committee shall report its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board.
   D.   Action By The Village Board Of Trustees: The Village Board of Trustees,
within a reasonable period of time, after receipt of the recommendations of the
Plan Commission and the Planning, Zoning and Plats Committee, shall approve the
preliminary plat, approve it subject to conditions and modifications, deny it,
or refer the application back to the Plan Commission for further consideration
and study. If such plat is approved by the Plan Commission, the Village Board
shall accept or reject the plat within thirty (30) days after its next
regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the Plan Commission.
Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
      1.   Approval of the preliminary plat constitutes approval of the layout
of the streets, lots, blocks, and land uses, and authorizes the subdivider to
prepare the detailed engineering drawings and final plat.
      2.   If the Village Board of Trustees approves the preliminary plat
subject to conditions and modifications, such approval shall be valid only when
the subdivider files with the Village Board of Trustees written consent to such
conditions and modifications.
   E.   Filing Requirements: If the preliminary plat is approved or approved
with conditions:
      1.   Original Plat Endorsement: The original plat and one print or copy
of the plat shall be endorsed by the Plan Commission as follows:
The proposed plan of subdivision as shown on this plat has received preliminary
approval by the Plan Commission of the Village of Wadsworth and the Plan
Commission is now ready to receive the final plat for consideration.
 
Dated ___________
 
PLAN COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF WADSWORTH
 
By: ________________________
(Chairman)
      2.   Application For Final Approval: Application for final approval of a
plat shall be made not later than one year after preliminary approval has been
granted. This application must be accompanied by such drawings, specifications,
and letter of credit or other approved surety as may be necessary to
demonstrate compliance with all requirements of the applicable Village
ordinances. If the final plat of subdivision and all other required documents
and/or plans are not filed in acceptable form with the Village Clerk in
accordance with this Title and the conditions of the preliminary plat approval
within twelve (12) months of preliminary plat approval, the preliminary plat
approval shall be void. Any further consideration of the proposed subdivision
shall require a new application and another review for preliminary approval by
both the Plan Commission and the Village Board of Trustees; provided, however,
that the Village Board, upon good cause shown, may extend the period for
obtaining final plat approval in six (6) month increments but not to exceed
twelve (12) months in the aggregate.
   F.   Required Information And Documents In The Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Information: The preliminary plat shall include maps, plans,
drawings and supporting material as follows:
         a.   The final draft of the preliminary plat shall be a boundary line
closure with the exact dimensions of all lines and angles shown, prepared by an
Illinois registered land surveyor.
         b.   All plats, plans, and maps shall be drawn on a tracing medium in
a manner that's clear and can be readily reproduced.
         c.   All plats, plans, and maps shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or such other scale as may be approved by
the Village Engineer. Other drawings shall be at a scale suitable to the
information shown thereon.
         d.   All plats, plans, and maps shall show the pertinent information
for the subject property and the surrounding area within two hundred feet
(200').
         e.   The required plats, plans, and maps are listed separately herein.
The subdivider may combine one or more of the required plats, plans, and maps;
provided, that no required information is omitted or obscured by the process
and the resulting documentation is clear and readily reviewable.
         f.   Other Information: An indication of the ownership, and existing
and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary
plat. If the subdivider owns any parcel so identified as "excepted", the
preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in
accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning and with an acceptable
relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat.
         g.   All other reasonably necessary information shall be shown in a
report.
      2.   Maps, Plans And Plats: The preliminary plat shall include:
         a.   A complete application on forms provided by the Village or such
other equivalent format.
         b.   A survey (plan) prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor
showing property lines, right-of-way lines, easements, street names, buildings
and other structures, and a legal description of the property.
         c.   A topographic survey (map) based on USGS datum showing contour
lines at an interval not greater than one foot (1') unless otherwise approved
by the Village Engineer showing: drainage courses, watershed divides, lakes,
ponds, wetlands (mapped to standards acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers), springs, other ground water sources, flood plains, a list of the
sources used to prepare the map, and a project bench mark. For the land that
slopes less than two percent (2%): spot elevations shall be shown at all breaks
in grade, along all waterways or swales, and at selected points not more than
one hundred feet (100') apart in all directions. For land that slopes two
percent (2%) or more: contours with an interval of not more than one foot (1')
shall be provided. Elevations shall be based on United States geological survey
datum. In areas of steep slopes, the Village Engineer may waive the
requirements for one foot (1') contours.
         d.   A plan of all existing engineering improvements showing all of
the information required for the topographic map, above, and all existing
improvements including roads and streets, detention facilities, drainage
structures including the length, size, material and inverts for all storm and
sanitary sewers, and farm tiles, man holes, catchbasins, wells, water mains,
waste disposal systems, fire hydrants including dry hydrants, other utilities,
and the proposals of any governmental agencies to rebuild, repair or replace
any existing improvements.
         e.   A soils map conforming to the criteria of the Lake County Health
Department.
         f.   A tree survey map conforming to the requirements of the Wadsworth
Landscape Ordinance or, in the absence of such an ordinance, such other
ordinance or standard as the Village Board shall approve.
         g.   A natural resources inventory map showing the extent of resources
to be protected under the regulations of Section
10-5-3 of this Code.
         h.   Site capacity calculations.
         i.   A Natural Resource Opinion by the Lake County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
         j.   A drawing showing the subject property in relation to Village
boundaries, the boundaries of other municipalities, school districts, library
districts, fire protection districts, other taxing districts, and the
boundaries of all zoning districts for a distance of at least one thousand feet
(1,000').
         k.   Proof of ownership acceptable to the Village Attorney.
         l.   A proposed preliminary plat or in the case of a planned unit
development a general development plan showing the following:
            (1)   The location, width, and designation by type of all streets.
            (2)   All parcels and lots showing the area, net buildable area,
dimensions, building setback lines, easements, proposed use and number of
dwelling units.
         m.   An engineering improvements plan showing the following:
            (1)   The location, width, and center-line dimensions of all street
improvements and typical cross sections of each type of street.
            (2)   The location, size, and invert elevations of all proposed
culverts, storm sewers, or sanitary sewers.
            (3)   The location and size of any proposed water mains.
            (4)   The location and gradient of all existing and proposed
drainage facilities.
            (5)   The location, size, and depth of any detention facilities
including the normal pool, invert elevations and size and type of control
structure.
            (6)   The location of any dry fire hydrants.
            (7)   All easements, labeled as to function.
            (8)   A tabular summary showing the area of the site, the area of
all dedicated roads and streets, the area of all school park and recreation
facilities, the area of all drainage facilities, flood plain areas, the net lot
area, the lineal feet of streets and the number of lots.
         n.   A Preliminary Resource Protection Plan conforming the
requirements of the Wadsworth Zoning Title.
         o.   A Preliminary Landscape Plan conforming to the requirements of
the Wadsworth Landscape Ordinance or in the absence of such an ordinance, such
other ordinance or standard as the Village Board shall approve.
         p.   A Comprehensive Drainage Plan conforming to the requirements of
this Title and the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance. A copy of the
complete submission to the LCSMC along with all correspondence shall be
submitted to the Village Engineer.
         q.   Draft Covenants and Bylaws of a homeowners association in which
each lot owner shall automatically be a voting member, with one vote per lot.
         r.   A preliminary planning and engineering report containing the
following information where appropriate: a tabular summary of the project,
phasing schedule, the method of extending any off-site utilities, a table of
compliance with all school, park, library, fire protection and any other
contributions, construction access, the test, tables, calculations and page
size exhibits of the submissions to LCSMC, the report of the engineer
responsible for the mapping of wetlands and the reports of any other
consultants whose findings were relied upon in the preparation of the
preliminary plat or General Development Plan.
         s.   A preliminary estimate by a registered professional engineer of
the total cost of construction or installation of all improvements including
the cost of landscaping and the cost of all reviews and inspections.
         t.   Prior to approval of the preliminary plat by the Plan Commission
the applicant shall furnish the following items:
            (1)   A revised preliminary plat if revisions are required for
approval.
            (2)   Letters or other suitable indications of preliminary approval
by the outside reviewing agencies including the following, where applicable:
               (A)   Lake County Division of Transportation.
               (B)   Lake County Health Department.
               (C)   Illinois Department of Transportation.
               (D)   Lake County Stormwater Management.
               (E)   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
            (3)   Letters or other reports recommending preliminary approval
from the following:
               (A)   Village Planner.
               (B)   Village Engineer.
               (C)   Village Attorney.
               (D)   Village Clerk as to payment of fees. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-
1996)
11-4-5: FINAL PLAT:
After the approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the
Village all required final engineering plans, drawings, calculations, and
details for all required improvements, including a field tile survey, including
dimension, if reasonably practical. The Plan Commission shall not take final
action upon the final plat until the engineering drawings have been reviewed
and approved by the Village Engineer.
   A.   Procedure:
      1.   Filing Of The Final Plat:
         a.   After the Village Engineer has reviewed and approved the final
engineering plans, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Board of
Trustees, twenty (20) copies of the final plat. The Village Board of Trustees
shall refer the final plat to the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendation. No person shall subdivide any parcel of land until a final plat
shall have been reviewed and approved by the Village Board of Trustees, as set
forth herein, and duly recorded.
         b.   The final plat shall conform substantially to the approved
preliminary plat.
      2.   Action By The Plan Commission:
         a.   The Plan Commission shall determine if the final plat is in
substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat and that the Village
Engineer has reviewed and approved the final plat and final engineering plans.
         b.   If the Plan Commission determines that it is in substantial
conformance, the chairman shall affix his signature to the final plat.
         c.   If the Commission determines that the final plat is not in
substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat, the Commission
shall set forth its findings in its own records and shall forward a copy to the
subdivider and to the Village Board.
      3.   Action By The Planning, Zoning, And Plats Committee: The Planning,
Zoning and Plats Committee shall determine if the final plat is in substantial
compliance with the approved preliminary plat and shall forward its findings to
the Village Board and the subdivider.
      4.   Action By The Village Board: After the review of the final plat by
the Plan Commission and the Planning, Zoning and Plats Committee, the Village
Board of Trustees shall approve or deny the final plat. When a subdivider
submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision for final approval has
supplied all drawings, maps and other documents, including acceptable letter of
credit or other surety to guarantee the construction of the public
improvements, required by the Village ordinances to be furnished in support
thereof, and if all such material meets all Village requirements, the Village
Board shall approve the proposed plat within sixty (60) days from the date of
filing the last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from
the date of filing application for final approval of the plat, whichever date
is later. The subdivider and the Village Board may mutually agree to extend the
sixty (60) day period. If the Board of Trustees approves the final plat, it
shall authorize the Village President and Village Clerk to affix their
signatures to the plat. If the Board of Trustees disapproves the final plat, it
shall set forth its reasons in its records and shall forward a copy to the
subdivider.
      5.   Recording Of The Plat: Upon approval by the Village Board of
Trustees, the subdivider shall collect the other necessary signatures, and the
Village Clerk shall record the plat with the County Recorder of Deeds at the
subdivider's expense. For the recording of the final plat, the Village Clerk
shall receive from the subdivider the signed mylar and six (6) blueprints of
the approved final plat and three (3) copies of the approved supporting
documents. The cost of such prints and copies of documents shall be paid by the
subdivider.
      6.   Distribution Of Copies Of The Recorded Final Plat: The final plat,
after recording, and all supporting documents transmitted with the final plat
to the Village Board, shall remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
A copy of the recorded final plat shall be delivered to the subdivider.
   B.   Final Plat Form And Content:
      1.   Final Plat Form: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). Variation in scale may be allowed
when determined by the Village Engineer to be necessary for a clear depiction
of the subdivision. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet
shall be numbered consecutively, and each sheet shall contain a notation
showing the total number of sheets, and its relation to the other sheets (e.g.
sheet 1 of 3 sheets). Linear dimensions shall be accurately depicted.
      2.   Final Plat Content: The final plat shall show on the face thereof:
         a.   The name of the subdivision.
         b.   The location and position of the subdivision indicated in each of
the following ways:
            (1)   By quarter-quarter section, section, township, range,
meridian, County and State.
            (2)   By distances and bearings from true north.
            (3)   By a written legal description of the exterior boundaries of
the land as surveyed and subdivided.
         c.   The top of the plat shall be oriented north, and the plat shall
contain a north arrow.
         d.   A graphic scale.
         e.   The dates of preparation and all revisions.
         f.   The description and location of all survey monuments.
         g.   Survey data sufficient to reproduce any line or reestablish any
monument in the subdivision.
         h.   All streets, alleys, blocks, parcels, and public grounds into
which the land is subdivided and of all easements and rights of way.
         i.   The length of boundary lines of all streets, alleys, blocks,
lots, parcels, public grounds, easements, and rights of way. Where a boundary
line is an arc of a circle, the radius and the length of the arc shall be
shown.
         j.   The width of all streets, alleys, easements, and rights of way.
         k.   The minimum front yard building setback lines of all lots and
parcels and a notation of the distance between such lines and the street right-
of-way line, which shall not be less than that required by the Zoning Title.
         l.   The area of each lot and parcel.
         m.   Consecutive letters on all blocks and consecutive numbers on all
lots throughout the plat.
         n.   The name of each street and an appropriate label designating all
other easements, rights of way, setback lines, dedications and reservations
(e.g. "Dedicated for Park Purposes" or "Reserved for Public School Site").
         o.   The abutting street lines of all adjoining subdivisions, shown in
their correct location by broken lines.
         p.   The water elevation of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
survey and the high watermarks of such lakes or streams: if any portion of the
land with a subdivision shown on any final plat is subject to flood hazard by
storm waters, such fact and portion of land so affected shall be clearly shown
on the final plat by a prominent note on each sheet of the final plat whereon
any such portion shall be shown.
         q.   Utility and Village easement dedications.
         r.   Consent of Lake County Health Department, Lake County Department
of Transportation, and Illinois Department of Transportation, if required.
      3.   Other Information:
         a.   A duly executed subdivision agreement, in form approved by the
Village, wherein the subdivider agrees to install at his expense all the
improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications, and approved by
the Village Board of Trustees and Village Engineer, within two (2) years of
final plat approval.
         b.   A letter of credit issued in conformity with the approved Village
form, or other comparable performance guarantee, in form approved by the
Village, as may be approved by the Village Attorney, with an expiration date of
not less than two (2) years after final plat approval. Said letter of credit or
other comparable performance guarantee shall be provided in an amount as
required by the Village Engineer, but in no case shall it be less than one
hundred thirty percent (130%) of the Village Engineer's estimate of the costs
of the improvements, as set forth in the approved plans and specifications,
plus the cost of engineering inspections. The letter of credit or performance
guarantee may be reduced commensurate with the completion of the work;
provided, however, that the remaining balance shall equal or exceed one hundred
thirty percent (130%) of the cost to complete the balance of the improvements,
as determined by the Village Engineer, and further provided that in no event
shall a letter of credit or other performance guarantee be reduced below twenty
five percent (25%) of the original amount, until all required improvements are
completed and accepted by the Village Board. No more than two (2) reductions in
the letter of credit or performance guarantee shall be permitted to any
subdivider before final release of the performance guarantee. Upon dedication
and acceptance, a maintenance guarantee, in the approved Village form, shall be
deposited with the Village in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the original
performance guarantee. Such guarantee shall be in effect for two (2) years from
the date of acceptance of the required improvements.
         c.   Sufficient information to confirm that all other conditions and
requirements of preliminary approval have been satisfied.
         d.   Payment of all required Village fees.
   C.   Certificates: The following duly executed certificates shall appear on
the plat as depicted in Section
11-5-1 of this Title:
      1.   Owner as to the ownership, drainage, and subdivision of the
property.
      2.   Surveyor as to compliance with Municipal and State regulations,
including the drainage and monument certificates.
      3.   Chairman of the Plan Commission.
      4.   Village Engineer.
      5.   County Clerk.
      6.   Village President and Village Clerk.
      7.   Owner and engineer drainage certificate.
      8.   Lake County Health Department.
      9.   Lake County Division of Transportation as to County highway access.
      10.   Illinois Department of Transportation as to State highway access.
(Ord. 96-445, 6-2-1996)
11-4-6: FINAL ENGINEERING:
   A.   Preparation; Services And Fees:
      1.   Preparation:
         a.   Final engineering shall be prepared by an Illinois-licensed
engineer. No plans shall be required in situations where this Title does not
require any improvements.
         b.   A plan shall be submitted, which depicts all areas, which will be
disturbed by construction. Construction shall include movement of construction
vehicles, roadway, utilities, septic fields, buildings, landscaping, ditching,
driveways, excavation and regrading.
         c.   When unusual site conditions exist, the Village Engineer may
require supplementary plans and specifications as necessary for an adequate
review of the plat.
         d.   A good faith cost estimate shall be provided by the subdivider's
engineer for use in determining the amount of the performance guarantee. The
estimate must be approved by the Village Engineer. The cost estimate shall have
sub-totals in the following categories:
            (1)   Roadway and drainage construction.
            (2)   Deceleration lane construction.
            (3)   Detention area construction.
            (4)   Soil and erosion control construction.
            (5)   Sanitary sewer and watermain construction.
            (6)   Miscellaneous construction.
            (7)   Underground utilities construction.
      2.   Consulting services and inspection fees.
   B.   Engineer Signature And Seal On Plans:
      1.   The engineer shall place his signature and the imprint of his seal
on all copies of the plans, specifications and cost estimate which are
required.
      2.   The name of the engineer and his company, including his title,
address, phone number, and the original date of design of the plans, as well as
all revision dates, shall be shown on the plans.
   C.   Road Construction And Storm Drainage Facilities:
      1.   Road construction plans shall be included as part of the final
engineering and shall include plan and profile views. The plans shall show the
existing and proposed center-line elevations at each station for all the roads
to be improved. The grade line profile shall be shown at a minimum scale of one
inch (1") equals fifty feet (50') horizontal and one inch (1") equals five feet
(5') vertical, unless otherwise specified by the Village Engineer. Complete
horizontal and vertical curve data shall be shown. A typical cross section
shall be included in the plans, and cross sections shall be provided at a
minimum of every one hundred feet (100') of road length or as required by the
Village Engineer. Said cross sections shall include existing and proposed
ground levels and elevations. Entrance design and deceleration lanes, where
applicable, shall be included in the plans.
      2.   Storm drainage facilities shall be included with the road
construction plans. A plan shall be provided showing watershed boundaries,
drainage areas, points of discharge, velocity of flow and flow quantities.
      3.   Construction specification details shall be provided for all
engineering improvements.
   D.   Storm Water Detention Plans: Final engineering shall include storm
water detention plans, which shall show the drainage pattern of the site
indicating the drainage basin and the drainageways, floodplain, flood table,
existing field tiles, and the location of the detention facilities. The plans
shall also include a cross section of the detention/retention basin, and
details of the outlet control mechanism. The plan shall be accompanied by
drainage calculations. Final engineering shall include all documentation
submitted to and received from the Lake County Stormwater Management
Commission.
   E.   Erosion And Sediment Control Plans: The final engineering shall include
an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. This Plan shall include soils,
topographic, and drainage information as well as any planned temporary or
permanent structural or vegetative erosion and sediment control measures. These
measures shall prevent sediment from leaving the development site and minimize
the amount of soil movement within the boundaries of the development site. A
schedule of operations shall also be included in the plans which shows the
approximate starting and completion dates of the various phases of construction
activities such as methods and rates, drainage and utility installations and
seeding dates.
   F.   Site Grading Plan: A site grading plan shall be provided for the entire
subdivision with established top of foundation elevation in one foot (1')
proposed contour lines.
   G.   Water And Sanitary Facility Plans:
      1.   When required, plans for community water distribution systems,
community water supply facilities, community sewage systems, and community
sewage treatment plants and sanitary sewers shall be provided as part of the
final engineering.
      2.   These plans shall be drawn according to the standards established by
the Lake County Public Works Department, the Lake County Health Department and
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 96-445, 6-2-1996)
11-4-7: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS AND SCHOOL SITES OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU
THEREOF:
   A.   School Payment:
      1.   As a condition of approval for any final plat of subdivision of any
block, lot, or sublot or any part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land, or
of a final plat for a planned unit development, or as a condition of issuance
of a building permit for any dwelling unit, each subdivider or permittee shall
be required to make payments to the Village for the benefit of the elementary
school and high school districts within which the property shall be located.
These funds are intended to provide the school district with the necessary
funds to secure school sites, and for such other purposes as permitted by law,
to provide adequate schooling for the anticipated pupils who will live within
each dwelling unit. The funds shall be paid at the time of final plat approval,
or, at the election of the subdivider, with the consent of the Village Board,
shall be paid at the time of building permit issuance for each dwelling unit.
In all other circumstances, the payment shall be made prior to issuance of a
building permit. No payment shall be required for any building permit for any
dwelling unit within a subdivision, if payment was made to the district at the
time of subdivision approval, in accordance with the requirements existing at
the time of said subdivision approval. No payment shall be required for any
building permit for any dwelling unit within a subdivision, if payment was made
to the district on or before the date of adoption hereof, pursuant to a written
agreement entered into prior to the date of adoption hereof for a subdivision,
which received final plat approval prior to the date of adoption hereof.
The amount of the payment shall be determined by the respective school
district, using generally accepted formulas, provided that the Village Board
has approved the amount ascertained by the respective district, and provided
that the district has executed the approved indemnification agreement. In the
event that the property upon which the dwelling unit is to be located falls
within two (2) school districts for the same level of schooling, such as the
same two (2) elementary school districts, the district which has the greater
portion of the property upon which the dwelling unit shall be located shall
receive the funds.
All funds shall be paid to the Village. The Village will thereafter remit the
funds on a quarterly basis, less an administrative processing charge of ten
percent (10%) up to a maximum of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each received
payment.
      2.   In order to qualify for the contribution, the respective school
district must execute the agreement substantially in the form as follows and
submit and have approved the contribution formula and amounts:
   AGREEMENT
   In exchange for the mutual obligations and considerations contained herein,
the Village of Wadsworth (hereinafter "Village") and            School District
#      (hereinafter "District") understand and agree as follows:
I.   The Village has enacted an ordinance, which requires payments to be made
to the Village for the benefit of the District for certain dwelling units to be
constructed within the Village. These funds, which will be received by the
Village and thereafter remitted to the District, less a ten per cent
administrative processing charge up to a maximum of $30.00 for each received
payment, shall be used for obtaining school sites and for such other purposes
as are permitted by law.
II.   The District will periodically establish the amount of payment per
dwelling unit, using generally accepted formulae, and submit the payment amount
determination to the Village for review and approval.
III.   The Village, upon receipt, shall review the proposed payment schedule.
If it is satisfactory, the Village will approve it, and thereafter require the
approved payments as a condition of final subdivision or planned unit
development approval, or issuance of a building permit. No payment shall be
required if a payment was already made to the District when the property was
originally subdivided.
IV.   The District shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village from any and
all claims, liability, losses, or damages the Village may suffer as a result of
the adoption or enforcement of Village ordinances pertaining to any such
contribution to the District, or in any way relating thereto, and any and all
payments made pursuant thereto.
V.   Should the Village, for the purposes of resisting, or compromising any
claims or demands arising out of the subject matter with respect to which
indemnification is provided by this agreement, or for the purposes of enforcing
this agreement, incur any expenses, attorney fees or court costs, the District
shall promptly reimburse the Village for any such expenses, attorney fees, or
court costs upon written demand by the Village.
VI.   This agreement shall be binding upon the parties hereto, their successors
and assigns.
VII.   This agreement shall be in full force and effect for forty years.
Dated                     
School District #     
                          
President      
Attest:
                          
Village of Wadsworth
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b257f9f2619881271642a49efa5c976e62fe122d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1221.png]
 
(Ord. 99-540, 12-21-1999)
   B.   Park And Recreation Payment: As a condition of approval of a final plat
of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each
subdivider shall be required to dedicate land for park and recreational
purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a
combination of both, at the option of the Village, in accordance with the
following criteria and formula:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total
requirement shall be five and one-half (5.5) acres of land per one thousand
(1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
 
TYPES OF RECREATION FACILITY     MINIMUM SIZE   MINIMUM ACRES PER 1,000 PEOPLE
Play lot                         8,000 sq. ft.  Not applicable
Neighborhood playground          5 acres        1.25
Neighborhood park                3.5 acres      1.0
District-wide park or play field 4 to 30 acres  1.25
Community-wide recreation park   12 to 30 acres 2.0
Total                                          5.5 acres of park per 1,000
                                                people
 
      2.   Location: The Comprehensive Park and Recreation Plan and/or the
"Standards by Types of Recreation and Park Areas" as adopted by the Village
shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park site adjoining all
elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered a
requirement. A central location which will serve equally the entire development
is most desirable. In large developments these sites can be located throughout
the development according to established standards for park area distances.
      3.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When a
subdivider provides within the subdivision open space for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. Depending on the size of the development a portion of
the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may
at the option of the Village Board be provided in the form of "private" open
space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be
determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area.
      4.   Private Open Spaces: In general, a substitution of private open
space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of
improvement and the installation of recreational facilities, including
equipment by the subdivider as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such
areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved
by the Village, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas,
the subdivider must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents. Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an
adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to
compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the
subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be
given.
      5.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park Sites: Where
the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or
when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes,
the Village shall require the Subdivider to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and
recreation land dedication shall be used solely for the acquisition of or
maintenance of park and recreation land.
      6.   Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area improved as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and
recreation and school sites. It has been determined that the present "fair
market value" of such improved land in and surrounding the Village is sixty
thousand dollars ($60,000.00) per acre and such figure shall be used in making
any calculation herein unless the subdivider files a written objection thereto.
In the event of any such objection the subdivider shall submit an appraisal
showing the "fair market value" of such improved land in the area of his
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said "fair
market value" per acre of such improved land shall be made by the Village Board
based upon such information submitted by the subdivider and from other sources.
      7.   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be
situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of
land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
         a.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and
a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land
that would have been required to be dedicated.
         b.   A major part of the local park or recreation site has already
been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development
to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication,
and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
      8.   Cash Payments: Cash payments in lieu of land dedications shall be
paid per dwelling unit at the time of issuance of building permits.
      9.   Density Table: The following table of population density is
generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size
for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required
dedications of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a
written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
                           JUNIOR                HIGH
        PRE-    ELEMENTARY HIGH       TOTAL      SCHOOL              TOTAL PER
TYPE OF SCHOOL  GRADES K-5 GRADES 6-8 GRADES K-8 GRADES 9- ADULTS    DWELLING
UNIT    1 MO.-4 5-10 YEARS 11-13      5-13 YEARS 12        18 YEARS+ UNIT
                           YEARS                 14-17
                                                 YEARS
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
                              JUNIOR    TOTAL     HIGH
           PRE-    ELEMENTARY HIGH      GRADES K- SCHOOL              TOTAL PER
TYPE OF    SCHOOL  GRADES K-5 GRADES 6- 8         GRADES 9- ADULTS    DWELLING
UNIT       1 MO.-4 5-10 YEARS 8         5-13      12        18 YEARS+ UNIT
                              11-13     YEARS     14-17
                              YEARS               YEARS
   DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY
2 Bedrooms .102    .122       .041      .163      .020      1.694     1.979
3 Bedrooms .254    .346       .138      .484      .142      1.921     2.801
4 Bedrooms .413    .470       .303      .773      .303      2.142     3.631
5 Bedrooms .236    .314       .231      .545      .212      2.637     3.630
   ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY
1 Bedrooms 0       0          0         0         0         1.068     1.068
2 Bedrooms .092    .095       .077      .172      .037      1.776     2.077
3 Bedrooms .231    .237       .064      .301      .066      1.805     2.403
4 Bedrooms .332    .345       .155      .500      .168      2.243     3.243
   APARTMENTS
Efficiency 0       0          0         0         0         1.360     1.360
1 Bedroom  0       .002       .001      .003      .001      1.749     1.753
2 Bedrooms .042    .082       .041      .123      .042      1.614     1.821
3 Bedrooms .050    .230       .123      .353      .116      2.499     3.018
 
      10.   Demographic Study: In the event a subdivider files a written
objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population
from the subdivision or planned unit development and in that event final
determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be
made by the Village Board based upon such demographic information submitted by
the subdivider and from other sources. It is recognized that population
density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if
necessary.
   C.   Reservation Of Additional Land: Where the Comprehensive Plan or the
standards of the Village call for a larger amount of park and recreational land
in a particular subdivision or planned unit development than the subdivider is
required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider's contribution
shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the Village or other public body
designated by the Village, provided that such acquisition is made within one
year from the date of approval of the final plat.
   D.   Combining With Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned
unit development is less than forty (40) acres, parks and public open space,
where possible, shall be combined with dedications from adjoining developments
in order to produce usable recreation areas without hardship on a particular
subdivider, or the Village Board may elect to accept a cash equivalent.
   E.   Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not
differ greatly from surrounding land.
   F.   Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for
full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or
acceptable provision made therefor. (Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996)
CHAPTER 5
PLAT CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Certificates
11-5-1: CERTIFICATES:
The following certificates shall be applicable to this title:
1.    To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage or surface waters
will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable
provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters
into public area, or drains which the subdivider has the right to use and that
such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision.
 
                                                                                         
      Owner       Engineer
 
2.    The surveyor needs to install all required monuments and affix and sign
the following certificate:
 
The undersigned certifies that, at the time of making this survey, I set in
such manner that they will not be moved by frost, good and sufficient monuments
marking the external boundaries of the tract to be divided or subdivided and
have designated upon the plat the points where they may be found. These
monuments were placed at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point
where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line and at all
angle points along a meander line, with points not less than 20 feet back from
the normal water elevation of a lake or from the bank of a stream, except that
when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street,
the monuments were placed in the right of way line of the street. All internal
boundaries, corners and points were monumented in the field by like monuments
as defined above. These monuments at least 2 of which are of stone or
reinforced concrete were set at the opposite extremities of the property
platted, placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at the points
where a curve changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line. All lots
were monumented in the field with 2 or more monuments. The monuments were
furnished by the person for whom the survey is made and are such that they will
not be moved by frost.
 
                                                           
      Surveyor
 
3.    Approved by the Plan Commission on              , 19      .
 
                                                          
      Plan Commission Chairman
 
4.    Approved by the Village Board of Trustees on            19     .
 
                                                          
      Village President
 
   ATTEST:
 
                                                          
      Village Clerk
 
5.    Approved by the Village Engineer on              19     .
 
                                                           
      Village Engineer
 
6.    Lake County Superintendent of Highways Certificate, if the subdivision
shall have direct access onto a County road.
 
7.    IDOT Certificate if the subdivision shall have direct access onto a road
under jurisdiction of IDOT.
 
8.    All public roads and other areas to be dedicated to the Village of
Wadsworth shall be indicated: "Hereby dedicated to the Village of Wadsworth."
 
9.    County Clerk's Certificate
 
State of Illinois   )
   County of Lake   ) SS
 
I,                                          , County Clerk of Lake County,
Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, unpaid
current general taxes, delinquent special assessments or unpaid current special
assessments against any of the land included in the described property. I
further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with the
plat.
 
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk of Lake County, Illinois.
 
Dated this      day of               , A.D.        
 
                                                            
            Lake County Clerk
 
10.    I,                                        , Village Treasurer of
Wadsworth, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no unpaid taxes of other
Village charges against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
 
                                                          
      Village Treasurer
 
11.    All areas designated scenic corridor on this plat shall be maintained in
their natural, undisturbed condition, and no manmade structures of any kind
shall be constructed thereon, nor shall any grading be permitted on any scenic
corridor area, except according to the regulations in the Wadsworth ordinance
that apply to these areas. All natural vegetation shall be preserved and
maintained and shall not be mowed, cultivated, sprayed or in any way disturbed
without following the required procedures of the Village of Wadsworth. Noxious
plant material may be removed subject to a landscape plan approved by the Plan
Commission. This restriction shall not to apply to improvements or other
activities which are prescribed by the approved plans and specifications or the
approved landscape plan for the development.
 
12.    A non exclusive easement for serving the subdivision and other property
with electric, communications, sewer, water, gas and drainage service is hereby
reserved to the Village of Wadsworth, other governmental authorities having
jurisdiction over the land subdivided hereon, and those public utility and CATV
companies operating under franchise from the Village of Wadsworth, including
but not limited to Commonwealth Edison Company, Ameritech, Northern Illinois
Gas Company, and U S Cable of Lake County, their respective successors and
assigns, jointly and severally, to install, operate, maintain, replace and
remove, from time to time, facilities used in connection with transmission and
distribution of electricity, sounds and signals, gas mains, sewer and water
mains, and drainage in, under, across, and upon the surface of the property
marked "easement" or "easement" on this plat, together with the right to
install required service connections under the surface of each lot to serve
improvements thereon, the right to cut, trim, or remove trees, bushes, and
roots as may be reasonably required incident to the rights herein given and the
right to enter upon the subdivided property for all such purposes. Obstructions
shall not be placed over grantees' facilities or in, upon, or over the property
marked "easement" or "easement" on this plat, without the prior written consent
of grantees. After installation of any such facilities, the grade of the
subdivision property shall not be altered in a manner as to interfere with the
proper operation and maintenance thereof.
 
                                                          
      Owner
 
13.    Standard Surveyor's Certificate.
 
14.    I,                                          , certify that I am the
owner of the property described hereon and that I caused said property to be
surveyed and subdivided as shown hereon.
 
                                                          
      Owner
 
   Subscribed and sworn to before me this       day of            , 19     .
                                                           
      Notary Public
 
15.    All other certificates reasonably required by the Village Board, Village
Engineer, or Village Attorney.
 
(Ord. 96-445, 7-2-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-754, 6-3-2008)
 
TITLE 12
LANDSCAPING
Title And Purpose   1
Definitions   2
Scope And Regulation   3
Protection And Replacement Of Existing Trees   4
Landscape Standards   5
Landscape Plan   6
Plant Material Standards   7
Maintenance And Guarantees   8
Exceptions And Variations   9
Penalties   10
CHAPTER 1
TITLE AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the WADSWORTH LANDSCAPE
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The natural landscape of the Wadsworth area is one of the Village's most valued
assets. It is a unique combination of natural and manmade features adapted
during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to an agrarian way of life.
The second half of the twentieth century has seen the beginning of a process of
development and change from a farm community to a low density suburban
community. It is the intent of this Title to protect and preserve those
features of the natural and agrarian landscape which contribute to the beauty
and charm of this Village setting and to regulate new development so that the
benefits of a well-landscaped environment are extended to all present and
future residents of the Village. Specifically this Title is adopted for the
following purposes:
   A.   To protect existing trees and forests and to secure for the residents
of Wadsworth the environmental and aesthetic benefits that such trees and
forests provide and to require the replacement of such trees and forests which
cannot as a practical matter be preserved.
   B.   To further implement the Wadsworth subdivision regulations 1  by
establishing standards for the landscaping of new subdivisions and planned unit
developments.
   C.   To further implement the natural resource protection and scenic
corridor provisions of the Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance 2  by establishing
standards for the landscaping of such areas.
   D.   To establish standards and regulations for the landscaping of business
and industries.
   E.   To protect the natural habitat of animal species indigenous to
Wadsworth environments.
   F.   To establish standards and regulations for preparation of landscape
plans, and the installation and maintenance of plant materials.
   G.   To provide for the removal of diseased or unsafe trees and other plant
materials, which contribute to unsafe or unhealthy environmental conditions.
   H.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
and general welfare of the people of Wadsworth. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 10 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Rules Of Construction
12-2-2: Definitions And Abbreviations
12-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Tense: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   B.   Plural: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and in the
plural the singular.
   C.   Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
   D.   Usage:
      1.   The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not discretionary.
      2.   The word "may" is permissive.
      3.   The word "lot" shall mean a zoning lot, unless otherwise defined
herein.
      4.   The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
      5.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "intended for",
"designed for", "occupied for", "maintained for", and "arranged for".
   E.   Measurements And Standards:
      1.   All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest
foot; if a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or less, the full number next below
shall be used. If a fraction is more than one-half foot (1/2'), the next full
number above shall be used.
      2.   All measurements expressed in feet and inches shall be to the
nearest inch; if fraction is one-half inch (1/2") or less, the full number next
below shall be used. If a fraction is more than one-half inch (1/2"), the next
full number above shall be used.
      3.   Any standard herein which, when applied, results in the requirement
of a fraction part of a tree or other plant shall be deemed to require the next
whole number of such trees or other plants when the fraction, however
expressed, is one- half (1/2) or more; otherwise use the next lower number.
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
In the construction of this Title the definitions contained herein shall be
observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. Also,
abbreviations, initials, and symbols used in the text, tables, exhibits, and
forms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein.
BB: Balled and burlapped.
BR: Bare root.
CALIPER: The diameter size of trees. The caliper of the trunk shall be taken
six inches (6") above the ground up to and including four inch (4") caliper
size, and twelve inches (12") above the ground for larger sizes.
CANOPY TREE: A descriptive term referring to large, single trunk, outwardly
branching trees reaching a mature height of at least thirty feet (30').
DBH: The diameter size of trees at breast height. Breast height measured at
four and one-half feet (41/2').
DECIDUOUS TREE (Or Other Plant): Any tree or other plant which sheds its leaves
or needles at a particular season of the year.
DEVELOPER: The owner of a lot or other parcel of land or his agent engaged in
the subdivision of land and/or the construction of improvements to land with
the intention of selling to another person the lots so subdivided or the land
so improved.
DRIP LINE: The perimeter of the circular area surrounding the trunk of a tree
measured as one foot (1') of radius from the trunk for each one inch (1") of
diameter at breast height.
EVERGREEN TREE (Or Other Plant): Any tree or other plant which retains its
leaves or needles and remains green throughout the year.
GROUND COVER: A spreading plant with a height less than one foot (1'). Ground
cover plants are often planted in dense grouping to control erosion or to
provide ornamental surface.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: Any person trained or educated as a landscape architect
who is a registered landscape architect with the State of Illinois.
ORNAMENTAL TREE: A tree generally having a mature height of less than twenty
five feet (25'), valued for one or more aesthetic characteristics such as
overall form, quality of bark, flowers, color of green foliage, fall color, or
berries.
OWNER: The person or persons who are the record title holders of a parcel of
land.
PUD: Planned unit development.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
legal entity, or any agent, servant, officer or employee thereof.
SHRUB: A small woody plant, generally less than twelve feet (12') in height
having either many trunks or stems or a pattern of branching which starts close
to the ground. Shrubs may be either deciduous or evergreen. Some shrubs are
raised or pruned to resemble small trees and are called herein "tree-form"
shrubs.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person subdividing land.
TREE: Any large woody plant having, characteristically, a single upright trunk
or stem. Some large trees have multiple trunks and are here described as
clumped or "clump form" trees.
TURF: An area of the surface of the ground densely planted with grasses or
similar plants; lawn.
VILLAGE: Village of Wadsworth, Illinois.
VILLAGE FORESTER: A person appointed as Village Forester by the Village Board.
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
CHAPTER 3
SCOPE AND REGULATION
SECTION:
12-3-1: Standards And Regulations
12-3-1: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
The standards and regulations of this title shall be applicable to the
following developments, acts, or situations occurring within the village:
   A.   Tree Protection: The standards and regulations for the protection of
existing trees and the replacement of removed or destroyed trees shall be
applicable to all areas of the village as set forth in chapter 4 of this title
and this title generally.
   B.   New Subdivisions: All new subdivisions and planned unit developments
shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards and regulations of chapter
5 of this title and this title generally. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
   C.   Commercial Uses: All newly constructed, reconstructed or enlarged uses
in the B business, CR commercial recreation, OR office and research and LI, LI-
1, and LI-2 light industrial districts, and the PL public land district shall
be landscaped in accordance with the standards and regulations of chapter 5 of
this title and this title generally. (Ord. 2009-803, 12-15-2009)
   D.   Conditional Uses: All uses for which a conditional use permit is
required under the Wadsworth zoning ordinance 1  shall be landscaped in
accordance with the standards and regulations herein. See also subsection
10-5-4A of this code.
   E.   Uses In Overlay Districts: All uses which are required to have site
plan review and approval prior to being permitted in overlay districts as shown
in section
10-4-4, table 1-A of this code. See also subsections
10-4-3B2 and
10-5-4A of this code.
   F.   Uses In Scenic Corridors: That portion of any lot which extends into a
scenic corridor overlay district shall be landscaped in accordance with the
standards and regulations herein. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING TREES
SECTION:
12-4-1: Protected Trees
12-4-2: Tree Protection During Construction
12-4-3: Prior Destruction Or Removal
12-4-4: Tree Replacement Standards
12-4-5: Tree Removal Permit Required
12-4-6: Exceptions
12-4-1: PROTECTED TREES:
   A.   Tree Cutting And Removal: Within the territorial limits of the Village
no person shall, without first obtaining a permit, remove or relocate to any
other site a tree or trees as described herein.
      1.   Any tree with a trunk diameter of six inches (6") or greater, DBH,
located in a "mature woodland" as defined by Section
10-2-3 of this Code, and which is subject to the natural resource protection
standards for forests provided for in subsection
10-5-3E of this Code.
      2.   Any tree with a trunk diameter of three inches (3") or greater, DBH,
located in a "young woodland" as defined by Section
10-2-3 of this Code, and which is subject to the natural resource protection
standards for forests provided for in subsection
10-5-3E of this Code.
      3.   Any other protected tree within the territorial limits of the
Village having a trunk diameter of ten inches (10") or greater, DBH.
   B.   Assaults On Trees:
      1.   No tree identified above shall be deliberately or accidentally
damaged or injured including damage or injury caused by the operation of
construction or maintenance machinery or motor vehicles.
      2.   No wires, cables, lights, signs or similar items may be attached to
any tree located in the public right of way or on public land except by
permission of the Village or the public agency owning the land upon which the
tree is located.
      3.   Where a tree is damaged so as to be unsafe, as determined by the
Village Forester, it shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the
replacement standards of Section
12-4-4 of this Chapter, by the person causing the damage or injury. (Ord. 97-
473, 4-1-1997)
12-4-2: TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   During Construction:
      1.   Protected trees as described in Section
12-4-1 of this Chapter shall be protected during all on-site construction
activities either by providing temporary fencing at the drip line and excluding
therefrom all construction equipment and materials storage, or by adhering to
the trunk vertical timbers in cases where there is not sufficient room for drip
line protection.
      2.   Construction activities in the vicinity of some species of trees
constitutes an assault, the effect of which can be mitigated by a variety of
practices including pruning, root pruning, feeding and tunneling for the
installation of utilities. Where failure to undertake such practices results in
the loss of a tree it shall be replaced in accordance with the replacement
standards set forth in Section
12-4-4 of this Chapter.
   B.   Post-Construction: The post-construction protection of mature and young
woodlands shall be in accordance with the resource protection standards of the
Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance 1 . (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
12-4-3: PRIOR DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL:
If during the course of the review of an application for an annexation to or a
development within the Village, it shall be determined that mature trees, or
mature or young woodlands, have been cut or relocated from the site prior to
the application for an annexation or a development, the net result of which
would be to frustrate or interfere with the application of a site capacity
analysis required under Section
10-5-3 of this Code, then, in that event, the Village shall treat the
annexation or development as if the trees were still existing on the site, and
require all appropriate site capacity calculations to be so applied. In
addition, as a condition of approval of the annexation or development, the
Village shall require that the developer replenish the site with like species
which aggregate to the full sum of the diameter of the trees which have been
removed. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-4-4: TREE REPLACEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Standard: When a permit is issued to remove tree(s), the permittee
shall be required to plant replacement trees for every tree removed after the
fifth tree for individual home sites and for every tree removed after the third
tree for other sites. The Village Forester may reduce the required amount of
replacement trees if he determines that strict compliance with this requirement
is impossible or not reasonably practical and a reduced amount of replanting
would still fulfill the purpose and intent of this Title. Tree replacements
will be of like species or other species approved by the Village Forester and
the number and size of which shall be in accordance with the following table:
Tree Removed In Young Woodlands Replacement Trees
Tree Removed In Young Woodlands Replacement Trees
1–4" to 6", DBH               1–3" caliper
1–Over 6", DBH                1–4" caliper or 2–3" caliper
In Mature Woodlands
1–3" to 5", DBH               1–3" caliper
1–6" to 12", DBH              2–3" caliper
1–Over 12", DBH               3–4" caliper
All Other Trees
1–10" to 14", DBH             3–4" caliper
1–Over 14", DBH               4–4" caliper
 
   B.   Exception: The natural resource protection standards of the Wadsworth
Zoning Ordinance 1  permit the removal of some trees without replacement. All
trees removed in excess of the standards of the Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance
shall be replaced as provided herein 2 . (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
2 2. See subsection
  10-5-3E5 of this Code.
12-4-5: TREE REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence tree removal, or damage any live protected tree
without first having obtained a tree removal permit from the Village. There
shall be no charge for the permit. Applications for permits may be obtained
from the Village Forester. Prior to the issuance of a permit for tree removal,
the Village Forester shall conduct an on-site inspection to determine whether
or not the removal conforms to the criteria of this Title. The permit shall be
issued if any one of the following conditions is present:
   A.   It is reasonably necessary to remove trees which pose a safety hazard
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or threatens to cause disruption of public
service.
   B.   It is reasonably necessary to remove trees which pose a safety hazard
to buildings.
   C.   It is reasonably necessary to remove diseased trees, or trees that have
been weakened by age, storm, fire, or other injury.
   D.   It is reasonably necessary, consistent with sound and recognized
forestry practices, for the tree to be removed.
   E.   It is reasonably necessary to remove the trees in order to construct
proposed improvements, which are consistent with the zoning of the property
upon which the tree is located, and there is no reasonable alternative
available on the site.
   F.   In order to comply with any other applicable Village ordinance
provisions, it is necessary for the trees to be cut or relocated. (Ord. 97-473,
4-1-1997)
12-4-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Utility Company Exemption: Utility companies, in the maintenance of
their operating and distribution equipment and facilities, are exempt from the
provisions of this Chapter.
   B.   Replacement Exemption: No replacement shall be required if the Village
Forester determines that the tree or trees to be removed are dead or unsafe.
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
CHAPTER 5
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Scope
12-5-2: Natural Resource Protection Areas
12-5-3: Scenic Corridor Areas
12-5-4: Subdivisions
12-5-5: Site Improvements - Residential
12-5-6: Site Improvements - Nonresidential
12-5-1: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the standards for landscaping subdivisions, individual
businesses, and other uses falling within the scope of regulation of this
title. The standards and regulations of this chapter are further divided into
five (5) separate sets of standards and regulations covering the landscaping of
natural resource protection areas, scenic corridor areas, subdivisions, site
improvements, and buffers and required yards; any new subdivision or any
business, industry or other development required to be landscaped which
contains any or all of these features shall be landscaped so that the
requirement for each feature present thereon is met and a unified design is
prepared for the entire subdivision or site. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-5-2: NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS:
   A.   Natural resource protection areas, as defined and established in titles
10 and 11 of this code, shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the resource. The landscape treatment shall be the minimum
treatment required to repair any damage to the resource incidental to the
development of the lot, to maintain the resource in an unchanged and
nonimpacted condition, and to allow appropriate future open space use of the
resource protection area consistent with the requirement for the protection and
preservation of the resource.
   B.   The area of protection of such resource shall be deleted from the area
of the lot for purposes of determining the landscaping requirements of the
balance of the lot. The owner shall submit to the village as part of the
landscape plan a resource protection plan indicating the landscape treatment of
all required resource protection areas 1 .
   C.   The resource protection measures required by all agencies having
jurisdiction over the site, other than the village, shall be adhered to and
shall form the basis for the resource protection plan for those resources which
fall within the jurisdiction of outside agencies. In particular, any
requirements of the U.S. army corps of engineers regarding wetlands and the
Lake County stormwater management agency regarding detention facilities shall
be complied with. The regulations and approvals of such agencies shall not
limit the village in requiring adequate resource protection as provided in
title 10 of this code and this title. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsections
  10-5-3E and F of this code and chapter 6 of this title.
12-5-3: SCENIC CORRIDOR AREAS:
The scenic corridor overlay district regulations of the Wadsworth zoning
ordinance 1  are intended to help preserve the natural scenic qualities of the
Wadsworth area. Of particular interest are the open fields, wetlands and stands
of hardwood forests. The wetlands and forest are protected natural resource
features under subsection
10-5-3E of this code. The standards for landscaping applicable to scenic
corridors require first the protection of natural resources. Beyond this the
owner has a choice in the preservation and continuation of other natural and
manmade environments such as old fields, farm fields, pastures and commercial
tree plantings of various kinds. Last, there are requirements for the landscape
improvements to be installed in those portions of the scenic corridors which
are clearly deficient in scenic resources of all types.
   A.   Protected Natural Resources: Natural resources required to be protected
under the Wadsworth zoning ordinance 2  shall be protected in scenic corridors.
Even though the Wadsworth zoning ordinance 3  provides that a portion of a
resource may be developed for other use, all parts of the resource lying within
a scenic corridor shall be protected. While some minimal landscape improvements
may be needed to stabilize or better protect the resource, no further
landscaping and no additional tree planting is required. The natural resources
required to be protected are:
      1.   Mature woodlands;
      2.   Young woodlands;
      3.   Wetlands;
      4.   Flood plains;
      5.   Steep slopes;
      6.   Lakes;
      7.   Ponds;
      8.   Lake shorelines;
      9.   Pond shorelines; and
      10.   Drainageways.
   B.   Other Natural Resources:
      1.   Old Fields: Old field environments in which the emergent trees are
at least six feet (6') in height may be preserved as part of a scenic corridor
and no further landscaping is required for such old field areas.
      2.   Farm Fields And Pastures: Farm fields and pastures may be retained
as part of a scenic corridor provided they adjoin or are part of a larger field
or pastures which are continued and maintained as part of the development.
      3.   Commercial Tree Plantings: Commercial plantings may be continued in
scenic corridors. Orchards may be retained as long as they are operated or they
may be abandoned without further landscaping required. Nurseries may be
retained as long as they are operated. Upon the cessation of operation, such
areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards of subsection C of
this Section. Other tree farms may be retained. At the time any such tree farm
is harvested, the scenic corridor portion shall be landscaped in accordance
with the following regulations.
   C.   Other Areas: All other areas within the scenic corridor, exclusive of
the protected natural resources and other natural resources, retained as part
of the landscape plan shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
standards:
      1.   Farm fields (field crop areas) which are abandoned along with all
disturbed areas shall be seeded or sodded. Pastures and other old fields which
are not retained as part of the landscape plan as other natural resources may
be left in a natural state, subject to the required tree planting.
      2.   Trees shall be planted within the scenic corridor area exclusive of
any conservation areas as provided in subsections A and B of this Section, in
accordance with the following standards:
Canopy trees (BB - 3 inches)     4/10,000 square feet
Ornamental trees (BB - 2 inches) 2/10,000 square feet
Shrubs (BB - 2 foot height)      5/10,000 square feet
Or
Canopy trees (BB - 3 inches)     1/10,000 square feet
Canopy trees (BR - 1 inch)       8/10,000 square feet
Ornamental trees (BB - 2 inches) 1/10,000 square feet
Ornamental trees (BR - 1 inch)   2/10,000 square feet
Shrubs (CTR - 1 gallon)          20/10,000 square feet
 
      3.   Earth berms may be constructed within the scenic corridor areas
outside any areas reserved for the protection of natural resources. Such berms
shall have fore and back slopes of no greater pitch than three to one (3:1).
Berms shall be seeded or sodded and planted in accordance with the above
standards.
      4.   Scenic corridor areas may be reforested in accordance with the
standards and regulations of Section
10-4-3 of this Code.
   D.   Credit For Existing Trees: Existing trees and trees saved from
orchards, nurseries and other commercial tree plantations may be substituted
for new trees required as replacement trees or for new trees as otherwise
required by this Title. Credit shall be given on a one-to-one (1:1) basis,
provided the existing trees are equal to or greater in size than those required
by ordinance and that the species is suitable for the intended purpose.
   E.   Signs: In addition to the standards and regulations of Section
10-5-8 of this Code, the following regulations shall govern the placement of
signs in all scenic corridors:
      1.   The following signs are permitted in scenic corridor areas:
         a.   A single permanent identification sign for a subdivision or
planned unit development when located at the entrance of the development.
         b.   A single permanent identification sign for a commercial,
industrial or institutional use located on the property containing the scenic
easement.
         c.   Signs required by governmental agencies.
      2.   The areas surrounding signs permitted in scenic corridors for a
distance of twenty feet (20') in all directions shall be landscaped. Such
landscaping shall be designed to blend with the surrounding natural environment
and shall completely screen any exposed foundations or other supporting
structural members of the sign.
   F.   Fencing: Only the following types of fencing are permitted within a
scenic corridor:
      1.   Farm fencing to enclose a farming activity within the scenic
corridor area.
      2.   Open security fencing (woven steel chainlink) when required to
protect a utility installation within the scenic corridor.
      3.   Right-of-way fencing where installed by governmental agencies to
enclose their limited access right of way.
   G.   Prohibitions: No ornamental buildings, structures, recreation
facilities, play equipment, or ornamental devices of any kind may be placed in
a scenic corridor. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
2 2. See title 10 of this code.
3 3. See title 10 of this code.
12-5-4: SUBDIVISIONS:
All subdivisions which are approved subsequent to the adoption of this Title
shall be landscaped in accordance with the following standards:
   A.   Street Trees:
      1.   Number Of Trees Required: There shall be one street tree planted on
each side of a street for each forty feet (40') of length of the street
measured along the center line of the street. That portion of the center line
(s) lying within the intersection of two (2) streets shall be excluded from the
measurement; however, for cul-de-sacs, the center line shall be extended to the
end of the right of way.
      2.   Size: Street trees shall be at least three inch (3") caliper when
planted.
      3.   Location: Street trees shall be planted within the right of way, on
the right-of-way line or outside the right of way but within ten feet (10') of
the right of way. Trees shall be located so as to not interfere with drainage
facilities or underground utilities. Further, trees shall be located so as to
not impede sight lines at street intersections and driveways. Trees may be
spaced at regular intervals or grouped in naturalistic clusters.
      4.   Types Of Trees: Street trees shall be canopy trees selected from the
list of plant materials in Chapter 7 of this Title. In any subdivision
requiring the planting of at least six (6) but not more than eighteen (18)
trees, at least two (2) varieties shall be selected. In any subdivision
requiring the planting of at least eighteen (18) trees, at least three (3)
varieties shall be selected.
   B.   Other Street Landscaping:
      1.   In addition, any area adjoining the street right of way which is
graded to form a ditch, detention area or other drainage feature shall also be
covered with at least four inches (4") of top soil and either seeded or sodded.
      2.   The unpaved portion, not including the gravel shoulder, of the right
of way shall be covered with at least four inches (4") of top soil and either
seeded or sodded.
      3.   Where a subdivision adjoins an existing street, that portion of the
right of way between the existing pavement and the right-of-way line shall be
landscaped to the same standard as new streets in the subdivision.
   C.   Ornamental Landscaping: The installation of ornamental plantings and
other landscape materials and/or features at the entrance to a subdivision
shall be designed so as to not impede sightlines or obscure the view of
identification signs, traffic signs and street signs. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-5-5: SITE IMPROVEMENTS - RESIDENTIAL:
Where the proposed development of a site is subject to the review and approval
of the village and includes the following improvements, such improvements shall
be landscaped in accordance with the standards established herein:
   A.   Detention Pond:
      1.   Surrounding Area: The on site areas surrounding a detention pond for
a distance of fifty feet (50') from the normal pool or water level shall be
landscaped.
      2.   Seeding And Sodding: All disturbed areas within the fifty foot (50')
perimeter shall be either seeded, sodded or planted with a suitable year round
ground cover.
      3.   Method Of Measurement: For purposes of determining the plant
material quantities required for landscaping a detention pond, the area shall
be based on the on site area to be landscaped less the area of the pond
measured at normal pool elevation.
      4.   Plant Materials Required: The following plant materials are
required:
         a.   Canopy trees (BB - 3 inches): Two (2) per ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
         b.   Ornamental trees (BB - 8 foot height): Two (2) per ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
         c.   Shrubs (BB - 2 foot height): Five (5) per ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
   B.   Detention Basin (Dry Basin):
      1.   Area To Be Landscaped: The area within the thirty feet (30')
surrounding the maximum high water elevation of the basin and the interior of
the basin itself shall be landscaped.
      2.   Seeding And Sodding: All areas of disturbed earth within the basin
and the thirty foot (30') perimeter shall be either seeded or sodded or planted
with suitable year round ground cover.
      3.   Method Of Measurement: The area to be landscaped shall be the entire
on site area within the thirty foot (30') perimeter surrounding the basin.
      4.   Plant Materials Required: The following plant materials are
required:
         a.   Canopy trees (BB - 3 inches): Two (2) per ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
         b.   Ornamental trees (BB - 8 foot height): Two (2) per ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
         c.   Shrubs (BB - 2 foot height): Five (5) per ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
Note: Plant materials selected for planting within the basin area should be
water tolerant.
   C.   Drainageway:
      1.   Area To Be Landscaped: The area of the drainageway to be landscaped
shall be either the actual area of the drainage easement or an area ten feet
(10') on either side of the centerline of the drainageway whichever is the
greater one.
      2.   Ground Cover: All areas of disturbed earth within the area to be
landscaped shall be either seeded, sodded, planted with suitable year round
ground cover, or improved with a suitable pavement or riprap.
      3.   Method Of Measurement: For purposes of determining the plant
material required, the length of the drainageway shall be measured along the
centerline of the actual draining course.
      4.   Plant Materials Required: The following plant materials are
required:
         a.   Canopy trees (BB - 3 inches): One per one hundred (100) linear
feet.
         b.   Ornamental trees (BB - 8 foot height): One per one hundred (100)
linear feet.
         c.   Shrubs (BB - 2 foot height): Three (3) per one hundred (100)
linear feet.
Note: Trees and shrubs will not be planted in the center of the drainageway.
(Ord. 2009-803, 12-15-2009)
12-5-6: SITE IMPROVEMENTS - NONRESIDENTIAL:
For all new development, redevelopment, or substantial site improvements, and
whenever a building permit is issued for a principal structure, in the
following zoning districts:   PL public land, B business, CR commercial
recreation, OR office and research, LI light industry, LI-1 light industry 1,
and LI-2 light industry 2, the following landscape standards will apply:
   A.   Street Trees:
      1.   Number Of Trees Required: There shall be one street tree planted for
every eighty feet (80') of length of street frontage measured at the street
right of way line.
      2.   Size: Street trees shall be at least three inch (3") caliper when
planted.
      3.   Location: Street trees shall be planted within the right of way, on
the right of way line or outside the right of way but within ten feet (10') of
the right of way. If a permit is required from any highway authority to plant
in the right of way, the owner is responsible for obtaining any permits prior
to planting. Trees shall be located so as to not interfere with drainage
facilities or underground utilities. Further, trees shall be located so as to
not impede sightlines at street intersections and driveways. Trees may be
spaced at regular intervals, grouped in clusters, or staggered based on the
site layout.
      4.   Types Of Trees: Street trees shall be canopy trees selected from the
list of plant materials in chapter 7 of this title. On any parcel requiring the
planting of more than six (6) street trees, no single plant species shall
represent more than forty percent (40%) of the total plantings.
   B.   Parking Lot Trees: For the buildings and uses that require an excess of
fifty (50) parking spaces the parking lots and off street parking areas shall
be landscaped as follows:
      1.   Number Of Trees Required: Off street parking lots shall be
landscaped with not less than one tree and two hundred (200) square feet of
landscape area a minimum of nine feet (9') wide for every thirty two (32)
parking spaces.
      2.   Size: Parking lot trees shall be at least three inch (3") caliper
when planted.
      3.   Location: All trees planted and the required two hundred (200)
square feet of landscape area shall be located within the parking areas at the
end of parking rows and/or be placed to break up the continuous plane of hard
surface parking area. For every thirty two (32) parking spaces in a row there
shall be a tree and two hundred (200) square feet of interior landscape area.
      4.   Types Of Trees: Parking lot trees shall be canopy trees selected
from the list of plant materials in chapter 7 of this title.
      5.   Landscape Area: The required landscape area will be covered with a
living material such as ground cover, shrubs, and turf or a combination
thereof; shredded bark mulch; or a designed bioswale or other best management
practice (BMP). The required landscape area shall not be totally covered with a
paved material, stone, or other impervious material.
   C.   On Site Landscaping: The on site areas for the building and uses that
fall under these requirements shall be landscaped as follows:
      1.   Required Plant Materials: For every ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of lot area exclusive of the building footprint, the following minimum
numbers of plant material are required:
         a.   Deciduous canopy trees/evergreen trees: Three (3).
         b.   Ornamental trees: Two (2).
         c.   Deciduous shrubs/evergreen shrubs: Fifteen (15).
The plant materials required for parking lots (subsection B of this section)
can be included in the calculations for required landscaping; however, the
required street trees (subsection A of this section) and the required buffered
plant materials (subsection D of this section) shall not be included in the
required calculations.
      2.   Size: The required plant materials will be of the minimum size as
listed below:
         a.   Deciduous canopy trees: Three inch (3") caliper.
         b.   Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') in height.
         c.   Ornamental trees: Eight feet (8') in height.
         d.   Deciduous shrubs/evergreen shrubs; upright growing shrubs: Two
feet (2') in height.
         e.   Spreading shrubs: Eighteen inches (18") wide.
      3.   Location: All the required landscaping will be located on the site
at the discretion of the property owner or developer on a plan prepared by an
Illinois registered landscape architect. It is encouraged to have all the
required landscaping in a well prepared plan that provides screening of parking
lots, loading areas, and trash enclosures; provides for and encourages best
management practices (BMPs) for stormwater management; provides interesting
framing and highlights the building architecture; is balanced on the site with
good foundation plantings; provides seasonal interest; and includes a good
design in conjunction with signage and lighting.
   D.   Buffer Yard Plantings: If the side and rear yards of any proposed
development in the zoning districts of this section abut any residential
district they shall be landscaped and fenced so as to form a planted buffer
between the commercial, office, industrial, or public use and any adjoining
residential district.
      1.   Minimum Width Of Buffer Yard: The minimum width of the buffer yard
shall be ten feet (10').
      2.   Fencing: A wood fence a minimum of six feet (6') in height with
ninety five percent (95%) opacity is required along the entire buffer yard
except for the area along the side yard that would be within the front yard
setback or would block views at driveways or intersections. The fencing will be
located on the interior side of the buffer yard with the required landscaping
placed between the fence and the residential use. It is encouraged that the
wood fencing be a style that is attractive and consistent on both sides such as
board on board and shadowbox styles.
      3.   Required Plant Materials: For every one hundred (100) linear feet of
buffer yard area, the following minimum numbers of plant material are required:
         a.   Deciduous canopy trees: Three (3).
         b.   Evergreen trees: Four (4).
         c.   Ornamental trees: Four (4).
         d.   Deciduous shrubs/evergreen shrubs: Twenty (20).
      4.   Size: The required plant materials will be of the minimum sizes as
listed below:
         a.   Deciduous canopy trees: Three inch (3") caliper.
         b.   Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') in height.
         c.   Ornamental trees: Eight feet (8') in height.
         d.   Deciduous shrubs/evergreen shrubs; upright growing shrubs: Two
feet (2') in height.
         e.   Spreading shrubs: Eighteen inches (18") wide.
   E.   Variety And Mix: It is encouraged that a variety of species be used in
the selection of required plant materials with indigenous materials making up a
majority of plant material. However, at a minimum, twenty percent (20%) of the
required plant material will be evergreen trees and shrubs. Care should be
taken that evergreen plant materials be located in areas away from possible
contact with road salt used for winter deicing purposes. It is encouraged that
property owners and developers utilize ground covers, ornamental and native
grasses, wildflowers, perennial and annual flowers to add color and interest to
their sites.
   F.   Nonpaved Areas: All areas of a site or lot not covered with structures,
required parking, loading areas, sidewalks, patios and driveways will be
covered with a living plant material such as turf, ground covers, native
grasses, annual or perennial flowers, or wildflowers. Areas covered in a
nonliving material such as stone, sand, wood chips (except as shredded bark
mulch in planting beds), asphalt, concrete, scrap material, glass, or plastic
will not be permitted unless approved by the village board. (Ord. 2009-803, 12-
15-2009)
CHAPTER 6
LANDSCAPE PLAN
SECTION:
12-6-1: Plan Required
12-6-2: Landscape Architect Shall Prepare
12-6-3: Plan Prepared In Stages
12-6-4: Review And Approval - Procedure For Subdivisions
12-6-5: Review And Approval - Procedure For Planned Unit Developments
12-6-6: Procedure For Site Plan Review
12-6-1: PLAN REQUIRED:
A landscape plan shall be provided by the developer in accordance with the
standards and specifications of this Chapter. The purpose of the landscape plan
is to show in one document all proposals for the protection and/or replacement
of existing trees as required by this Title; the protection of mature and young
woodlands, and other natural resources as required by the Zoning Ordinance 1 ;
and the installation of new landscape materials in accordance with the
subdivision regulations 2 , the Zoning Ordinance and this Title. It is the
further intent of this Chapter that these elements, existing and proposed, be
incorporated into a unified design. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 11 of this Code.
12-6-2: LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT SHALL PREPARE:
The landscape plan required by Section
12-6-1 of this Chapter shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in
the State of Illinois. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-6-3: PLAN PREPARED IN STAGES:
The landscape plan shall be prepared in stages which correspond to the stages
of approval established for planned unit developments, subdivisions and other
business and industrial uses by the Wadsworth Zoning Ordinance 1 , Subdivision
Control Ordinance 2  and this Title. In all cases the preliminary plan shall
include a survey of existing conditions as specified below. Only in the case of
a planned unit development is a final landscape plan separate from the
construction documents required.
   A.   Survey Of Existing Conditions: This drawing shall be prepared at the
same scale as the tentative plat of subdivision, the preliminary plan of the
planned unit development or the site plan prepared for the site plan review and
shall show the existing conditions on the site including where applicable the
following items:
      1.   A boundary survey of the site.
      2.   A topographic survey of the site with a contour interval not greater
than one foot (1').
      3.   Existing roads, streets, other rights of way and easements on or
adjoining the site.
      4.   Existing development including all buildings, structures, pavements,
wells, septic systems and existing drainage facilities.
      5.   A tree survey including the items listed below. The developer may
show the tree survey on a separate drawing at the same scale as the drawing of
other existing conditions.
         a.   Mature and young woodlands either mapped at the drip line of the
stand with the dominant species identified or individually showing the
location, size (DBH), and species of all trees greater than three inch (3")
DBH.
         b.   Trees grown for commercial purposes either mapped at the
boundaries of the plantation and showing the size and species or individually
showing the location, size (DBH or caliper) and species.
         c.   Other existing trees greater than three inch (3") DBH showing the
location, size (DBH) and species.
      6.   Other natural features of the site including the items listed below
which are, in certain circumstances, required to be protected under the site
capacity regulations of section
10-5-3 of this code.
         a.   Floodplains.
         b.   Wetlands.
         c.   Steep slopes.
         d.   Lakes and ponds.
         e.   Lake shorelines.
         f.   Pond shorelines.
         g.   Drainageways.
         h.   Soil types. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
   B.   Preliminary Landscape Plan: The preliminary plan is a plan drawn at the
same scale as the tentative plat of subdivision, preliminary development plan
of a planned unit development or the site plan prepared for site plan review
showing the proposed landscape treatment of the site including the following
items where applicable:
      1.   All of the information shown on the survey of existing conditions
regarding those existing conditions which are to be preserved as part of the
landscape plan.
      2.   The proposed improvements to the site including, where applicable,
streets, sidewalks, pedestrianways or trails, buildings or building pads,
parking lots, driveways, drainage and detention facilities, and septic systems.
      3.   Any protected trees to be removed and any replacement trees to be
provided as required by this title 3 .
      4.   Existing and proposed property lines, right of way lines and
easements.
      5.   A preliminary proposal for the landscape treatment of all public
rights of way, public and private open spaces (parks, playgrounds and common
areas), scenic corridors, drainage and detention facilities, and open space
reserved for resource protection purposes under the regulations of the
Wadsworth zoning ordinance 4 , the subdivision control ordinance 5  and chapter
5 of this title.
      6.   A preliminary proposal for the landscape treatment of the required
landscaping in chapter 5 of this title.
      7.   A preliminary tabulation of all natural resource protection areas
showing the existing resource area, the required protection area and the
protection area provided.
      8.   A preliminary tabulation of tree replacement showing trees removed,
replacement trees required and trees provided.
      9.   A preliminary tabulation of all required landscaping in accordance
with the standards of chapter 5 of this title.
      10.   The preliminary layout required for site plan review purposes may
be combined with and show the other features required for site plan review 6 .
(Ord. 2009-803, 12-15-2009)
   C.   Final Landscape Plan (Planned Unit Development Only): The final
landscape plan shall include, where applicable, the following items:
      1.   An overall layout of the project drawn at the same scale as the
final plat of subdivision or the final development plan of a planned unit
development and showing in final form all of the items listed in subsection B
of this section, approved as part of the preliminary plan.
      2.   A planting plan showing all plant materials to be installed as part
of the development.
      3.   A final tabulation of all resource protection areas showing the area
of the existing resource, the required protection area and the protection area
provided.
      4.   A final tabulation of tree replacement showing the number, size
(dbh) and species of trees removed and the number, size (caliper) and species
of replacement trees.
      5.   A plant list showing the number, size (caliper), type and species of
all new plant materials.
      6.   A statement of the guarantee on all plant materials as required by
chapter 8 of this title.
   D.   Construction Documents: The construction documents shall represent all
landscape improvements required by this title or by other agencies, having
jurisdiction and approved by the plan commission as part of the preliminary and
or final landscape plan. The construction documents shall clearly show the work
to be done by the landscape contractor acting either as a prime contractor or
as a subcontractor to the general contractor. Any required landscape
improvements not a part of the landscape contract shall be identified on the
construction documents as "by others" with the "others" clearly identified. The
construction documents shall include the following:
      1.   An overall layout of the project.
      2.   Planting plan.
      3.   Planting details.
      4.   Other construction plans and details, as required.
      5.   Specifications.
      6.   A detailed cost estimate showing quantities, estimated units,
estimated unit cost and costs for all materials used in the project including
installation. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 3. See Title 10 of this Code.
2 4. See Title 11 of this Code.
3 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
4 2. See title 10 of this code.
5 3. See title 11 of this code.
6 4. See section
  10-5-4 of this code.
12-6-4: REVIEW AND APPROVAL - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISIONS:
For subdivisions, the landscape plan shall be prepared, reviewed and approved
in two (2) stages as follows:
   A.   Preliminary Approval:
      1.   The preliminary landscape plan shall consist of a survey of existing
conditions, and preliminary landscape plan.
      2.   The preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted to the plan
commission along with the tentative plat of subdivision.
      3.   The plan commission shall review and recommend approval of the
preliminary landscape plan prior to approving the tentative plan.
      4.   The village planner shall submit a written report to the plan
commission based on the review of the landscape plan and an on site inspection
of the site.
   B.   Construction Documents Approval:
      1.   Based on an approved preliminary landscape plan the developer shall
prepare construction documents for the proper installation of all landscape
materials. This plan shall conform to the specifications for construction
documents.
      2.   The construction documents shall be submitted to the plan
commission, village engineer, and the village planner for review prior to the
approval if the final plat of subdivision and the enactment of a subdivision
agreement between developer and the village.
      3.   The estimated cost of all required landscape improvements shall be
used, in part, to determine the amount of the letter of credit or other
guarantee required of the developer.
      4.   The plan commission shall review and recommend approval of the
construction documents prior to approving the final plat of subdivision. (Ord.
97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-6-5: REVIEW AND APPROVAL - PROCEDURE FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
For all planned unit developments, the landscape plan shall be prepared,
reviewed and approved in two (2) stages as follows:
   A.   Preliminary Approval:
      1.   The preliminary landscape plan shall consist of a survey of existing
conditions and a preliminary landscape plan.
      2.   The preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted to the plan
commission along with the preliminary development plan.
      3.   The plan commission shall review the preliminary landscape plan and
recommend approval by the village board. Approval of the preliminary plan may
be conditioned on specified changes, additions or deletions to the preliminary
landscape plan as submitted. The preliminary development plan shall not be
approved until the preliminary landscape plan has been approved.
      4.   The village planner shall submit a written report to the plan
commission based on the review of the landscape plan and an on site inspection
of the site.
   B.   Construction Documents Approval:
      1.   Based on an approved preliminary landscape plan, the developer shall
prepare construction documents for the proper installation of all landscape
materials. This plan shall conform to the specifications for construction
documents.
      2.   The construction documents shall be submitted to the plan
commission, village engineer, and village planner for review prior to the
approval of the final development plan, the final plat of subdivision and the
enactment of a subdivision agreement between the developer and the village.
      3.   The estimated cost of all required landscape improvements shall be
used, in part, to determine the amount of the letter of credit or other
guarantee required of the developer.
      4.   The plan commission shall review and recommend approval of the
construction documents prior to approving the final plat of subdivision. (Ord.
2009-803, 12-15-2009)
12-6-6: PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW:
The Wadsworth zoning ordinance 1  provides that certain types of developments
shall only be approved following site plan review 2 . The landscape plan for
purposes of site plan review shall be prepared in two (2) stages as follows:
   A.   Preliminary Landscape Plan:
      1.   The preliminary landscape plan shall consist of a survey of existing
conditions and a preliminary landscape plan. The developer may, if he so
chooses, combine the survey of existing conditions and the preliminary layout
with additional information required for site plan review in one document.
      2.   The preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted to the village
engineer, village planner and the plan commission at least thirty (30) days
prior to any public hearing for a conditional use requiring site plan review.
      3.   The plan commission shall review and recommend approval of the
preliminary landscape plan prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit
for any conditional use requiring site plan review and the approved preliminary
landscape plan shall become a part of the conditions of approval of conditional
use.
      4.   For uses requiring site plan review which are not conditional uses,
the plan commission shall recommend approval of the preliminary landscape plan
prior to the application for a building permit and the submission of
construction documents.
   B.   Construction Documents:
      1.   Based on an approved preliminary plan, the developer shall prepare
construction documents for the proper installation of all landscape materials
required by this title or by other governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
The construction documents shall conform to the specifications for construction
documents in this chapter.
      2.   The construction documents shall be submitted to the village
engineer, village planner, and the plan commission and shall be recommended for
approval by all prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      3.   The village planner shall provide a written review of the plans and
documents prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
2 2. See section
  10-5-4 of this code.
CHAPTER 7
PLANT MATERIAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Plant Materials
12-7-2: Planting Standards
12-7-3: Restricted Trees
12-7-4: Recommended Trees
12-7-5: Recommended Deciduous Shrubs
12-7-6: Recommended Evergreens
12-7-1: PLANT MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards: All plant material shall conform to the standards adopted by
the American Association of Nurserymen and/or the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
current edition.
   B.   Source: All plant materials shall be grown nursery stock and from a
site no further than one subzone from project site except that existing plants
from the project site may be substituted for equal or smaller required new
materials.
   C.   Size And Measurement: All measurements shall conform to the minimum
standards set forth in the current edition of the American Standards For
Nursery Stock as published by the American Association of Nurserymen. (Ord. 97-
473, 4-1-1997)
12-7-2: PLANTING STANDARDS:
   A.   Tree And Shrub Installation: The diameter of the pits for trees shall
be at least twelve inches (12") and for shrubs shall be at least six inches
(6") greater than the diameter of the ball. The depth of the plant pits shall
be the same depth as the ball. All plants shall be planted in a soil mixture
which shall be thoroughly watered and tamped as backfilling progresses.
Planting soil shall be prepared by combining three (3) parts topsoil with one
part peat. This is a general requirement, specific site and soil conditions may
require site-specific treatment including, but not limited to, under drainage,
use of native soil, and tree-spade transplanting. The transplanting of
materials found on the site shall follow good horticultural practice.
   B.   Mulching: Within three (3) days after planting, plants shall be mulched
with a minimum three inches (3") of shredded bark mulch or peat with a shallow
water basin around the planting.
   C.   Wrapping: All deciduous canopy trees will be wrapped with a commercial
tree wrap.
   D.   Pruning: Prune all plant materials to preserve the natural character of
the plant. Pruning shall be limited to the minimum necessary to remove injured
or broken branches and to compensate for the loss of roots during
transplanting, but never to exceed one-third (1/3) of the branching structure.
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-7-3: RESTRICTED TREES:
The following list of trees will not be allowed to be planted as street trees
in the dedicated rights of way, within ten feet (10') of a right of way or
within sewer and water utility easements where tree roots will damage sewer and
water lines:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name        Common Name
                      
Populus - All species Aspen, Cottonwood and Poplar, etc.
Robinia pseudo-accia  Black Locust
Acer negunda          Box Elder
Catalpa bignoides     Catalpa
Ulmus parvifolia      Siberian Elm
                      
All species           Evergreen/Conifers
All species           Fruit trees
Maclura pomifera      Osage Orange
Acer saccharinum      Silver Maple
Ailanthus altesma     Tree of Heaven
Salix biloba          Willow
 
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-7-4: RECOMMENDED TREES:
The following list of trees are recommended based on the Chicago Horticultural
Society - Chicago Botanic Garden, best deciduous trees for Chicago, and the
availability from local nurseries. Recommended street trees are shown with an
asterisk (*).
Botanical Name        Common Name
                      
Populus - All species Aspen, Cottonwood and Poplar, etc.
Robinia pseudo-accia  Black Locust
Acer negunda          Box Elder
Catalpa bignoides     Catalpa
Ulmus parvifolia      Siberian Elm
                      
All species           Evergreen/Conifers
All species           Fruit trees
Maclura pomifera      Osage Orange
Acer saccharinum      Silver Maple
Ailanthus altesma     Tree of Heaven
Salix biloba          Willow
 
Partial list of crab apple with good disease resistance and/or good form:
Adams, Ames White, baccata "jackii", Beverly, centennial, floribunda, Liset,
Mary Potter, sargentii, snowdrift, and white angel.
Crab apples that should not be planted because of disease: Almey, amoldiana,
Eleyi, flame, goldfinch, Hopa, ionsis, Irene, jubilee, Leslie, pink perfection,
scheideckeri, snowcloud, Strathmore, vanguard.
Botanical Name                  Common Name
                              
Acer ginnala amur              Maple
Acer griseum                   Paperbark maple
Acer platanoides               *Norway maple
Acer rubrum                    *Red maple
Acer saccharum                 *Sugar maple
Acer triflorum                 *Three-flower maple
Aesculus x carnea              Red horse chestnut
Alnus glutinosa                Common alder
Amelanchier x grandiflora      Apple serviceberry
Betula nigra                   River birch
Betula platyphylla             Whitespire birch
Japonica "whitespire"           
Carpinus caroliniana           *American hornbeam
Celtis occidentalis            *Common hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonicum       Katsura tree
Cercis canadensis              Eastern redbud
Cladrastis lutea               American yellowwood
Cornus alternifolia            Pagoda dogwood
Cornus mas                     Cornelian cherry dogwood
Corylus colurna                Turkish filbert
Crataegus crus-galli           Cockspur hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum          Washington hawthorn
Crataegus viridis              Green hawthorn
Fagus sylvatica                European beech
Ginkgo biloba                  *Ginkgo or maidenhair tree
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis  *Thornless honey locust
Gymnocladus dioicus            Kentucky coffeetree
Koelreuteria paniculata        Golden rain tree
Larix decidua                  European larch
Liriodendron tulipifera        *Tulip tree
Magnolia stellata              Star magnolia
Magnolia x loebneri            Loebner magnolia
Magnolia x soulangiana         Saucer magnolia
Malus spp.                     Crab apples
 
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997; amd. Ord. 2009-803, 12-15-2009)
12-7-5: RECOMMENDED DECIDUOUS SHRUBS:
The following list of deciduous shrubs are recommended based on the Chicago
Horticultural Society - Chicago Botanic Garden, best deciduous shrubs for
Chicago, and the availability from local nurseries:
Botanical Name                   Common Name
                                 
Nyssa sylvatica                  Black tupelo or sourgum
Ostrya virginiana phellodendron  *Hop hornbeam or ironwood amur cork tree
Prunus sargentii                 Sargent cherry
Prunus virginiana                Schubert cherry
Pyrus calleryana                 Callery pear
Quercus alba                     White oak
Quercus imbricaria               Shingle oak
Quercus macrocarpa               *Burr oak
Quercus rubra                    Red oak
Rhus typhina                     Staghorn sumac
Sophora japonica                 Japanese pagodatree or scholartree
Syringa reticulata               Japanese tree lilac
Taxodium distichum               Bald cypress
Tilia cordata                    *Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa                  *Silver linden
Ulmus parvifolia                 *Chinese elm
 
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-7-6: RECOMMENDED EVERGREENS:
The following list of evergreens are recommended based on the Chicago
Horticultural Society - Chicago Botanical Garden, Best Evergreens for the
Chicago Area, and the availability from local nurseries:
Botanical Name                 Common Name
                               
Abies concolor                 White Fir
Abies holophylla               Needle Fir
Abies homolepis                Nikko Fir
Abies koreana                  Korean Fir
Abies lasiocarpa               Alpine Fir
Abies normanniana              Normann Fir
Chamaecyparis pisifera         Sawara False Cypress
filifera threadleaf            False Cypress
Armstrongii                    Armstrong Juniper
Blue point                     Blue Point Juniper
Columnaris glauca              Blue Columnar Chinese
Fairview                       Fairview Chinese Juniper
Hetzii columnaris              Hetz Columnar Juniper
Iowa                           Chinese Juniper
Keterleeri                     Keterleer Chinese Juniper
Maneyi                         Maney Chinese Juniper
Mint julep                     Mint Julep Juniper
Old gold                       Old Gold Juniper
Pfitzeriana kallay             Kallay Pfitzer Juniper
var. sargentii                 Sargent Juniper
var. sargentii glauca          Blue Sargent Juniper
Wintergreen                    Wintergreen Juniper
Juniperus communis repanda     Creeping Juniper
Bar harbor                     Bar Harbor Juniper
Blue chip                      Blue Chip Juniper
Dunvegan blue                  Dunvegan Blue Juniper
Livida                         Livida Juniper
Plumosa compacta               Tures Strain Andorra
Wiltonii                       Blue Rap Juniper
Wisconsin                      Wisconsin Juniper
Burkii                         Burk Red Cedar
Canaertii                      Canaert Red Cedar
Glauca                         Blue Red Cedar
Grey owl                       Grey Owl Red Cedar
Hillii                         Hill's Red Cedar
Kosteri                        Kostri Red Cedar
Silver spreader                Silver Spreader Red Cedar
Picea abies                    Norway Spruce
Picea abies nidiformis         Bird's Nest Spruce
Glauca                         Colorado Blue Spruce
Hoopsli                        Hoopsii
Moerheimli                     Moer Thompsen Spruce
Pinus cembra                   Swiss Stone Pine
Pinus densiflora umbraculifera Tanyosho Pine
Pinus flexilis                 Lumber Pine
Pinus koraiensis               Korean Pine
Pinus mugo var. mugo           Dwarf Mugho Pine
Pinus parviflora               Japanese White Pine
Pinus strobus                  Eastern White Pine
Pinus wallichiana              Himalayan Pine
Pseudotsuga menziesi           Douglas Fir
Taxus cuspidata                Japanese Yew
Taxus cuspidata                Nana Dwarf Japanese Yew
Taxus cuspidata capitata       Japanese Yew
Berrybilli                     Berryhill Yew
Dark green spreader            Dark Green Spreading Yew
Densiformis                    Dense Yew
Hatfieldii                     Hatfield Yew
Hicksii                        Hicks Yew
Nigra                          Nigra
Tauntonli                      Tauntonii
Danica                         Danica
Holmstrup                      Holmstrup
Little gem                     Little Gem
Nigra                          Nigra
Techny                         Techny
Wareana                        Siberian
Woodwardii                     Woodward
Thuja plicata                  Giant Arborviate
Tsuga canadenis                Canadian Hemlock
Sunnyside                      Sunnyside Box
Winter beauty                  Winter Beauty Box
Wintergreen                    Wintergreen Box
Green gem                      Green Gem Box
Green mountain                 Green Mountain Box
Green velvet                   Green Velvet Box
 
(Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
CHAPTER 8
MAINTENANCE AND GUARANTEES
SECTION:
12-8-1: Maintenance
12-8-2: Guarantees
12-8-1: MAINTENANCE:
For any subdivision, planned unit development or other development for which
landscaping is required under this Title, the owner or developer is encouraged
to prepare and implement a comprehensive landscape maintenance program. Such
program should include, as a minimum, insect and disease control in conformance
with State of Illinois licensing requirements, pruning, fertilization, weed
control and watering.
   A.   Natural Resource Protection Areas:
      1.   During construction and during the time that the developer continues
to own a lot in a subdivision or planned unit development upon which has been
placed a conservation easement for the purpose of protecting natural resources,
it shall be the developer's responsibility to maintain such conservation
easement and to keep the area free of all buildings, equipment, storage areas
and other incursions and activities that threaten the integrity of the
protected resource.
      2.   Once a lot has been sold and after expiration of the required period
for guarantees, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of property upon
which a conservation easement has been placed for the purpose of protecting
natural resources to maintain such conservation easement and to keep the area
free of all buildings, storage areas, and other incursions and activities that
threaten the integrity of the protected resource.
   B.   Scenic Corridors: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property upon which a scenic corridor is located to ensure that the scenic
corridor is maintained in conformance to the requirements of the Wadsworth
Zoning Ordinance 1  and the approved landscape plan where one exists and to
keep the area free of all buildings, unapproved landscape features, signs and
fences.
   C.   Other Restrictions: Nothing herein shall prevent the establishment and
enforcement by covenant or by the action of the governing body of a homeowners
association of higher standards of maintenance in accordance with the approved
landscape plan. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
12-8-2: GUARANTEES:
   A.   Subdivisions And Planned Unit Developments: Landscape improvements
shall be subject to the same guarantees as other improvements under the
Subdivision Control Ordinance 1 . Such guarantees shall remain the
responsibility of the developer throughout the guarantee period. Further, it
shall be the developer's responsibility to remove and replace dead or diseased
plant materials, including any plant materials which fail to exhibit healthy,
vigorous growth compared to other materials in the vicinity. This
responsibility shall extend throughout the guarantee period.
   B.   Site Development Projects: The owner or developer shall guarantee all
materials for a period of one year from the date of the issuance of an
occupancy permit or other required approval by the Village. In no case shall
the guarantee period be less than one year from the date of the installation of
the plant materials.
   C.   Transplanted Materials: The owner or developer shall guarantee all
materials transplanted from on-site locations for the same period required for
nursery grown materials. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
CHAPTER 9
EXCEPTIONS AND VARIATIONS
SECTION:
12-9-1: Exceptions
12-9-2: Variations
12-9-1: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall restrict any public utility in the lawful operation and
maintenance of its distribution and collection facilities including aboveground
and buried wires and cables and piping, transmission or broadcast facilities as
provided by law. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-9-2: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Standards: The Village Board may vary the terms and regulations of this
Title where it finds:
      1.   The strict enforcement of this Title will cause hardship or
practical difficulty for the owner.
      2.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or general welfare or injurious to other property or improvement
in the immediate vicinity.
      3.   The variation will be the least deviation from the requirements of
this Title which will mitigate the hardship or practical difficulty which gives
basis to the variation.
      4.   The variation when granted will not also vary the provisions of
either the Wadsworth Subdivision Control Ordinance 1  or the Wadsworth Zoning
Ordinance 2 .
   B.   Procedures: All variation shall be requested in writing and shall be
acted upon by the Village Board. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 10 of this Code.
CHAPTER 10
PENALTIES
SECTION:
12-10-1: Fine
12-10-2: Replacement Of Trees
12-10-1: FINE:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. A separate offense
shall be deemed to occur for each day a violation occurs or continues. Further,
a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each tree that is damaged,
removed, cut or otherwise assaulted without a permit. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
12-10-2: REPLACEMENT OF TREES:
In addition to the penalty prescribed in Section
12-10-1 of this Chapter, any trees which were damaged or removed in
contravention of this Title shall be replaced with like species in accordance
with the replacement formulas contained herein by the person convicted of
violating this Title. (Ord. 97-473, 4-1-1997)
TITLE 13
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Miscellaneous Fees Enumerated   1
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS FEES ENUMERATED
SECTION:
13-1-1: Fee Schedule
13-1-1: FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fee schedule shall apply for the specified items. In the event of
a conflict between any amount set forth herein and any other village code
section or village ordinance the larger amount shall apply.
   MISCELLANEOUS FEES SCHEDULE
Item Fee Professional Fee Deposit Deposit
Item                                        Fee          Professional  Deposit
                                                         Fee Deposit
Annexation:
   Annexation fee                        $ 100.00     $2,500.00      
Bonds:                                                                
   Road and site bond                    3,000.00                   
Miscellaneous village items:                                          
   Vehicle sticker                       3.00                       
   Vehicle sticker, senior citizen 65 or 1.00                       
older
   Zoning map                            10.00                      
Planned unit development (PUD):                                       
                                                         $5,000.00 or
                                                         such lesser
   PUD escrow                                        amount as      
                                                         approved by
                                                         village board
                                            $100.00 plus
   PUD fee                               $50.00 per                 
                                            acre
Property consolidation:                                               
   Consolidation escrow                              $300.00        
   Consolidation fee                     $100.00                    
Rentals:                                                              
   Campanella Field1:                                              
 League game, resident                     50.00        0.00          0.00
 League game, nonresident                  75.00        0.00          0.00
 League practice, resident                 25.00        0.00          0.00
 League practice, nonresident              50.00        0.00          0.00
 Scheduled nonleague game/practice,        0.00         n/a           n/a
  resident
 Scheduled nonleague game/practice,        25.00        n/a           n/a
  nonresident
   Village hall                          50.00                      
   Wadsworth Community Park:                                       
 Large shelter, resident                   200.00                     
 Large shelter, nonresident                400.00                     
 Small shelter, resident                   25.00        n/a           100.00
 Small shelter, nonresident                50.00        n/a           100.00
Subdivision:                                                          
                                                         $5,000.00 or
                                                         such lesser
   Subdivision escrow                                amount as      
                                                         approved by
                                                         village board
                                            $100.00 plus
   Subdivision fee                       $50.00 per                 
                                            acre
Temporary use permits (see section          $50.00                     
10-5-12 of this code)
Zoning:                                                               
   Conditional use                       100.00       $1,500.00      
   Rezoning                              250.00       1,500.00       
   Text amendment                        250.00       1,500.00       
   Variance2                             750.00       0.00           
Zoning certificate (see section             50.00                      
10-3-1 of this code)
 
Note:
    1.    Use of Campanella Field limited to 3 hours for scheduled events.
    2.     A Professional Fee Deposit may be required if deemed necessary by
the Zoning Officer based on the complexity and scope of the variance
application. (Ord. 2000-557, 10-3-2000; amd. Ord. 2004-663, 8-3-2004; Ord.
2006-701, 8-1-2006; Ord. 2010-811, 4-20-2010; Ord. 2015-947, 4-8-2015; Ord.
2016-983, 3-16-2016; Ord. 2019-1075, 10-15-2019; Ord. 2020-1082, 3-16-2020;
Ord. 2023-1142, 11-21-2023; Ord. 2024-1155, 8-20-2024)
 
