CITY CODE
of
WARRENVILLE, ILLINOIS
1983
Code current through:
Ord. O2025-54, passed November 3, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Warrenville, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance O2025-54, passed November 3, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. O2025 - 55
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WARRENVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
THE WARRENVILLE CITY CODE REGARDING SHORT-TERM RENTALS
 
   WHEREAS, the City is a home rule municipal corporation in accordance with
Article VII, Section 6(a) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970;
and
   WHEREAS, the rental of dwelling units to transient guests for less than 30
consecutive dates ( “Short-Term Rental” ) has the potential to raise public
health and safety concerns, negatively impact neighborhood cohesion, and
decrease the availability of housing in the City; and
   WHEREAS, Short-Term Rentals also provide additional short-term
accommodations within the City and a potential additional income source to
residential property owners; and
   WHEREAS, in order to balance the potentially negative impacts of Short-Term
Rentals with their potentially positive attributes, the City has determined
that is necessary and appropriate to regulate Short-Term Rentals; and
   WHEREAS, the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance, as amended ( “Zoning
Ordinance” ), is codified as Title 10 of the Warrenville City Code; and
WHEREAS, Chapter 13 of the Zoning Ordinance sets forth definitions of terms
used in the Zoning Ordinance ( “Chapter 13” ); and
WHEREAS, Table 3A of the Zoning Ordinance sets forth regulations regarding
permitted and special uses in all zoning districts ( “Table 3A” ); and
WHEREAS, Title 3 of the Warrenville City Code ( “City Code” ) sets forth
licensing regulations pertaining to certain business operations conducted
within the City ( “Licensing Regulations” ); and
WHEREAS, Section 3-1-5 of the City Code imposes a home rule hotel operator’s
tax; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the following sections of the Zoning
Ordinance to include regulations to allow short-term rentals subject to certain
conditions and restrictions: (i) Chapter 13 to include definitions for “short
term rental”; and (ii) Table 3A to allow short-term rentals in residential
districts subject to the licensing provisions set forth in Title 3 of the City
Code (collectively, the “Text Amendments” ); and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the following sections of the City Code to
further regulate Short-Term Rentals: (i) Title 3 of the City Code to add a new
Chapter 31 to require a license in order to operate a short-term rental within
the City and impose additional regulations intended to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and the occupants of the short-term rental
and to mitigate the impacts of short-term rentals on the surrounding
neighborhood; (ii) Section 3-1-5 of the City Code to update and clarify the
Hotel Tax to applies to the facilitators of short-term rental bookings, such as
Airbnb, and to the rental of Short-Term Rentals; and (iii) Section 3-10-1 to
clarify that home-based businesses and home occupations must obtain business
registrations from the City (collectively, the “City Code Amendments” ); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to notice duly published in the Daily Herald on October 8,
2025, the Plan Commission held a public hearing on October 23, 2025 to consider
the Text Amendments; and
 
WHEREAS, on October 23, 2025, after considering all of the testimony and
evidence presented at the public hearing, the Plan Commission recommended that
the City Council approve the Text Amendments; and
   WHEREAS, the Mayor and the City Council have considered the recommendations
of the Plan Commission and all of the materials, facts, and circumstances
relating to the Text Amendments and the City Code Amendments, and find that it
is in the best interest of the City and the public to approve the Text
Amendments and City Code Amendments and amend the Zoning Ordinance and City
Code in the manner provided in this Ordinance;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF WARRENVILLE,
DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1:   Recitals.  The recitals listed above are incorporated in this
Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Ordinance.
SECTION 2:   Amendment to Section 13. Section 13 of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to insert the following definitions in alphabetical order:
 
“13. DEFINITIONS
 
 
*         *      *
 
SHORT-TERM RENTAL:   A dwelling unit or portion of a dwelling unit that is
available for rent by transient guests for a period shorter than 30 consecutive
days. The term “short-term rental” does not include boarding, lodging, or
rooming houses, nursing homes, motels, hotels, bed and breakfast, or tourist
homes, as such terms are defined in this Section 13; or (ii) the rental of a
dwelling unit pursuant to a rental agreement executed in conjunction with a
contract to sell the dwelling unit.
 
*         *      *”
 
SECTION 3:   Amendments to Table 3A. Table 3A of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby
amended as follows:
 
“Table 3A: Permitted and Special Uses in All Zoning Districts
 
*         *      *
 
***** Short-term rentals are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-
6 districts only pursuant to a short term rental license required by and
compliance with the additional regulations set forth in Title 3, Chapter 31 of
this Code.
*      *      *
 
 
                       Most Restrictive (Lowest   Most Restrictive (Lowest
Land Use               Numbered) Districts Use is Numbered) Districts Use is a
                       a Permitted Use In         Special Use In
* * *                  * * *                      * * *
Short-term Rental***** R1                         -
* * *                  * * *                      * * *”
 
 
SECTION 4:   Amendments to Section 3-10-1. Section 3-10-1, titled “Business
Registration and Licenses Required,” of Chapter 10, titled “Business
Registration and Licenses,” of Title 3, titled “Business Regulations,” of the
City Code is hereby amended as follows:
 
“3-10-1: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSES REQUIRED:
 
    A.   It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct any business or
establishment or to do business or engage in any activity or occupation,
including, without limitation, home-based businesses and home occupations as
defined in Section 10.A.2.A of the Zoning Ordinance in the City without having
first obtained a business registration (and, as applicable, a separate license
for certain businesses as required by this Title 3), unless Municipal
registration or licensure of the business has been preempted by State law.
 
    B.   Any person shall be subject to the requirement for a business
registration (and, as applicable, a separate license) if, by himself or through
an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the
business or occupation, solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the
City.”
 
SECTION 5:   Amendments to add Title 3, Chapter 31. Title 3, titled “Business
Regulations,” of the City Code is hereby amended to add a new Chapter 31,
titled “Short-Term Rentals,” as set forth on Exhibit A , attached to and made a
part of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 6:   Amendments to Section 3-1-5.  Section 3-1-5, titled “Hotel
Operator’s Tax,” of Chapter 1, titled “Municipal Occupation Taxes,” of Title 3,
titled “Business Regulations,” is hereby amended as follows:
 
“3-1-5: HOTEL OPERATOR'S TAX:
    A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall be defined as hereinafter set forth:
FACILITATOR: Any person or entity that provides a means through which a person
may book a room in a hotel, including a short-term rental, regardless of
whether payment is transferred through or processed by the facilitator.
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, kept,
used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where
lodging, apartments, suites, or other sleeping accommodations are offered for
consideration to guests, including, without limitation, accommodations offered
by online travel companies and/or facilitators. For the purposes of this
Section 5, hotel or motel includes inns, motels, hotels, lodging houses, or
short-term rentals, or any portions thereof.
ONLINE TRAVEL COMPANY: A person or entity that books, reserves, or rents hotel
or motel rooms and makes other travel arrangements for consumers via the
internet or other digital means. Online travel companies are considered
facilitators, as defined in this section.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any room, living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations , or other lodging accommodation within a hotel and containing
facilities for sleeping . (Ord. 3036, 10-3-2016; amd. Ord. O2019-07, 3-4-2019)
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: A dwelling unit, or portion thereof, used for overnight
accommodation that is available for rent by transient guests for a period
shorter than 30 consecutive days. For the purposes of this chapter 3-1-5 only,
a short-term rental unit is a room.
 
    B.   Tax Imposed; Administration:
       1.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons, including
facilitators, engaged in or having sufficient proprietary interest so as to
entitle the person to a portion of the gross receipts from the business of
renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel in the City, including online
travel companies facilitators, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the monies,
revenues or any other consideration received from such renting, leasing or
letting activities, excluding, however, from the rental income calculation the
proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that
hotel.
       2.   Rules And Regulations: The City Finance Director may promulgate
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this section
concerning the enforcement and application of this section. The terms "rules"
and "regulations" include, but are not limited to, a case by case determination
as to whether or not the tax imposed by this section applies.
       3.   Books And Records: Every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, including online travel companies and
facilitators, shall keep accurate books and records of its business activity in
the City. The books and records shall include original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given
rise, to any tax liability under this section.
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, including online travel companies  and
facilitators , to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the
City Finance Director, or his/her authorized representative, shall at all times
have full access for inspection and auditing, which records shall include a
daily sheet showing: a) the number of hotel or motel rooms rented in the City
during the twenty four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same
hotel or motel room where such shall occur; and b) the actual hotel or motel
monies, revenues or any other consideration collected with respect to rental
activities for the date in question.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
city's finance director or his/her authorized representative in the discharge
of his/her duties in the performance of this section.
       4.   Transmittal Of Tax Revenue:
          a.   The person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel within the city, including online travel companies and
facilitators, shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect
to each hotel and motel room during each month commencing on and including the
first day of each month, on forms prescribed by the city finance director. The
returns shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar
month.
          b.   At the time of filing said tax returns, the person engaged in
the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city
including online travel companies and facilitators, shall pay to the city
finance director all taxes due for the period to which the tax returns apply.
Any payment made by check which is returned to the city because of insufficient
funds may result in the director requiring that future payments be made by
cashier's check or money order.
          c.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per thirty (30) day period, or
portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
       5.   Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, the city attorney shall, upon the request of the city finance
director, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3036,
10-3-2016)
    C.   Reimbursement: Persons subject to this tax may reimburse themselves
for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with state tax imposed under "the hotel operator's occupation tax act"
1 .
    D.   Limitation On Authority: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize the city to impose a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any
business which under the constitution of the United States may not be made the
subject of taxation by this state. (Ord. 859, 9-2-1986)
*      *      *”
SECTION 7:   Effective Date.  This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
10 days following its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form in
the manner required by law.
 
 
 
PASSED THIS _17th _ day of __November__, 2025.
 
 
APPROVED THIS _17th __ day of __November__, 2025.
 
 
AYES:__7_ NAYS:__0__ ABSENT:__1___ ABSTAIN:__0__
   
 
         
               ___/s/ Andrew Johnson_________________
               MAYOR
ATTEST:
 
___/s/ Julie Clark____________
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
TITLE 3
CHAPTER 31
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
 
 
3-31-1:   DEFINITIONS:
 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply unless
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
 
DWELLING UNIT – See definition provided in the Warrenville Zoning Ordinance,
Title 10, Chapter 13 of this Code.
 
SHORT-TERM RENTAL - See definition provided in the Warrenville Zoning
Ordinance, Title 10, Chapter 13 of this Code.
 
3-31-2: RESERVED.
3-31-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A.   License Required: No person may maintain or conduct the business of
operating a short-term rental in the City without having a valid license issued
by the City.
 
B.   License Term: A short-term rental license will be valid for an annual
period commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of that same
year, unless terminated or revoked.
C.   Non-Transferable: The license is not transferable to another person or
location, even if the other person intends to operate the same short-term
rental at the location used by the licensee.
D.   License Applicant: Only the owner of the dwelling proposed to be used as a
short-term rental may apply for and receive a license.
E.   License Application: An application for a short-term rental license must
include the following:
1.   The full name and contact information of the applicant;
2.   The full name and contact information of the manager who will conduct the
day-to-day business of the short-term rental, including, without limitation,
interacting with guests and arranging for maintenance and cleaning, if
different than the owner;
3.   The location and proof of ownership of the short-term rental unit;
4.   The full name and valid contact information for a person or company who
will serve as an emergency 24-hour contact. The 24-hour emergency contact must
be able to respond, or send a representative to respond, to the short-term
rental unit within 15 minutes when contacted by the City or other emergency
responders;
5.   A floor plan noting all emergency exits, the number of bedrooms, and the
location and number of parking spaces;
6.   If the proposed short-term rental is subject to a home owners association
or condominium association, a letter from the board of the association
consenting to the location and operation of the short-term rental;
7.   Payment of the nonrefundable annual license fee in the amount set forth in
Annual Fee Ordinance.
E.   Inspection Required: Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Code
Enforcement Officer, or their designee, will conduct a life safety inspection
of the proposed short-term rental. Any life safety violations must be brought
into compliance before a license will be issued.
3-31-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
 
A.   Application Information to Remain Current: If any information provided in
the license application has changed, the licensee must notify the City in
writing within 14 days, provided, however, that the emergency contact
information must be updated within 24 hours.
 
B.   Compliance; Inspection Required:   Short-term rentals must comply with all
applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, the City Zoning
Ordinance, City Code (including building, electrical, plumbing, and property
maintenance regulations), and the City Fire Code. Short-term rentals are
subject to inspection by the City Code Enforcement Officer, or their designee,
and the Warrenville Fire Protection District throughout the license period.
 
C.   Gatherings Prohibited: A short-term rental must be used for lodging
purposes only, and may not be used for parties, weddings, conferences,
meetings, or other events, regardless of the number of attendees.
D.   Insurance: An insurance policy for the short-term rental that covers the
short-term rental use of the property in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and a minimum amount of $2,000,000 aggregate is required. The policy
must include a provision requiring 30 days’ advance notice to the City prior to
cancellation or lapse of the policy. The licensee must maintain the insurance
required under this section in full force and effect for the duration of the
license period for each short-term rental location. This requirement cannot be
satisfied by insurance coverage provided by a short-term rental platform,
including without limitation, Airbnb, VRBO, and others. A Certificate of
Insurance must be provided as part of the license application.
E.   Guest Log: The licensee must keep a log of all renters’ names, permanent
addresses, phone numbers, and the dates for each short-term rental booking
period. Upon request, the licensee must provide a copy of this log to the City
for inspection.
F.   Maximum Occupancy: The maximum number of occupants allowed per night will
be calculated based on the number of bedrooms in the short-term rental unit. No
more than two occupants are allowed per bedroom and no non-bedrooms (e.g.
living rooms) may be used in the calculation of maximum occupancy regardless of
sleeping accommodations provided in such rooms. No short-term rental may be
occupied at any time by a number of persons in excess of the maximum permitted
occupancy limit as set forth in this Code. Occupancy limits must be
conspicuously posted near the entrance of all short-term rental.
G.   Display of License: A copy of the short-term rental license must be
displayed in a visible location inside the short-term rental. The license
number and issuance date must be listed on every listing advertising the rental
of the short-term rental.
H.   Minimum Stay: A short-term rental must be rented for a minimum of one
night.
I.   Maximum Number of Short-term Rentals Per Zoning Lot: Only one short-term
rental is allowed per zoning lot.
J.   Maximum Number of Licenses Per Person: A person may hold a maximum of two
short-term rental licenses at one time.
K.   Parking: all vehicles associated with the short-term rental must be parked
on the same zoning lot in off-street parking spaces that comply with the off-
street parking regulations set forth in Title 10, Chapter 5 of this Code.
L.   Nuisance Prohibited: A short-term rental unit may not produce excessive
noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference
detectable to normal sensory perception in accordance with the zoning ordinance
performance standards set forth in Title 10, Section 9 of this Code.
M.   Exterior appearance: A short-term rental unit may not have any exterior
alterations or additions, including signs, that identify or advertise the
short-term rental as a short-term rental.
 
3-31-4:TAX IMPOSED.
 
All transactions for short-term rental units will be subject to the Hotel
Operator’s Tax imposed pursuant to Section 3-1-5 of this Code and must comply
with all requirements therein.
 
3-31-5: ISSUANCE, DENIAL, SUSPENSION, RENEWAL, AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
 
A.   No person whose license has been revoked may apply for another short-term
rental license for any location within the City for a period of one year
following the date of the revocation.
 
B.   The renewal of a license shall follow the same provisions required for the
issuance of a license under this chapter.
 
C.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, the provisions of Article 3,
Chapter 10 of this Code shall apply to short-term rental applications,
licensees, and licenses, including, without limitation, license issuance,
renewal, denial, suspension or revocation.
 
D.   A short-term rental license may be suspended or revoked upon the discovery
by the City Code Enforcement Official of life safety violations on the short-
term rental property or inside the short-term rental.
3-31-6: RESERVED.
 
3-31-7: RESERVED.
 
3-31-8: PENALTY:
 
In addition to the suspension or revocation of any business license granted
pursuant to this Chapter, any person (including, without limitation, the owner
and the manager of the short-term rental) who violates or who intentionally or
knowingly permits the violation of any section of this chapter may be subject
to the general penalty set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code and in the
Annual Fee Ordinance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. O2025 - 57
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WARRENVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE AND
THE WARRENVILLE CITY CODE REGARDING PUBLIC ART MURALS
 
   WHEREAS, the City is a home rule municipal corporation in accordance with
Article VII, Section 6(a) of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970;
and
   WHEREAS, murals visible from the public right-of-way can enhance the
character and aesthetics of public spaces as well as embody walls with history,
storytelling, and placemaking that distinguish the City from other communities;
and
   WHEREAS, the City desires to allow the installation of public art murals
within the City pursuant to reasonable conditions and restrictions; and
   WHEREAS, the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance, as amended ( “Zoning
Ordinance” ), is codified as Title 10 of the Warrenville City Code; and
WHEREAS, Chapter 13 of the Zoning Ordinance sets forth definitions of terms
used in the Zoning Ordinance ( “Chapter 13” ); and
WHEREAS, Table 3A of the Zoning Ordinance sets forth regulations regarding
permitted and special uses in all zoning districts ( “Table 3A” ); and
WHEREAS, Title 8 of the Warrenville City Code ( “City Code” ) sets forth
regulations related to buildings and construction within the City ( “Building
Regulations” ); and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the following sections of the Zoning
Ordinance to include regulations to allow short-term rentals subject to certain
conditions and restrictions: (i) Chapter 13 to include definitions for “public
art murals”; and (ii) Table 3A to allow public art murals, subject to the
additional regulations set forth in Title 8 of the City Code (collectively, the
“Text Amendments” ); and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the Building Regulations to add a new
Chapter 22 to require a public art mural permit, approved by the City Council,
prior to installing a public art mural and impose additional regulations to
ensure the public art murals enhance rather than detract from the appearance
and character of public spaces (collectively, the “City Code Amendments” ); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to notice duly published in the Daily Herald on October 8,
2025, the Plan Commission held a public hearing on October 23, 2025 to consider
the Text Amendments; and
 
WHEREAS, on October 23, 2025, after considering all of the testimony and
evidence presented at the public hearing, the Plan Commission recommended that
the City Council approve the Text Amendments; and
   WHEREAS, the Mayor and the City Council have considered the recommendations
of the Plan Commission and all of the materials, facts, and circumstances
relating to the Text Amendments and the City Code Amendments, and find that it
is in the best interest of the City and the public to approve the Text
Amendments and City Code Amendments and amend the Zoning Ordinance and City
Code in the manner provided in this Ordinance;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF WARRENVILLE,
DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1:   Recitals.  The recitals listed above are incorporated in this
Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Ordinance.
SECTION 2:   Amendment to Section 13. Section 13 of the Zoning Ordinance is
hereby amended to insert the following definitions in alphabetical order:
 
“13. DEFINITIONS
 
 
*         *      *
 
PUBLIC ART MURAL:   A large painting or other work of visual art professionally
applied directly on the side exterior wall of a building that (i) is visible
from a public right-of-way or other public property; (ii) does not contain any
hidden or overt text, logos, symbols, slogans or trademarks; and (iii) does not
identify or advertise a business, product, service, event, institution,
organization, location, or individual. A public art mural is not a sign, as
defined in Section 8-22-9 of the City Code.
 
*         *      *”
 
SECTION 3:   Amendments to Table 3A. Table 3A of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby
amended as follows:
 
“Table 3A: Permitted and Special Uses in All Zoning Districts
 
*         *      *
 
****** Public art murals are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-
6 only when located on a zoning lot already used for a park, playground, or
forest preserve and open to the public. Public art murals must be installed in
accordance with the additional regulations set forth in Title 8, Chapter 22 of
the City Code.
*      *      *
 
 
                        Most Restrictive (Lowest   Most Restrictive (Lowest
Land Use                Numbered) Districts Use is Numbered) Districts Use is a
                        a Permitted Use In         Special Use In
* * *                   * * *                      * * *
Public Art Murals****** R1 B2 O1 TO M1             -
* * *                   * * *                      * * *”
 
SECTION 4:   Amendments to add Title 8, Chapter 22. Title 8, titled “Building
Regulations,” of the City Code is hereby amended to add a new Chapter 22,
titled “Public Art Murals,” as set forth on Exhibit A , attached to and made a
part of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 5:   Effective Date.  This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
10 days following its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form in
the manner required by law.
 
 
 
PASSED THIS _17th __ day of __November__, 2025.
 
 
AYES:__7__ NAYS:__0__ ABSENT:__1___ ABSTAIN:__0__
 
 
APPROVED THIS _17th _ day of __November__, 2025.
 
      
         
               ____/s/ Andrew Johnson________________
               MAYOR
ATTEST:
 
___/s/ Julie Cark__________
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
CHAPTER 22
PUBLIC ART MURALS
 
8-22-1: PURPOSE:   
 
Public art murals, as defined in Section 13 of the Warrenville Zoning
Ordinance, can enhance the character and aesthetics of public spaces as well as
embody walls with history, storytelling, and placemaking that distinguish the
City from other communities. The purpose of this chapter is to allow the
installation of public art murals pursuant to reasonable conditions and
restrictions.
 
8-22-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:   
 
Public art murals are prohibited in the City unless installed pursuant to a
permit issued by the City in accordance with this chapter.
 
8-22-3: PUBLIC ART MURAL STANDARDS.
 
No permit may be issued for a public art mural unless the public art mural
complies with the following standards:
 
A. The public art mural must be located on a lot where public art murals are
permitted pursuant to Table 3A of the Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
 
B. No more than one public art mural is permitted per building and the mural
must be confined to only one wall.
 
C. No more than one public art mural is permitted per zoning lot.
 
D. Public art murals may only be installed on secondary facades and may not be
installed on facades facing primary street frontages.
 
E. Public art murals must be at least 64 square feet in size.
 
F. A public art mural may not extend more than six inches from the plane of the
wall it is placed upon and must be entirely located on zoning lot.
 
G. Public art murals must be sealed with anti-graffiti and UV resistant coating
immediately upon completion of the mural.
 
H. Public art murals material medium must be compatible with the surface and/or
substrate so as not to degrade or damage the underlying surface (e.g., mineral
paint formulated for masonry should be used on masonry or concrete walls rather
than acrylics)
 
I. A public art mural may not have or include electrical or mechanical
components or use any moving structural elements, flashing, lighting, or other
elements that result in movement or the appearance of movement or change in the
mural image.
 
J. Public art murals may be illuminated by downlighting that is turned off and
back on not more than once every 24 hours provided that the illumination must
comply with the performance standards contained in 10-9.I of the Warrenville
Zoning Ordinance.
 
K. Public art murals may not contain an offensive act, utterance, gesture or
display, including, without limitation known gang symbols, that is obscene or
creates a clear and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of
violence.
 
8-22-4: APPLICATION.   
 
A public art mural permit application must be submitted to the Community
Development Department that includes, without limitation, the following
information and documents:
 
A. A color rendering of the proposed mural, including dimensions and a site
rendering of the proposed wall or facade upon which the mural would be
installed or affixed.
 
B. An aerial map providing the location where the proposed mural would be
installed and photographs of the site location and its immediate surroundings.
 
C. A narrative that includes a written description of the proposed mural, the
project timeline, budget and funding sources.
 
D. Resume or biography for each artist involved in the design and application
of the mural that includes a list of examples of their previous mural projects
work and the location of each project.
 
E. A maintenance and removal plan that includes:
 
1. the proposed timeline or lifespan of the mural;
 
2. information explaining the proposed wall preparation, materials,
installation process, protective coating; and
 
3. statement attesting that the protective coating will be applied in order to
preserve the integrity of the building, structure and mural.
 
4. an explanation for how the mural may be removed without damaging the surface
of the exterior wall.
 
F. A mural maintenance and removal agreement, in a form prepared by and
acceptable to the City, executed by the artist and property owner, that, among
other things, contains a waiver of the Visual Artists' Rights Act, 17 U.S.C. §§
106, 106A and 113, as amended, executed by the artist. The maintenance and
removal of mural agreement must be recorded against the property on which the
mural is located and must provide for a minimum mural maintenance period of
five years. The property owner must agree to be ultimately responsible for the
maintenance and removal of the mural.
 
G. An affidavit attesting that the notice required by Section 8-22-5 was
provided and a copy of the letter mailed to the neighboring properties.
 
H. A letter from the property owner consenting to installation of the public
art mural.
 
I. The application fee, in the amount set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance.
 
8-22-5: NOTICE REQUIRED.
 
At least 21 days before the Tourism and Arts Commission meeting at which the
application will be considered, the applicant must send written notice by first
class mail to the record title owner of each property located within 50 feet of
the property on which the public art mural will be installed, which for the
purposes of this section, will be deemed properly provided if the written
notice is sent to the current tax payer of record listed on the DuPage County
Assessor’s Office. The written notice must contain the address of the mural, a
rendering of the proposed mural and its location on the building, and the date
and time of the Tourism and Arts Commission meeting at which the application
will be considered.
 
8-22-6: APPROVAL PROCEDURE.   
 
A. Application. An application must be filed in accordance with Section 8-22-4.
 
B. Action by the Community Development Department: Upon receipt of an
application for a public art mural permit, the Community Development Department
will review the application and, if complete, and proposed to be in a location
permitted by Table 3A of the Warrenville Zoning Ordinance, will transmit the
application to the Tourism and Arts Commission for its review and
recommendation.
 
C. Action by the Tourism and Arts Commission: The Tourism and Arts Commission
will consider the application at a public meeting of the commission in
accordance with the review criteria set forth in Subsection 8-22-5.E and
transmit its written recommendation to the City Council.
 
D. Action by the City Council: The City Council will consider the application
at a scheduled public meeting and will either approve or disapprove the
issuance of the public art mural permit by resolution.
 
E. Review Criteria for Public Art Murals: The Tourism and Arts Commission and
the City Council will recommend approval of or approve (as applicable) the
public art mural permit if the public art mural comports with the following
criteria:
 
1. The public art mural complies with the standards set forth in Section 8-22-
3.
 
2. The public art mural is designed to be durable and have sufficient
structural integrity.
 
3. The public art mural satisfies the purpose of this chapter because it:
 
a. Includes history, storytelling, or placemaking content, themes, or
inspiration; or
 
b. Is inspired by, educates about, or advocates for at least one attribute or
aspect of the City and its residence, including, without limitation, its
vibrancy, diversity, or traditions; and
 
c. Is consistent with and enhances the family-friendly character of the City’s
public spaces.
 
4. The public art mural will not create a danger for motorists or pedestrians,
nor will it limit the use or enjoyment of an adjacent property or any property
with a clear line of sight to the public art mural.
 
8-22-6: MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL REQUIRED.
 
A. The public art mural permittee and the owner of the property on which a
public art mural is located must maintain the public art mural in good and safe
condition such that it maintains its original color vibrancy, does not have any
flaking, torn, peeling, or otherwise deteriorating surfaces, and is not defaced
or altered such that it no longer conforms with the originally approved design.
 
B. If the public art mural is not maintained in accordance with subsection A of
this section or if it is no longer desired by the property owner, the mural
must be fully removed such that no remnant of the mural remains and the
exterior wall to which it had been affixed is in good and clean condition.
 
8-22-7: RESERVED.
 
8-22-8: PENALTY.
 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day
on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 668
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF WARRENVILLE, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Warrenville,
Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Warrenville, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together
with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing
body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the
Official Code and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new provision
shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the insertion of
the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3) copies of
which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code of Warrenville, Illinois.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-25.png]
 
ROLL CALL:
AYES:   Ald. Aschauer, Fay, Fessler, Lowderbaugh, Walters, Wheeler.
NAYS:   -0-   ABSENT: Ald. Hudetz, Pertell
Published in pamphlet form by Authority of the City Council of the City of
Warrenville, Du Page County, Illinois, this 16th day of August, 1983.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Warrenville.
This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the WARRENVILLE CITY
CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept
up to date as provided in Section
 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(1983 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporation contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding. So far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed
in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY: The City of Warrenville, County of DuPage, State of Illinois.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Warrenville".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. (1983 Code)
   FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the City, beginning with the 1980-1981
fiscal year, be and hereby is May 1 through April 30, inclusive. (Ord. 572, 3-
2-81)
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Warrenville".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1983 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Penalty For Repeat Offenses
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Except as provided in section
1-4-3 of this chapter, any person convicted of a violation of any section or
provision of this Code, where no other penalty is expressly set forth, shall be
fined a sum as stipulated in the Annual Fee Ordinance.
   B.   Any person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of
the City is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and shall be
punished accordingly.
   C.   In addition to a fine, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 579, the court
may impose a period of conditional discharge or court supervision up to six (6)
months. The court may also order restitution.
   D.   A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or
failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. (Ord.
2563, 1-18-2010; amd. Ord. 2695, 2-21-2012; Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; Ord.
O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section unless otherwise indicated. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues and shall be subject to penalties or fines as a separate offense,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this chapter shall apply with respect to the fine or penalty amount.
   D.   In addition to any remedies available at law, the City of Warrenville
may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to
restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any City ordinance.
(Ord. 2563, 1-18-2010)
1-4-3: PENALTY FOR REPEAT OFFENSES:
   A.   Unless any specific penalty provision of this Code or of any ordinance
of the City of Warrenville provides a penalty for repeat offenses, whether said
provision is currently existing or hereafter adopted, increased fines shall be
imposed for repeated violations in the manner set forth in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 2563, 1-18-2010)
   B.   Increased fines shall be imposed for repeated violations (hereinafter
referred to as a "repeat offense") by a person of any requirement or provisions
of this Code or any ordinance, including the City's zoning ordinance. As used
in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or subsequent) violation of
the same ordinance, regulation, requirement or Code provision: 1) committed by
a person within any twelve (12) month period (unless some other period is
specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and 2) for which the
person has either been found guilty in the Circuit Court of the 18th Judicial
Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois, or by virtue of a final, unappealable
administrative adjudication decision. Unless otherwise specifically provided by
this code, statute, or any ordinance for a particular violation, the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:
      1.   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no
less than two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00), plus costs.
      2.   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense shall be
no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs.
      3.   The fine for any offense which is a third repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
costs. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings
1-5-2: Presiding Officer
1-5-3: Duties Of The Mayor
1-5-4: Duties Of The Aldermen
1-5-5: Standing Committees
1-5-6: Ordinances
1-5-7: Rules And Order Of Business
1-5-8: Journal Of Proceedings
1-5-9: Omnibus Votes
1-5-10: Rules Of Procedure For Committees, Boards And Commissions
1-5-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be
held on the first and third Mondays of each month of the year at the hour of
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. The meetings shall be held at the city hall. (Ord.
1586, 5-19-1997)
As in the case with visitors, while the meeting of the city council is being
conducted, no person, other than a member of the council, may address that
body, or state any opinions on a question or item of business being considered
by the council, except with the consent of two (2) of the members present.
(Ord. 469, 10-15-1979; amd. Ord. 1090, 4-16-1990)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor, or any
three (3) aldermen. A written request of intent to call a meeting must be given
to the clerk at least forty eight (48) hours in advance, by three (3) aldermen.
At least forty eight (48) hours' written notice of such special meeting shall
be given by the clerk and such notice shall specify the time, purpose and
agenda of such meeting. Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the
notice at city hall. Copies of the notice of special meetings must be supplied
to any local newspaper of general circulation that has filed an annual report
for such notice.
Only the business to be discussed on the agenda may be discussed at a special
meeting. Any three (3) members of the city council may add an item or items to
the agenda, provided the clerk was given notice in writing at least forty eight
(48) hours in advance. A special meeting may be adjourned to a later date
provided it is not beyond the date of the next regular council meeting. No
subject may be considered at an adjourned special meeting that might not have
been considered at the original special meeting. If there is some doubt as to
the propriety of any action taken at a special meeting, then at the next
regular meeting of the council, a motion should be adopted to ratify action
taken at a special meeting. Such a motion to ratify action taken at a special
meeting will be effective even though the special meeting was not held pursuant
to proper notice. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979)
   C.   Public Notice Of Meetings: At the beginning of each calendar year, the
city clerk shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings of the
city council, whose dates must be set by the city council. Such notice shall
state the dates, time and place of such meetings. A member of the council is
presumed to know the regular meeting dates, and no special notice is required.
Public notice of any special meeting except a meeting held in the event of a
bona fide emergency, or of any rescheduled regular meeting, or any reconvened
meeting, shall be given at least forty eight (48) hours before such meeting,
which notice shall also include the agenda for the special, rescheduled, or
reconvened meeting. The requirement of public notice of reconvened meetings
does not apply to any case where the meeting was open to the public and: 1) it
is to be reconvened within twenty four (24) hours, or 2) an announcement of the
time and place of the reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting and
there is no change in the agenda. Notice of an emergency meeting shall be given
as soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting,
to any news medium which has filed an annual request for notice.
Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice at city hall and
on the city website. Copies of the notice of regular meetings and copies of
notices of any special, rescheduled or reconvened meeting must be supplied to
any local radio or TV stations that have filed an annual report for such
notice. News media shall be given the same notice of all special, rescheduled
or reconvened meetings in the same manner in which it is given to members of
the council, provided that any such news medium has given the public body an
address at which such notice may be given. (Ord. 2572, 4-5-2010)
   D.   Open Meetings And Executive Sessions: All meetings of the council,
committees and subcommittees, must be open to the public. Executive sessions
may be called for portions of meetings in order to consider matters for which a
public body may hold closed meetings pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/2, as now existing or hereafter amended.
An executive session may be held in conjunction with a regular or special
meeting, or may be held independent of any public meeting. A motion should be
made calling the executive session. Such motion should state the purpose and
business to be discussed at the executive session with an appropriate citation
to the statutory exemption under which the closed meeting will be held as
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2a, as now existing or hereafter
amended. (Ord. 2794, 7-1-2013)
   E.   Quorum, Attendance: Each meeting of the council shall convene at the
time appointed for such meeting, as provided by ordinance. The clerk, or acting
clerk, shall call the roll of members. If no quorum be present, the council
shall not thereby stand adjourned, but the members present shall be competent,
by majority vote, to adjourn or recess the council to another time or date
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting.
A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum. The mayor is to be
counted in determining whether a quorum is present. Acts done by the council
without a quorum are void. A quorum must be present not only to begin a
meeting, but also at the time of a roll call vote on any proposition.
If no quorum is present and the members present desire to compel the attendance
of absent members, they themselves, or by their agents, shall attempt to
communicate the call to the session personally to the absentees. Any absent
member who refuses to attend the meeting (or a new meeting to which the members
present have adjourned) after personal notice to attend, may be fined by the
members present a sum not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
occurrence. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979)
1-5-2: PRESIDING OFFICER:
   A.   Mayor: The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council, but he
or she shall have a vote only where the state statutes or the municipal
ordinances require more than a majority vote of the corporate authorities, or
in the event of a tie, or where one-half (1/2) of the aldermen elected have
voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no
tie vote 1 . (Ord. 1729, 11-16-1998)
   B.   Mayor Pro Tem:
      1.   During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor
shall appoint a mayor pro tem.
      2.   The mayor pro tem, during the mayor's absence or disability, shall
perform the duties and possess all the rights and power of the mayor. (Ord.
1909, 6-4-2001)
      3.   Where the absence or disability of the mayor is to be of a very
short duration and the mayor will not be out of the city, the council shall
elect one of its number temporary chairman. The mayor pro tem and temporary
chairman shall vote on all questions on which the vote is taken by yeas and
nays. When a vote is taken, the name of the presiding officer shall be called
last. The mayor pro tem shall have all the duties and power of the mayor; the
temporary chairman shall have only such powers and duties as accrue to a
presiding officer. (Ord. 1729, 11-16-1998; amd. Ord. 1909, 6-4-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-5-7B of this chapter.
1-5-3: DUTIES OF THE MAYOR:
   A.   The mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law,
including the city ordinance and shall take care that the laws and ordinances
are faithfully executed.
   B.   The mayor presides at the council meetings, but may not abuse his
authority as a parliamentarian. The mayor has the power to administer oaths.
   C.   The mayor at all times may examine and inspect the books, records and
papers of any agent, employee or officer of the city.
   D.   When necessary, the mayor may call on every inhabitant of the city over
the age of eighteen (18) years to aid in enforcing laws and ordinances. (Ord.
469, 10-15-1979)
   E.   The mayor shall appoint persons to fill aldermanic vacancies in the
manner provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-50, as now existing
or hereafter amended. (Ord. 1592, 7-7-1997; amd. Ord. 1997, 9-16-2002)
1-5-4: DUTIES OF THE ALDERMEN:
   A.   The aldermen shall be the representatives of the people of their wards
at the city council meetings. The aldermen shall be responsible to the people
of their wards and the citizens of the city for their actions at council
meetings.
   B.   Aldermen shall be required to attend every scheduled regular meeting of
the city council and standing committees of which they are members. If an
alderman fails to attend any scheduled regular meeting of the city council or
standing committee of which the alderman is a member, such absence shall be
recorded in the record of proceedings of said meeting by the city clerk as
follows:
      1.   Excused Absences: An alderman's absence shall be deemed excused if
the alderman contacts the city clerk prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the
day of the scheduled meeting and indicates he/she will not be in attendance.
Aldermen are limited to five (5) excused absences per calendar year, and
absences in excess of ten (10) per calendar year shall be deemed to be
unexcused unless the alderman's absence is due to attendance at any meeting or
function whose purpose is to promote, serve or advance the business of the
city, which absence shall be counted as excused, and the limitation of five (5)
unexcused absences shall not apply.
      2.   Unexcused Absences: An alderman's absence shall be deemed unexcused
if that alderman fails to contact the city clerk prior to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on the day of the scheduled meeting; or if the alderman has already
accumulated five (5) absences in the current calendar year, regardless of the
reason for said absences.
      3.   Absence Accumulation: Should an alderman accumulate ten (10) excused
and/or unexcused absences during a calendar year, then said alderman will be
subject to censure by the city council. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-5-5: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The following shall be the standing committees of the city council and their
respective duties:
Community Development Committee
Building and zoning                  Building related codes
Community development projects       Zoning ordinance
Annexation                           Subdivision code
Economic development                 Geographic information systems
Comprehensive plan review and update Planning
Code enforcement                      
Other issues as delegated by city council and/or other committees
Public Safety And Finance Committee
Budget                               Litigation
Audit                                Law enforcement
Personnel                            Liquor licenses
Compensation                         Risk management
Collective bargaining                State, county and local legislation
Other issues as delegated by city council and/or other committees
Public Works And Infrastructure Committee
Public works                         Public improvements
Public property                      Engineering
Parks and recreation                 Water and sewer rates
Franchise agreements                 Stormwater and floodplain management
Other issues as delegated by city council and/or other committees
 
Other committees may be instituted from time to time by a two- thirds (2/3)
vote of the city council, to serve the changing needs of the city government.
Membership on these other committees shall follow the same guidelines
prescribed for standing committees. The lifetime of such other committees shall
in no case exceed the limits of the two (2) year period between municipal
elections, however, and each newly elected city council shall have the option
of reinstituting previous other committees by another two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the city council.
Committee membership and organization shall be governed by the following:
   A.   All standing committees and other committees shall be comprised of the
aldermen, plus the mayor as an ex officio member. The committee members shall
select the chairman for each committee. Standing committee chairmanships shall
remain in effect until amended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the city council.
   B.   Action on any committee report or recommendation of any standing
committee or other committee may be deferred for final action thereon to the
next regular meeting of the city council after the report or recommendation is
made, upon the request of any three (3) members of the city council then
holding office. (Ord. O2017-07, 3-6-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Style Of Ordinances: The style of all ordinances shall be:
BE IT ORDAINED BY the City Council of the City of Warrenville, Illinois....
(Ord. 469, 10-15-1979)
   B.   Record Of Ordinances: The clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances
passed in an ordinance book for such purpose and shall supply copies of passed
ordinances to the public safety, legislative and intergovernmental affairs
committee chairman for his book. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979; amd. Ord. 1039, 6-5-
1989)
All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or making any
appropriation shall be published as required by statute 1 , either in a
newspaper or in pamphlet form, in which case, the ordinance in its pamphlet
form shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the city
hall.
No ordinance, which must be published to comply with subsection A of this
section, shall go into effect until ten (10) days after it is so published
unless a statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it
achieves passage by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the council then
holding office. In all other cases, the ordinance shall go into effect upon the
passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the
ordinance may not take effect until a later date. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979)
   C.   Reading Of Ordinances: All ordinances presented to the council shall
have a first reading at a meeting of the council and a second reading at a
subsequent meeting of the council, prior to passage by the council. The second
reading requirement shall be deemed to have been met if the ordinance is placed
upon the consent agenda for second reading. (Ord. 1039, 6-5-1989)
If an ordinance has a first reading and then fails to have a second reading at
the next subsequent meeting of the council, it shall be considered to have died
on the floor and may not be considered again until a first reading is again
held on it.
The second reading of any ordinance may be waived by a motion and majority vote
of the members then holding office. The ordinance may then be passed at its
first reading. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
1-5-7: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Order Of Business At Meetings: The order of business shall be as set
forth in the following agenda:
   AGENDA
      1.   Opening ceremonies.
      2.   Citizens' comments.
      3.   Officials and staff comments.
      4.   Approval of agenda.
      5.   Approval of minutes.
      6.   Consent agenda - omnibus vote.
      7.   Regular agenda.
      8.   Unfinished business.
      9.   New business.
      10.   Closed session.
      11.   Adjourn. (Ord. 1707, 9-8-1998)
   B.   Voting 1 : All ordinances for whatever purpose and any resolution or
motion: 1) to create any liability against the city, or 2) for the expenditure
or appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence of a majority of
all members holding office.
In the voting upon of all ordinances and upon any resolutions or motions, the
"yeas" and "nays" of each member will be taken and recorded in the minutes of
the council. The official copy of any ordinance will list the names of each
person voting and how he voted.
An alderman is not required to vote on a motion, resolution or ordinance. His
failure to vote will not invalidate a resolution or motion which does not
require the affirmative vote of a particular percentage of the council where
the majority of those exercising their franchise are in favor of the motion or
resolution.
The mayor is required to vote on three (3) occasions:
      1.   Where the vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie;
      2.   Where one-half (1/2) of the aldermen elected have voted in favor of
an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or
      3.   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
required by state statutes to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion. (Ord.
469, 10-5-1979)
Any vote provided for under the Illinois municipal code or state statute that
does not specify whether it shall be a concurring vote or an affirmative vote
shall be considered an affirmative vote. In such an instance, an abstention, a
pass or a recusal of a member of the corporate authorities in response to a
roll call vote on a matter shall be recorded as such and shall not be counted
as a vote with the majority. (Ord. 1861, 7-17-2000)
   C.   Approval And Veto Of Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions: All
resolutions and motions: 1) which create any liability against the city, or 2)
which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money and all
ordinances, passed by the city council, shall be deposited with the city clerk.
If the mayor approves them, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves
he shall return to the city council, with his written objections, at the next
regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than five (5) days after
their passage.
The mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance,
resolution or motion making an appropriation and, if so, the remainder shall be
effective.
If the mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or
motion with his written objections within the designated time, it shall become
effective despite the absence of his signature.
   D.   Overriding The Veto Of The Mayor: A motion may be made to override the
veto of the mayor. In order to override the veto of the mayor, two thirds (2/3)
of the aldermen then holding office are required to pass the motion with an
affirmative vote. The ordinance, resolution or motion shall then become
effective. (Ord. 469, 10-5-1979)
   E.   Reconsideration Of Actions By The Council: The council may reconsider
its votes and actions upon questions before it and rescind its previous
actions, with the following exceptions:
      1.   No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a
special meeting, unless there are present at the special meeting as many
aldermen as were present when the vote was taken.
      2.   The council cannot reverse, at a subsequent meeting, its initial
decision to accept or reject the recommendation of an advisory body required in
its deliberations to hold a public hearing without ordering another public
hearing, especially where the decision to reconsider is motivated by evidence
and information not presented at the first public hearing. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-
2003)
   F.   Visitors: Except during the time allotted for citizens' comments, no
person, other than a member of the council, may address that body, except with
the consent of two (2) of the members present. (Ord. 469, 10-5-1979)
   G.   Debate: The chairman of the committee whose report is under
consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close the
debate.
No member shall speak longer than ten (10) minutes at any one time, except by
consent of the council; and in closing debate on any question as above
provided, the speaker shall be limited to five (5) minutes, except by special
consent of the council.
While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private discussion or pass
between the speaker and the chair. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
   H.   Call Of Member To Order: A member, when called to order by the chair,
shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his seat and the order or ruling
of the chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of
appeal. (Ord. 469, 10-5-1979; amd. Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
   I.   Motions:
      1.   Precedence Of Motions: The following chart sets out motions in the
order of their precedence. The main or principal motion is at the bottom in
rank. The other motions may be made while the main motion is pending and must
be dealt with before the main motion. They are arranged according to rank, the
highest at the top of the list. Incidental motions, however, have no rank among
themselves, yet take precedence over subsidiary motions. When any one motion is
immediately pending, the motions above it on the list are in order, and those
below are out of order.
a. Privileged Motions:
   Debatable       Fix time to adjourn
                   Adjourn
   Undebatable     Take recess
                   Question of privilege
b. Incidental Motions:
   Undebatable except motion to appeal:
                   Appeal
                   Division of assembly
                   Division of a question
                   Filling blanks
                   Objection
                   Point of order
                   Suspend the rules (needs 2/3 vote)
                   Withdraw a motion
c. Subsidiary Motions:
                   Lay on the table
   Undebatable     The previous question (close debate, needs 2/3 vote)
                   Limit or extend debate
                   Postpone to a definite time
                   Refer to a committee
   Debatable       Amend the amendment
                   Amendment
                   Postpone indefinitely
                   Main or principal motion
d. Miscellaneous Motions: After action has taken place on main or principal
   motion:
   Take from table (Undebatable)
   Rescind         (Debatable) Requires 2/3 vote without notice; majority vote
                   with notice
   Reconsider      (Debatable)
   Ratify          (Debatable)
 
      2.   Motion To Refer: A motion to refer to a standing committee shall
take precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
      3.   Motion To Amend: A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order,
but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be in order.
An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an
amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
      4.   Reading Of Ordinance/Resolution: No resolution, ordinance or minutes
need be read prior to consideration but such items may be read in response to a
motion passed seeking such a reading.
      5.   Motion To Substitute: A substitute for any original proposition
under debate or for any pending amendment to such proposition may be
entertained notwithstanding that at such time further amendment is admissible;
and if acceptable by the council by vote, shall entirely supersede such
original proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all
amendments appertaining thereto.
      6.   Record Of Motions: In all cases where a resolution or motion is
made, the name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be recorded.
      7.   Motion To Call The Previous Question: A motion may be made to call
the previous question. After the second, the chair shall immediately put the
question (since there is no debate), "Shall the question be now put?" If this
is carried by a two- thirds (2/3) vote of all members present, all debate
ceases and the chair puts the main question on the floor for vote.
   J.   Appeals From Decisions Of The Chair: Any member may appeal to the
council from a ruling of the chair and, if the appeal is seconded, the member
making the appeal may briefly state his reason for the same, and the chair may
briefly explain his ruling.
The chair shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be
sustained?" If a majority of the members present vote "no", the decision of the
chair shall be overruled; otherwise it shall be sustained.
   K.   Question Of Personal Privilege: The right of a member to address the
council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
   L.   Taking And Entering The Votes: The "yeas" and "nays" upon any question
shall be taken and entered in the journal. When the clerk has commenced to call
the roll of the council for the taking of a vote by "yeas" and "nays", all
debate on the question before the council shall be deemed concluded and during
the taking of the vote a member shall be permitted to briefly explain his vote
and shall respond to the calling of his name by the clerk by answering "yea" or
"nay" as the case may be.
   M.   Censure Of Members; Expulsion Of Members: Pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-40-15, any member acting or appearing in a lewd or
disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to
or about any member of the council, or who does not obey the order of the
chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the council. With
the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen elected, the council may
expel an alderman, but not a second time for the same offense.
   N.   Adoption Of "Robert's Rules Of Order" Newly Revised: The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the current edition of "Robert's Rules Of
Order" newly revised, except to the extent modified by the ordinances of the
city of Warrenville or special rule(s) of the city council, or inconsistent
with the statutes or laws of the state, shall govern all meetings of the city
council.
   O.   Temporary Suspension Of Rules, Amendment Of Rules: These rules may be
temporarily suspended, repealed, altered or amended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the council then holding office. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-5-2A of this chapter.
1-5-8: JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS:
The clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the council. Within ten
(10) days after such meeting of the council, the clerk shall supply to each
member a typewritten copy of the proceedings (minutes). The clerk's draft of
the journal of proceedings may be amended to correctly reflect the view of the
legislative body as to the events which occurred. (Ord. 469, 10-5-1979)
1-5-9: OMNIBUS VOTES:
   A.   The corporate authorities at any meeting may, by unanimous consent,
take a single vote by yeas and nays on the several questions of the passage of
any two (2) or more of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, or
motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group. The ordinances
which are placed together for voting purposes shall be known as the "consent
agenda". The single vote thereon shall be entered separately in the journal of
proceedings under the designation "omnibus vote". (Ord. 1039, 6-5-1989)
   B.   Any item preliminarily placed on the consent agenda may be removed
therefrom only upon the request of the mayor or any alderman. Members of the
public may petition in writing that an item be removed from the consent agenda.
(Ord. 1039, 6-5-1989; amd. Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-5-10: RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
Each committee, board and commission is hereby authorized to adopt its own
rules of procedure so long as those rules are consistent with the state and
federal statutes and the ordinances of the city. Should any committee, board or
commission not adopt its own rules of procedure then the rules of procedure for
such committee, board or commission shall be the edition of "Robert's rules"
then in effect for the city council. (Ord. 1708, 9-8-1998)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointments; Discharge Of Appointed City Officers
1-6-2: Oaths, Bonds
1-6-3: Indemnification Of Certain Officers
1-6-4: Compensation
1-6-5: Wage Rate, Public Works Laborers
1-6-6: Access To City Property, Books
1-6-7: City Clerk
1-6-8: City Collector (Rep. by Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-6-9: City Treasurer
1-6-10: Deputy City Treasurer
1-6-11: City Administrator
1-6-12: Director Of Public Works/Superintendent Of Streets
1-6-13: Director Of Community And Economic Development
1-6-14: City Historian
1-6-15: Police Commissioners
1-6-16: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, Participation
1-6-17: Budget Officer
1-6-18: Finance Director
1-6-1: APPOINTMENTS; DISCHARGE OF APPOINTED CITY OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointments: The Mayor shall have the power to make permanent
appointments only with the advice and consent of the Council, and in some
cases, subject to the approval of the Council, unless otherwise explicitly
stated in this Code. Any permanent appointment made without the Council shall
be invalid and without force.
   If there are applicants for an position appointed by the Mayor, the Mayor
must make the appointment and the Council members then present shall decide
whether to ratify the appointment or not to ratify the appointment. For this
very reason, care should be exercised by all members of the Council in
soliciting any applicants for appointive positions.
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary
exigencies or to prevent material impairment of any department in the City, the
Mayor may make a temporary appointment, to remain in force until a permanent
appointment can be made. The temporary appointment shall not exceed a period of
sixty (60) days. No temporary appointment of any one person shall be made more
than twice in any calendar year.
      1.   Whenever an appointed Municipal official ceases to perform the
duties of or to hold the office by reason of death, permanent physical or
mental disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or
abandonment of office and, further, in order to prevent a stoppage of public
business, to meet extraordinary exigencies, or to prevent material impairment
of any department in the City, the Mayor may make a temporary appointment to
such Municipal office and the term of the appointment shall not exceed a single
sixty (60) day term or the then remaining term of the Mayor of the City,
whichever is less; provided, however, that the term of any temporary
appointment for the offices listed in subsection A2 of this section shall be as
set forth in that subsection.
      2.   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
temporarily appoint:
         a.   City Administrator;
         b.   Budget Officer;
         c.   Chief of Police.
      3.   No person shall be eligible for a temporary appointment a second
time to the same Municipal office, but the same person is eligible for
permanent appointment to the same office in accordance with the applicable
State Statutes and City ordinances.
   B.   Discharge Of City Officials Appointed By The Mayor: An appointed
official of the City may be discharged as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-35-10. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. O2021-02, 1-18-2021)
1-6-2: OATHS, BONDS:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all city officers,
whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the following oath:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United States
and the constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of the office of              according to the best of my
ability.
This oath, so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the city clerk.
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all city officers,
except aldermen, shall execute a bond with security to be approved by the
corporate authorities. The bond shall be payable to the city in whatever penal
sum may be directed by resolution or ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money received
by such officer, according to law and also the ordinances of the city. Such
bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any
loss sustained by the insolvency, failure, or closing of any bank or savings
and loan association organized and operating either under the laws of the state
or the United States wherein such officer has placed funds in his custody, if
the bank or savings and loan association has been approved by the corporate
authorities as a depository for these funds. In no case, however, shall the
mayor's bond be fixed at less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). The
treasurer's bond shall be an amount of money that is not less than three (3)
times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census figure used
for motor fuel tax purposes. These bonds shall be filed with the city clerk,
except the bond of the city clerk, which shall be filed with the city
treasurer. (Ord. 1016, 12-19-1988)
1-6-3: INDEMNIFICATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS:
   A.   To the fullest extent permitted by the constitution of the state of
Illinois of 1970 and all other applicable laws, all city officers and
employees, and each member of each board, commission or panel of the city,
whether appointed or otherwise designated, established pursuant to applicable
state statute, ordinance or resolution of the city, shall be indemnified,
defended and held harmless by the city from and against all liabilities,
expenses of investigation, judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may
be imposed upon or reasonably incurred or paid by such officer, employee or
appointee in connection with or resulting from any claim made against him or
her, or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he or she may be
involved, by reason of his or her being or having been such officer, employee
or appointee of the city, whether or not he or she continues to be such
officer, employee or appointee at or after the time of such claim, action,
suit, proceeding or investigation; provided, however, that the foregoing
indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
      1.   Any liability or cost or judgment with respect to any matter in
which the officer, employee or appointee is finally adjudged to be guilty of a
criminal act.
      2.   Any liability, cost or judgment against an officer, employee or
appointee which is payable to the city itself or where the city was injured and
the individual either obtained personal benefit or financial gain as a result
of his or her wrongful conduct.
      3.   Any liability or cost incurred as a result of an investigation
initiated by the city into the misconduct of the officer, employee or
appointee.
      4.   Any liability or cost incurred as a result of a failure or refusal
of the officer, employee or appointee to reasonably cooperate in the defense of
such claim, action, suit or proceeding.
      5.   Any liability, cost or judgment excluded by a written waiver from
the officer, employee or appointee.
   B.   The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any
other rights to which such officer, employee or appointee may otherwise be
entitled as a matter of law under state statute or city ordinance. (Ord. 1958,
1-21-2002)
1-6-4: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Mayor: The mayor elected at the 2001 municipal election shall receive
compensation in the amount of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year.
The mayors elected at the 2005 municipal election and thereafter shall receive
compensation in the amount of twenty four thousand dollars ($24,000.00) per
year.
   B.   Aldermen:
      1.   Each alderman elected at the consolidated municipal elections in
1999 or subsequently shall be compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each regular or special meeting of the city council attended, and for each
meeting of a committee which is
comprised of all aldermen and the mayor, not to exceed forty two (42) meetings
per year, or two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100.00) per annum; provided
that compensation shall be paid for only one meeting per day if more than one
meeting is held on any one day. Each alderman shall be allowed two (2) absences
for just cause in each year for which he shall be compensated.
      2.   Each alderman elected at the consolidated municipal elections of
2003 and thereafter shall be compensated at the rate of four hundred dollars
($400.00) per month.
      3.   At the option of any alderman, said alderman, by written
notification addressed to the council and clerk, may elect not to be paid all
or any portion of said compensation.
   C.   City Clerk: The city clerk shall receive compensation in the amount of
six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month beginning May 1, 1995. City clerks
elected at the consolidated municipal elections of 2005 and thereafter shall be
compensated at the rate of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per year. (Ord.
1993, 6-17-2002)
   D.   City Treasurer: The city treasurer shall receive a compensation of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per month ($2,400.00 per year). (Ord. 734, 1-7-1985)
   E.   Compensation For Expenses: All city officials and authorized city
employees may be compensated for expenses incurred on city business including
automobile mileage at a rate equal to the rate allowed by the internal revenue
service as a business expense deduction. Receipts or a written statement shall
be submitted to the finance director as a prerequisite for such compensation.
(Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-6-5: WAGE RATE, PUBLIC WORKS LABORERS:
   A.   To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under
contract for public works" 1 , approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of this city is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the DuPage County area as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June 2,
1986, a copy of that determination being incorporated herein by reference. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in
aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
   B.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of this city to the extent required by the aforesaid
act.
   C.   The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by
any interested party in the main office of this city this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage.
   D.   The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer,
and to any association of employers and to any person or association of
employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies
of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of
workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   E.   The city clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section
with both the secretary of state and the department of labor of the state of
Illinois.
   F.   The city clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area a copy of this section, and such publication shall
constitute notice that the determination is effective and that this is the
determination of this public body. (Ord. 847, 6-16-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 - 130/12.
1-6-6: ACCESS TO CITY PROPERTY, BOOKS:
All elected city officials shall have access to city hall at all times. All
elected city officials shall have access to city books and records upon
reasonable request to the city administrator. (Ord. 2591, 6-21-2010)
1-6-7: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Duties Of City Clerk: The city clerk shall have and perform the
following duties:
      1.   Keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the city council, and all
papers belonging to the city, the custody and control of which are not given to
other officers.
      2.   Attend all meetings of the council and keep a full record of its
proceedings in the journal.
      3.   Appoint the various clerks and subordinates to work in the office,
which the city council may authorize and shall be held responsible for the
fidelity of all persons so appointed.
      4.   Have the power to administer oaths and affirmations upon all lawful
occasions.
      5.   Exercise a general supervision over all the officers of the city,
charged in any manner with the receipt, collection and return of the city
revenue into the treasury.
      6.   Have the custody and control of all city documents, books and papers
which the city council may designate. (Ord. 469, 10-15-1979; amd. Ord. 889, 4-
20-1987)
      7.   The city clerk shall further perform such duties as may be
prescribed by law or may be assigned to him/her by the city council. (Ord.
2040, 2-18-2003)
1-6-8: CITY COLLECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-6-9: CITY TREASURER:
The City Treasurer shall perform the following duties; provided, however, the
City Treasurer may delegate any or all of the following duties to the Director
of Finance:
   A.   Receive all money belonging to the city and keep the books and accounts
in the manner prescribed by ordinance. These books and accounts shall always be
subject to the inspection of any member of the city council.
   B.   Keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debits
and credits belonging thereto.
   C.   File copies of any receipts issued by him with the city clerk.
   D.   Make a written monthly report to the city council. This report shall
show the state of the treasury at the date of the account and the balance of
money in the treasury. It shall also show a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures of the city, as shown by the books, up to the time of
the report.
   E.   Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Treasurer
shall prepare and file with the City Clerk an account of all monies received
and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year. This account shall
be in accordance with state statutes.
   F.   The Treasurer shall further perform such duties as may be prescribed by
law or may be assigned to the Treasurer by the City Council. (Ord. 469, 10-15-
1979; amd. Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-2021)
1-6-10: DEPUTY CITY TREASURER:
The office of Deputy City Treasurer is hereby created. The Director of Finance
will serve as the Deputy City Treasurer unless another person is appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Deputy City
Treasurer shall have the following responsibilities:
   A.   To perform duties as assigned by the City Treasurer, subject to the
supervision and direction of the City Treasurer; and
   B.   To perform the duties of the City Treasurer in the event of the City
Treasurer's absence or inability to perform such duties at any time. When
performing duties pursuant to this subsection
1-6-10(B), the Deputy Treasurer shall have all the powers and authority granted
by state statute or this code to the Treasurer.
The compensation to be paid to the Deputy City Treasurer shall be determined by
the City Council. (Ord. 2918, 4-6-2015; amd. Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-2021)
1-6-11: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment And Relationship To Elected Officials: The city
administrator shall be appointed to an indefinite term of office by a majority
vote of the city council. The administrator shall, in all cases, be subject to
the authority and direction of the mayor and city council.
   B.   Compensation And Terms Of Appointment: The rate of compensation of the
city administrator shall be set by the city council and may be adjusted from
time to time as the council deems appropriate.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The city administrator shall be responsible to the
mayor and city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the
city. In discharging this responsibility, the city administrator shall:
      1.   Direct, supervise and coordinate the activities of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, and to
administer the affairs of the city to ensure that all city business is
accomplished efficiently and economically;
      2.   Employ, discipline, suspend and terminate any and all city
employees, including department directors appointed by the city administrator,
except when otherwise provided by law or contract, and to the extent permitted
by law and subject to the city administrator's discretion and direct
supervision, to delegate to any employee any of these powers as respects any
subordinates of that employee; (Ord. 1785, 10-4-1999)
      3.   Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused; take part in
all discussions, and make suggestions and recommendations to the city council
on any matter pertaining to the city's business or affairs; but the city
administrator shall not have the right to vote on any matter; (Ord. 2040, 2-18-
2003)
      4.   Provide for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the
city; ensure that all franchises granted by, and all contracts with, the city
are faithfully kept and performed;
      5.   Prepare and submit to the mayor and city council by the date set by
the council a recommended annual budget for city operations and recommended
capital programs; administer the approved budget;
      6.   Hold such other appointive offices as may be consistent with law, as
the mayor and city council may determine, and to faithfully and honestly
discharge the duties and powers associated with such office;
      7.   Submit to the mayor and city council and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city as of the end of each fiscal year;
      8.   Make such other reports as the mayor and city council may require
concerning the operations of the city departments, offices and agencies;
      9.   Keep the mayor and city council fully apprised as to the present
financial condition and future needs of the city;
      10.   Advise the mayor and city council on pending decisions of public
policy and recommend the adoption of such measures as the administrator may
deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community
or for the improvement of administrative services;
      11.   Supervise and administer the procurement of commodities and
services for all city departments, offices and agencies, and promulgate
purchasing rules implementing city ordinances and which are consistent with
state law, which shall be followed by employees in the procurement of goods and
services;
      12.   Propose to the mayor and city council such personnel rules and
regulations as the administrator deems necessary to manage the personnel of the
city;
      13.   Supervise and administer the conduct of all collective bargaining
processes of the city and recommend to the city council collective bargaining
agreements for consideration and approval by the council, and administer all
employee organization contracts reached through the collective bargaining
process;
      14.   Provide staff support services to the mayor and members of the city
council;
      15.   Perform such other duties as may be specified by law or city
ordinance or as may from time to time be requested by the mayor and city
council; (Ord. 1785, 10-4-1999)
      16.   Be authorized to amend provisions of the personnel manual without
city council approval under the following circumstances:
         a.   To comply with federal or state laws, rules, orders, policies or
regulations governing employment; or
         b.   To clarify any of the provisions herein; or
         c.   To make minor amendments as may be required to efficiently
provide city services.
With respect to minor amendments or clarifications, the city administrator
shall report the proposed amendment or clarification to the city council prior
to its implementation. If the city council determines that the proposed
amendment or clarification is major, then the city council shall have the sole
authority to approve the proposed clarification or amendment. (Ord. 2173, 10-
18-2004)
   D.   Bond: The city administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond before
entering upon the duties of his office in such sum as may be required by the
mayor and city council, but the amount of such bond shall not be less than the
amount which may be required from time to time by the statutes of the state or
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, whichever is
greater. Said bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the
city administrator of his duties and shall be conditioned to indemnify the city
for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the city
administrator. The premium for such bond shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 2902,
12-15-2014)
   E.   Acting Administrator: Whenever the city administrator is absent from
the city for personal reasons, or on account of city business, or is otherwise
unable to perform the duties and responsibilities of city administrator due to
short term illness or disability, the city administrator may designate in
writing a member of the city's senior administrative staff to serve as acting
administrator and to carry out the duties of the administrator during the
administrator's absence. In the event of a prolonged absence, as determined by
either the city administrator himself or the mayor and city council, then the
mayor and city council shall appoint an acting administrator, whose office
shall be temporary and who shall serve only until such time as the city
administrator is able to resume the duties of his office.
   F.   Matters Directed To Administrator's Attention: No citizen or elected
officer or official of the city shall dictate the employment or discipline of
any person by the city administrator or by any of the city administrator's
subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry or work orders, elected city
officers or officials shall deal with the administrative service through the
city administrator. Elected city officers shall not give orders to any
subordinates of the city administrator, either publicly or privately.
   G.   Authority Of Other Officers: Except to the extent permitted by law,
nothing contained in this section shall be construed or be deemed to diminish
or detract from the powers and authority of any elected or appointed officer or
official of the city that is provided by state statute. (Ord. 1785, 10-4-1999;
amd. Ord. O2021-02, 1-18-2021)
1-6-12: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS/SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS:
   A.   Office Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the office
of director of public works of the city, which office shall be appointed by the
city administrator.
   B.   Responsibilities: The director of public works shall be responsible
for:
      1.   The operation of the public works department, including all
divisions, and the supervision and direction of its employees.
      2.   Advising the city administrator and city council on matters related
to the city infrastructure and capital improvement programs.
      3.   Overseeing the operations and maintenance of the city's water and
sanitary sewer utilities.
      4.   Coordination of general maintenance of all city buildings, grounds
and properties.
      5.   Performing such other duties as may be prescribed by the city
administrator or city ordinance.
   C.   Duties: The director of public works shall restrict his employment
strictly to the office of the director of public works of the city while in the
employment of the city. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. O2021-02, 1-18-2021)
1-6-13: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Office Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the Office
of the Director of Community and Economic Development of the City, which office
shall be appointed by the City Administrator.
   B.   Responsibilities: The Director of Community and Economic Development
shall be responsible for:
      1.   The operation and management of the Community Development
Department, including, without limitation, Building Code enforcement,
development engineering and stormwater/floodplain management, geographic
information systems, planning and zoning, and economic development.
      2.   Administration of the subdivision control regulations.
      3.   Staffing of the Zoning Board of Appeals/Plan Commission.
      4.   Fulfilling, or assigning his designee to fulfill, the duties of
chief building official and Zoning Administrator.
      5.   Staffing committees of the City Council addressing community and
economic development issues.
      6.   Performing such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor and/or
City Council. (Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
1-6-14: CITY HISTORIAN:
   A.   Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of City
Historian, which official shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
   B.   Duties: Said officer's duties shall include maintaining the historical
records for the City and such other duties as shall from time to time be
prescribed by the Corporate Authorities.
   C.   Unsalaried Position: Said office shall be an unsalaried position. (Ord.
324, 6-20-1977)
1-6-15: POLICE COMMISSIONERS:
   A.   The fidelity bond for Police Commissioners appointed pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (Ord. 318, 5-16-1977)
1-6-16: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND, PARTICIPATION:
The City hereby elects to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund, effective January 1, 1981. (Ord. 540, 9-24-1980)
1-6-17: BUDGET OFFICER:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of
Budget Officer. The Budget Officer shall be designated by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Corporate Authorities and shall take an oath of office. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10 shall not apply to an individual serving as the
Budget Officer. Such Budget Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
The Budget Officer may hold another Municipal office, either elected or
appointed, and may receive compensation for both offices. The Budget Officer
shall post a fidelity bond in such sum as may be required by the Mayor and City
Council, but the amount of such bond shall not be less than the amount which
may be required from time to time by the Statutes of the State or five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, whichever is greater; provided,
however, should the Budget Officer hold another City office for which a
fidelity bond is required, the City Council may authorize a single fidelity
bond for both offices. (Ord. 2902, 12-15-2014)
   B.   Powers And Duties Of The Budget Officer: The Budget Officer shall have
the following powers and duties:
      1.   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all City departments, commissions, and boards.
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.3.
      3.   Examine all books and records of all City departments, commissions,
and boards which relate to monies received by the City, City departments,
commissions, and boards, and paid out by the City, City departments,
commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to
the City, City departments, commissions and boards.
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the City, City departments,
commissions, and boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for purposes of
compiling a City budget, such information to be furnished by the City, City
departments, commissions, and boards in the form required by the Budget
Officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such
information as is requested of it available to the Budget Officer shall not be
permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the City until
such City department, commission, or board shall comply in full with the
request of the Budget Officer.
      5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the City, City departments, commissions, or board
except as authorized by the budget.
      6.   Compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenue
available to the City for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted,
together with recommended expenditures for the City and all of the City's
departments, commissions, and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure
recommendations shall be represented in a manner which is in conformity with
good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of
accounts, now or in the future, recommended by the National Committee on
Governmental Accounting or the auditor of public accounts of the State of
Illinois, or the Division of Local Governmental Affairs and Property Taxes of
the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois or successor agencies shall
be deemed proof of such conformity. The budget shall contain actual or
estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding
the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the
fiscal data from such two (2) preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a
manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts approved above. Each
budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure
shall be made. The budget shall be prepared in conformance with the applicable
provisions of the Illinois Statutes, including 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
8-2-9.4 through 5/8-2-9.11 as presently existing or hereafter amended. (Ord.
1025, 3-6-1989)
      7.   The Budget Officer shall perform such further duties as may be
prescribed by law or as may be assigned to him/her by the City Council. (Ord.
2040, 2-18-2003)
1-6-18: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
   A.   Office Established; Appointment: There is hereby established the Office
of the Director of Finance of the City, which office shall be appointed by the
City Administrator.
   B.   Responsibilities: The Director of Finance shall be responsible for:
      1.   The operation of the Finance Department and the supervision and
direction of its employees.
      2.   Advising the City Administrator and City Council and other officials
on fiscal matters of the City.
      3.   Assisting the City Administrator and Budget Officer in the
preparation of the annual budget, including forecasting revenues, compiling
expenditure requests, coordinating the printing of the proposed budget
document, preparing the annual tax levy ordinance, and monitoring budget
performance.
      4.   Investing City funds in accordance with State laws and City
ordinances. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to invest said funds.
The Director of Finance shall make full and complete written reports to the
City Council at least once each month detailing the investments made.
      5.   Performing the following duties as designee of the City Treasurer:
         a.   Receive all tax monies belonging to the City and keeping the
books and accounts in accordance with State and Federal Statutes, and as
prescribed by the Corporate Authorities.
         b.   Make a written monthly report to the Mayor, City Council and City
Administrator of all money collected.
         c.   Keep a separate account of each fund and the debits and credits
belonging thereto.
         d.   Keep a true and accurate account of all monies paid into the
Treasury, showing from whom and on what account received; pay out all such sums
of money as may be authorized by the Mayor and City Council.
         e.   Perform such other duties as may be directed by the Treasurer.
(Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-2021)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTION WARDS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Wards Designated
1-7-1: WARDS DESIGNATED:
The city is hereby divided into four (4) wards, described as follows:
Ward 1
All That Part of the Property Within the Corporate Limits of the City of
Warrenville Lying Within That Part of Sections 27, 28, 33, 34, and 35, Township
39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian and Part of Sections 1,
2, 3 and 4, Township 38 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian,
Described as Follows: Beginning at the Intersection of the Centerline of Ferry
Creek and the Line Between Naperville and Winfield Townships (Being Also the
Centerline of Townline Road); Thence West along Said Line Between Naperville
and Winfield Townships to the West Right-of-way Line of Illinois State Route
59; Thence Southerly along Said Westerly Right-of-way to the Northerly Line of
Ferry Road; Thence Westerly along Said Northerly Line of Ferry Road to the
Northwesterly Line of the Dupage County Parkway "Prairie Path" (Formerly C.a. &
E. Railroad); Thence Southwesterly along Said Northwesterly Line of Said Dupage
County Parkway "Prairie Path" to the West Line of Lot 1 of the Plat of Survey
of the Alexander Ferguson Farm, Recorded as Document No. 456920; Thence North
along Said West Line of Lot 1 to the North Line of Ferry Road; Thence Westerly
along Said North Line of Ferry Road to the West Line of a 29.9988 Acre Tract of
Land Conveyed to the State of Illinois for Use and Benefit of the Department of
Corrections by Trustee's Deed Recorded as Document No. R73-67864; Thence North
along Said West Line of State of Illinois, Department of Corrections Property,
as Described in Document R73-67864, to the Northwest Corner Thereof; Thence
Easterly along the North Line of Said State of Illinois, Department of
Corrections Property as Described in Document No. R73-67864 and the North Line
of the City of Warrenville Assessment Plat No. 1, Recorded as Document R75-
71562, to the Northeast Corner Thereof; Thence South along the East Line of
Said City of Warrenville Assessment Plat No. 1 to the Southeast Corner Thereof;
Thence West along the South Line of Said City of Warrenville Assessment Plat
No. 1, to the Southwest Corner Thereof, Being a Point on the East Line of
Aforesaid State of Illinois Department of Corrections Tract; Thence Southerly
along Said East Line of Said State of Illinois Tract, to the Southerly Line of
Ferry Road; Thence Easterly along the Southerly Line of Ferry Road to the
Southerly Extension of the West Line of Naperville and Winfield Township
Supervisors Assessment Plat No. 1, Recorded as Document No. 517758; Thence
Northerly along Said West Line of Said Naperville and Winfield Township
Supervisors Assessment Plat No. 1, Rose Tortoriello's Division Recorded as
Document No. 666086, Anthony Pacelli's Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No.
540223 and the Duke Realty Unit 6 Plat of Consolidation Recorded as Document
No. R2017-117524, to the Northwest Corner of Lot 1 in Said Duke Realty Unit 6
Plat of Consolidation Thence Easterly along the North Line of Said Lot 1 in
Said Duke Realty Unit 6 Plat of Consolidation to the West Right-of-way Line of
Illinois State Route 59; Thence Northerly along Said West Right-of-way Line of
Illinois State Route 59 to the South Line of Robert Bartlett's Green Acres
Recorded as Document No. 454884; Thence Westerly along Said South Line of
Robert Bartlett's Green Acres to the Southwest Corner Thereof; Thence Northerly
along the West Line of Robert Bartlett's Green Acres to the Northerly Line of
Illinois State Rout 56 (Butterfield Road); Thence Westerly along the Northerly
Line of Said Illinois State Route 56 to the West Line of Lot 2 in Satter's
Assessment Plat Recorded as Document R71-006792; Thence Northerly along the
West Line of Said Lot 2 to the Northwest Corner Thereof; Thence Westerly along
the North Line of Lot 1 in Satters Assessment Plat to the Easterly Line of the
Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway; Thence Northerly along the Easterly Line of
Said Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway, Being the Westerly Line of Satter's
Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R71-006792 to the Northerly Corner of
Lot 3 in Said Satter's Assessment Plat, Being a Point on the West Line of
Talbot Avenue; Thence Northerly along the West Line of Talbot Avenue to the
Southeast Corner of Tax Parcel No. 04-33-201-003; Thence along the Southerly
Line of Said Tax Parcel No. 04-33-201-003 to the East Line of the Elgin, Joliet
& Eastern Railway; Thence Northerly along Said East Line of the Elgin, Joliet &
Eastern Railway, Said East Line Also Being the West Line of the Plat of
Consolidation of Summerlakes Park Recorded as Document No. R2006-165783 and
Richard Haighs Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R1986-152582 to the
Northerly Line of the Creek Located on Lot 1 of Said Richard Haighs Assessment
Plat and Said Plat of Consolidation of Summer Lakes Park; Thence Easterly and
Southerly along the Northerly Line of Said Creek to the Northerly Shore Line of
the Pond of the Summer Lakes Homeowner's Association Located on Tax Parcel Nos.
04-28-408-016, 04-33-208-027, 04-27-310-001, and 04-34-100-013; Thence Easterly
and Southerly along Said Norhterly Shore Line to the Northerly Face of the
Concrete Overflow Structure at the Easterly End of Said Pond at Lakeview Drive;
Thence Easterly along the Northerly Face of Said Concrete Overflow Structure
and the Easterly Extension Thereof to the Centerline of Lakeview Drive; Thence
Northerly along the Centerline of Said Lakeview Drive to the Centerline of
Continental Drive; Thence Southerly and Southeasterly along Said Centerline of
Continental Drive to the Centerline of Illinois State Rout 59, Being Also the
Intersection of Said Illinois State Route 59 and Meadow Avenue; Thence East
along the Centerline of Meadow Avenue and its Extension to the Northwest Corner
of Edgebrook Unit 4 Recorded as Document No. R77-113441; Thence East along the
North Line of Edgebrook Unit 4 Recorded as Document R77-113441 and Edgebrook
Unit 3 Recorded as Document No. R77-l 18154 to the Northeast Corner of Said
Edgebrook Unit 3; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Said Edgebrook Unit 3
to the Southwest Corner of Lot 6 in Don Clevenger's Resubdivision Recorded as
Document No. R77-089164; Thence Easterly along the South Line of Said Lot 6 in
Don Clevenger's Resubdivision and its Extension Easterly to the Centerline of
Williams Road, Being Also the Intersection of Williams Road and Calument
Avenue; Thence Easterly along the Centerline of Calumet Avenue to the
Centerline of Rockwell Street; Thence Southerly along the Centerline of
Rockwell Street to the Southerly Line of Illinois State Route 56 (Butterfield
Road); Thence Northeasterly along Said Southerly Line of Said Illinois State
Route 56 Also Being the Northwesterly Line of Manning's Second Assessment Plat
Recorded as Document No. R1961-029450 to the Most Northerly Corner of Lot 3 of
Said Manning's Second Assessment Plat Being on the Southwesterly Line of
Batavia Road; Thence Southeasterly along Said Southwesterly Line of Batavia
Road to the Most Easterly Corner of Said Lot 3 of Said Manning's Second
Assessment Plat; Thence Southwesterly along the Southeasterly Line of Said Lot
3 to the Most Easterly Corner of Lot 7 of Manning's Second Assessment Plat;
Thence Southwesterly along the Easterly Line of Said Lot 7 of Manning's Second
Assessment Plat to Intersection with the Northwesterly Extension of the
Southwesterly Line of Warren Avenue; Thence Southeasterly along Said
Southwesterly Line of Warren Avenue to the Intersection with the Northwesterly
Line of Manning Avenue; Thence Westerly and Southerly along Said Northwesterly
Line of Manning Avenue to the Intersection with the Northerly Line of Ray
Street; Thence Westerly along Said Northerly Line of Ray Street to the
Centerline of Rockwell Street; Thence Southerly along Said Centerline of
Rockwell Street to the Centerline of Warrenville Road; Thence Easterly along
Said Centerline of Warrenville Road to the Centerline of River Road; Thence
Southerly along the Centerline of River Road to the Line Between Naperville and
Winfield Townships; Thence East along the Line Between Naperville and Winfield
Townships to the Northerly Line of Torch Parkway; Thence Easterly along the
Northerly Line of Torch Parkway to the Centerline of Winfield Road; Thence
Southerly along the Centerline of Winfield Road to the Northerly Line of Ferry
Road/Warrenville Road; Thence Easterly along Said Northerly Line of Ferry Road/
Warrenville Road to a Point in Said Northerly Line That Is at Right Angles to
the Most Northerly Corner of Tax Parcel No. 07-01-106-001; Thence Southeasterly
to the Most Northerly Corner of Tax Parcel No. 07-01-106-001; Thence South
along the East Line of Tax Parcelno. 07-01-106-001 to the Southeast Corner
Thereof; Thence West along the South Line of Tax Parcel No. 07-01-106-001 to
the East Line of Mill Street; Thence Southwesterly to the West Line of Mill
Street; Thence Southerly along the West Line of Mill Street to the North Line
of I-88 (East-west Tollway); Thence Southerly to the Northeast Corner of Tax
Parcel No. 07- 01-300-006, Being a Point on the North Line of Northern Illinois
Gas Company Naperville Township Assessment Plat No. 1 Recorded as Document No.
R64-027940 and on the West Line of Mill Street; Thence South to the South Line
of Northern Illinois Gas Company Naperville Assessment Plat No. 1 Recorded as
Document No. R64-027940; Thence East to the West Line of Mill Street; Thence
South along the West Line of Mill Street to its Intersection with the West Line
of West Avenue; Thence South along the West Line of West Avenue to the
Southeast Corner of Cantera Subarea Klot 1 Resubdivision Recorded as Document
No. R99-246747; Thence West along the South Line of Cantera Subarea K Lot 1
Resubdivision Recorded as Document No. R99-246747, Cantera Subarea K Recorded
as Document No. R95-183401, Cantera Subarea J Recorded as Document No. R2000-
27668, Cantera Subarea I Resubdivision Recorded as Document No. R2003-195726
and its Extension to the Northwest Corner of Cress Creek Commons Unit 5
Recorded as Document No. R88-055771, Being the Northeast Corner of Mcdowell
Grove/fawell Dam Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R2004-207203; Thence
Westerly along the Northerly Line of Said Mcdowell Grove/fawell Dam Assessment
Plat to the Southwest Corner of the Forest Preserve District Cantera South
Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R2007-177577; Thence North and
Northeast along the Westerly Line of Said Mcdowell Grove/Fawell Dam Assessment
Plat to the Southerly Line of Diehl Road; Thence Southeasterly along the
Southerly Line of Diehl Road, 106.19 Feet to a Jog in the Southerly Line of
Diehl Road; Thence Northerly 60.0 Feet to a Jog in the Southerly Line of Diehl
Road; Thence Northerly to the Southwest Corner of Cantera Subarea G Recorded as
Document R97-150129; Thence Northeasterly along the Westerly Line of Cantera
Subarea G to the Northwest Corner Thereof; Thence Easterly along the North Line
of Cantera Subarea G to its Intersection with the Southerly Extension of the
East Line of Lot 10 in Northern Illinois Gas Company Assessment Plat No. 1
Recorded as Document R64-027940; Thence Northerly along Said Extended Line of
Lot 10 to the Southeast Corner of Lot 10 in Northern Illinois Gas Company
Assessment Plat No. 1; Thence Westerly along the South Line of Lots 10, 9, and
8 in Northern Illinois Gas Company Assessment Plat No. 1 to the East Line of
Old River Road; Thence Northerly along the East Line of Old River Road to the
South Line of Ferry Road; Thence Northerly to the Southwest Corner of Lot 1 in
Prairie Point Corporate Park Unit 1a Recorded as Document R2005-129890; Thence
Northerly along the West Line of Prairie Point Corporate Park Unit 1A Recorded
as Document No. R2005-129890 and Ray W. Macdonald County Clerk' S Isackson
Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R76-010233 to the Centerline of Ferry
Creek; Thence Northwesterly along the Centerline of Ferry Creek to the Place of
Beginning, in Dupage County, Illinois.
Ward 2
That Part of Sections 27, 28, 33 and 34, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of
the Third Principal Meridian Described as Follows: Beginning at the
Intersection of the East Line of the Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway and the
Northerly Line of the Creek Located on Lot 1 of Richard Haighs Assessment Plat
Recorded as Document No. R1986-152582; Thence Northerly along Said East Line of
the Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway, the West Line of Said Richard Haighs
Assessment Plat, and Hurlingham Unit 1 Recorded as Document No. R1978-058120 to
the Centerline of Batavia Road; Thence Southeasterly along the Centerline of
Batavia Road to the Centerline of Sanchez Drive; Thence Northerly along Said
Centerline of Said Sanchez Drive to the Centerline of Branch Avenue; Thence
Easterly along the Centerline of Said Branch Avenue to the Centerline of
Riverside Avenue; Thence Southerly along Said Centerline of Riverside Avenue to
the Centerline of Batavia Road; Thence Southeasterly along Said Centerline of
Batavia Road to the Centerline of Glen Drive North; Thence Southerly along Said
Centerline of Glen Drive North to the Centerline of Calument Avenue; Thence
Westerly along the Easterly Extension of the South Line of Lot 6 in Don
Clevenger' S Resubdivision Recorded as Document No. R77-089164 and along the
South Line of Lot 6 in Don Clevenger's Resubdivision to the Southwest Corner
Thereof, Being a Point on the East Line of Edgebrook Unit N0.3 Recorded as
Document No. R77-119154; Thence Northerly along the East Line of Edgebrook Unit
3 to the Northeast Corner Thereof; Thence Westerly along the North Line of
Edgebrook Unit 3 Recorded as Document No. R77-118154 and Edgebrook Unit 4
Recorded as Document No. R77-113441 to the Northwest Corner of Edgebrook Unit
4; Thence Westerly along the Easterly Extension of Meadow Avenue and along the
Centerline of Meadow Avenue to the Centerline of Illinois State Route 59, Being
Also the Intersection of the Centerline of Illinois State Route 59 and the
Centerline of Continental Drive; Thence Northwesterly and Northerly along the
Centerline of Continental Drive to the Centerline of Lakeview Drive; Thence
Southerly along the Centerline of Lakeview Drive to the Easterly Extension of
the Northerly Face of the Concrete Overflow Structure Westerly of Lakeview
Drive at the East End of the Pond of the Summer Lakes Homeowner's Association
Located on Tax Parcel Nos. 04-28-408-016, 04-33-208-027, 04-27-310-001, and 04-
34-100-013; Thence Westerly along the Extension of and the Northerly Face of
Said Concrete Overflow Structure to the Intersection with the Northerly Shore
Line of Said Pond; Thence Northerly and Westerly along Said Northerly Shore
Line of Said Pond to the Northerly Line of the Creek Located on Lot 1 of Said
Richard Haighs Assessment Plat and the Plat of Consolidation of Summer Lakes
Park Recorded as Document No. R2006-165783; Thence Westerly and Northerly along
Said Creek to the Place of Beginning, in Dupage County, Illinois.
Ward 3
That Part of Section 27, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third
Principal Meridian, Described as Follows: Beginning at the Northeast Corner of
Lot 9 in Robert Bartlett's Riverside Recorded as Document No. 543778, Being a
Point in the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River and the
Northwest Corner of Lot 1 in Galo's Division Recorded as Document No. R71-
060256; Thence Easterly along the North Line of Said Galo' S Division and the
North Line of Robert Bartlett's Riverside First Addition Recorded as Document
No. 576257 to the Northeast Corner of Lot 82 Thereof; Thence Southerly along
the East Line of Said Lot 82 and its Extension South to the South Line of
Forestview Drive; Thence Easterly along the South Line of Forestview Drive to
the West Line of Robert Bartlett's Riverside Second Addition Recorded as
Document No. 583161; Thence Southerly along the West Line of Robert Bartlett's
Riverside Second Addition Recorded as Document No. 583161 to the Southeast
Corner Thereof, Being a Point on the North Line of Thorn Apple Woods Recorded
as Document No. R69-048275; Thence Westerly along the North Line of Thorn Apple
Woods, Being along the East-west Quarter Section Line of Section 27, Township
39 North, Range 9, to the Center of Said Section 27; Thence Northerly along the
North-south Quarter Section Line of Section 27, Township 39 North, Range 9,
73.26 Feet to the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River; Thence
Northwesterly, Westerly and North along the Centerline of the West Branch of
the Dupage River to the Place of Beginning, in Dupage County, Illinois.
Also:
All That Part of the Property Within the Corporate Limits of the City of
Warrenville Lying Within That Part of Section 1 and 2, Township 38 North, Range
9, and Sections 25, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36, Township 39 North, Range 9, All East of
the Third Principal Meridian, Described as Follows: Beginning at the Northwest
Corner of Riverside Park Unit 1 Recorded as Document No. R71-022550; Thence
Easterly along the North Line of Said Riverside Park Unit I to the West Line of
Williams Road; Thence Continuing Easterly to the East Line of Williams Road,
Being the Northwest Corner of Lot 8 in Williams Woods Recorded as Document No.
R97-016535; Thence Easterly along the North Line of Said Williams Woods to the
Northeast Corner of Lot 7 Thereof; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Said
Lot 7 to the Southeast Corner Thereof; Thence Westerly along the South Line of
Said Lot 7 to the Northeast Corner of Mcnellis Subdivision Recorded as Document
No. R84-093605; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Mcnellis Subdivision to
the Southeast Corner Thereof; Thence Westerly along the South Line of Said
Mcnellis Subdivision and the South Line of Williams Woods Recorded as Document
No. R97-016535 to the East Line of Williams Road; Thence Westerly to a Point on
the South Line of Iroquois Court South That Is the North Point of Curve at the
Northeast Corner of Lot 6 in Block 1 in Riverside Park Unit 1 Recorded as
Document No. R71-022550; Thence Southeasterly along Said Curve and the West
Line of Williams Road to the Point of Curve at the Northeast Corner of Said Lot
6, Block 1; Thence Continuing Southerly along the West Line of Williams Road to
the Westerly Extension of the North Line of River Highlands Recorded as
Document No. 99196; Thence Easterly along Said Extended Line and the North Line
of River Highlands Recorded as Document No. 99196 to the Northeast Corner of
Lot 1 in River Highlands; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Lot 1 in Said
River Highlands to the Southeast Corner Thereof, Being a Point in the
Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River; Thence Southeasterly along
the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River to a Point on the West
Line of Lot 4 in River and Grove Addition Recorded as Document No. 100037;
Thence Northerly along the West Line of Said Lot 4 to the Northwest Corner of
Lot 4 in Said River & Grove Addition; Thence Southeasterly along the Northerly
Line of Said Lot 4 to the Northeast Corner Thereof, Being a Point on the East
Line of Section 27, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Northerly along the East
Line of Section 27, Township 39 North, Range 9 to the Northwest Corner of von
Lanken Assessment Plat Recorded as Document No. R65-040676; Thence Easterly
along the North Line of Said von Lanken Assessment Plat and its Extension
Easterly 82.5 Feet to Blackwell Forest Preserve; Thence Southerly along
Blackwell Forest Preserve to a Point on the South Line of the Southwest Quarter
of Section 26, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Easterly along the South Line
of the Southwest Quarter of Section 26, Township 39 North, Range 9 to the
Southeast Corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section 26, Township 39 North,
Range 9, Being the Northeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter of Section 35,
Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Southerly along the East Line of the
Northwest Quarter of Section 35, Township 39 North, Range 9 to the Northerly
Right-of-way Line of Illinois State Route 56 (Butterfield Road); Thence
Southwesterly along the Northerly Line of Illinois State Route 56 to a Jog in
the Northerly Right-of-way of Illinois State Route 56, Being a Point on the
Northerly Line of River & Grove Addition Recorded as Document No. 100037;
Thence Southeasterly along the Northerly Line of River & Grove Addition to a
Point on the Southerly Right-of-way Line of Illinois State Route 59, Being the
Northwest Corner of Forest Preserve District Breme Assessment Plat Recorded as
Document No. R82-022066; Thence Northeasterly along the Southerly Line of
Illinois State Route 56 to the North Line of the Northeast Quarter of Section
35, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Easterly along the North Line of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 35, Township 39 North, Range 9 to the East Line of
Winfield Road; Thence Northerly along the East Line of Winfield Road to the
South Line of Illinois State Route 56; Thence Easterly along the South Line of
Illinois Route 56 to the East Line of the West Half of the Southwest Quarter of
Section 25, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Southerly along the East Line of
the West Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 25, Township 39 North, Range
9 to the South Line of the Southwest Quarter of Said Section 25; Thence
Westerly along the South Line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 25, Township
39 North, Range 9 to the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of Section
35, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Southerly along the East Line of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 35, Township 39 North, Range 9 to a Point on the
North Line of Robert Bartlett's Park View Subdivision Recorded as Document No.
538028; Thence Easterly along the North Line of Said Robert Bartlett's Park
View Subdivision to the Northeast Corner Thereof; Thence Southerly along the
East Line of Robert Bartlett's Park View Subdivision to the North Line of
Greenview Avenue; Thence Westerly along the North Line of Greenview Avenue to
the West Line of Virginia Avenue Extended North; Thence Southerly along Said
Extended Line and the West Line of Virginia Avenue to the Northwest Corner of
Virginia Avenue and Galusha Avenue; Thence Southerly to the Southwest Corner of
Galusha Avenue and Virginia Avenue; Thence Easterly along the South Line of
Galusha Avenue to the East Line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36,
Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Northerly along the East Line of the
Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 39 North, Range 9 and the East Line
of the Northwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 39 North, Range 9 to the North
Line of Galusha Farms Recorded as Document No. 462197; Thence Easterly along
the North Line of Galusha Farms to the West Line of Saddle Ridge Court
Subdivision Recorded as Document No. R2000-132063; Thence Northerly to the
Northwest Corner of Saddle Ridge Court Subdivision Thereof; Thence Easterly
along the North Line of Saddle Ridge Court Subdivision to the Northeast Corner
Thereof; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Saddle Ridge Court Subdivision
to the Northwest Corner of Otto Deb's Subdivision Recorded as Document No.
R1955-775066; Thence Easterly along the North Line of Said Otto Deb's
Subdivision to the Northeast Corner of Lot 6 of Said Otto Deb's Subdivision;
Thence Southerly along the East Line of Said Lot 6 and its Extension South to
the South Line of Galusha Avenue; Thence Easterly along the South Line of
Galusha Avenue to the West Line of Brouillette Resubdivision Recorded as
Document No.r79-018813, Extended South; Thence Northerly along Said Extended
Line and the West Line of Brouillette Resubdivision to the Northwest Corner
Thereof; Thence Easterly along the North Line of Brouillette Resubdivision to
the Northeast Corner Thereof; Thence Southerly along the East Line of
Brouilette Resubdivision and its Extension South to the South Line of Galusha
Avenue; Thence Easterly along the South Line of Galusha Avenue to the West Line
of Herrick Road; Thence Southerly along the West Line of Herrick Road to the
North Line of Warrenville Road; Thence Northwesterly along the Northerly Line
of Warrenville Road to the Southeast Corner of Herrick Lake Center Recorded as
Document R98-202478; Thence Westerly to the Intersection of the Northerly Line
of Ferry Road/warrenville Road and the Southerly Line of Warrenville Road;
Thence Westerly along the Northerly Line of Ferry Road/warrenville Road to the
Centerline of Winfield Road; Thence Northerly along the Centerline of Said
Winfield Road to the Northerly Line of Torch Parkway; Thence Westerly along the
Northerly Line of Torch Parkway to the Line Between Naperville and Winfield
Townships; Thence West along Said Line Between Naperville and Winfield
Townships to the Centerline of River Road; Thence Northerly along the
Centerline of River Road to the Centerline of Warrenville Road; Thence Westerly
along the Centerline of Warrenville Road to the Centerline of Rockwell Avenue;
Thence Northerly along Said Centerline of Rockwell Avenue to the Northerly Line
of Ray Street; Thence Easterly along Said Northerly Line of Ray Street; to the
Westerly Line of Manning Avenue; Thence Northerly and Easterly along the
Westerly Line of Manning Avenue to the Southwesterly Line of Warren Avenue,
Thence Northwesterly along Said Southwesterly Line of Warren Avenue and the
Extension Thereof to the Easterly Line of Lot 7 of Manning's Second Assessment
Plat Recorded as Document No. R1961-029450; Thence Northeasterly along the
Easterly Line of Said Lot 7 to the Most Easterly Corner of Said Lot 7; Thence
Northeasterly along the Southeasterly Line of Lot 3 of Said Manning's Seconds
Assessment Plat to the Most Easterly Corner of Said Lot 3 Being on the
Southwesterly Line of Batavia Road; Thence Northwesterly along the Said
Southwesterly Line of Batavia Road to the Most Northerly Corner of Said Lot 3
Being on the Southerly Line of Illiinois State Route 56 (Butterfield Road);
Thence Southwesterly along the Southerly Line of Said Illinois State Route 56
to the Centerline of Rockwell Street; Thence Northerly along the Centerline of
Rockwell Street to the Centerline of Calumet Avenue; Thence Westerly along the
Centerline of Calumet Avenue to the Centerline of Glen Drive North; Thence
Northerly along the Centerline of Glen Drive North to the Centerline of Batavia
Road; Thence Northwesterly along the Centerline of Batavia Road to the
Centerline of Emerald Green Drive; Thence Northerly along Said Centerline of
Emerald Green Drive to the Northerly Line of John Bardeen Drive; Thence
Easterly along Said Northerly Line of John Bardeen Drive to the North Terminus
of Said North Line of John Bardeen Drive Said Point Also Being on the North
Line of Emerald Green's Second Resubdivision Recorded as Document No. R74-
009225; Thence Easterly along Said North Line to the Southeast Corner of Lot 49
in Emerald Green Unit 6 Recorded as Document No. R77-101442 Said Point Also
Being on the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River; Thence
Northeasterly, Northerly and Northwesterly along the East Line of Said Lot 49,
Said East Line Also Being the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River
to the Northwest Corner of Riverside Park Unit 1 Recorded as Document No. R7l -
022550, Said Point Also Being the Place of Beginning, in Dupage County,
Illinois.
Ward 4
That Part of Sections 21, 22, 27, and 28, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of
the Third Principal Meridian, Described as Follows: Beginning at the
Intersection of the East Line of the Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway with the
Centerline of Batavia Road; Thence Northerly along the East Line of the Elgin,
Joliet & Eastern Railway to the North Line of the Maple Hill Condominium
Association's Maple Hill Subdivision Recorded as Document R1994-029463; Thence
Easterly along the North Line of Said Maple Hill Condominium Association's
Maple Hill Subdivision to the West Line of Illinois State Route 59; Thence
Southerly along the West Line of Illinois State Route 59 to a Point on the
Westerly Extension of Tract "A" in Foote-denemark Plat of Survey Recorded as
Document No. 605328; Thence Easterly on the Westerly Extension of the North
Line of Tract "A" in Foote- Denemark Plat of Survey, the North Line of Tract
"A" in Foote- Denemark Plat of Survey Recorded as Document 605328 and the North
Line of Lot 1 in Frederick G. Walker Plat of Survey Recorded as Document No.
539821 to the Northeast Corner of Lot 1 in Frederick G. Walker Plat of Survey
Thereof; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Lot 1 in Frederick G. Walker
Plat of Survey to the Southeast Corner Thereof, Being a Point on the North Line
of Mack Road; Thence Westerly along the North Line of Mack Road to the East
Line of Illinois State Route 59; Thence Southwesterly to the West Line of
Illinois State Route 59, Being the Northeast Corner of Lot 1 in Fox Hollow Unit
1 Recorded as Document No. R85-036760; Thence Southerly along the West Line of
Illinois State Route 59 to the Southeast Corner of Lot 836 in Hurlingham Unit
No. 7 Recorded as Document R78-029948; Thence Southeasterly to the East Line of
Illinois State Route 59, Being a Point on the North Line of Lot 9 in Robert
Bartlett's Riverside Recorded as Document No. 543778; Thence Easterly along the
North Line of Lot 9 in Robert Bartlett's Riverside to the Centerline of the
West Branch of the Dupage River; Thence Southerly, Easterly and Southeasterly
along the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River to the Most
Northerly Corner of the East Line of Lot 47 in Emerald Green Unit 6 Recorded as
Document R77-101442, Being a Point on the North-south Quarter Section Line of
Section 27, Township 39 North, Range 9; Thence Southerly along Said Quarter
Section Line, 73.26 Feet to the Center of Section 27, Township 39 North, Range
9; Thence Easterly along the East-west Quarter Section Line of Said Section 27,
35.0 Feet; Thence Southerly Parallel with the North-south Quarter Section Line
of Said Section 27, a Distance of 130.0 Feet to the Northwest Corner of Lot 48
in Emerald Green Unit 6 Recorded as Document No. R77-101442; Thence Easterly
along the North Line of Said Lot 48, 147.97 Feet to the Northeast Corner
Thereof; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Said Lot 48, 168.32 Feet to
the Southeast Corner Thereof, Being a Point on the North Line of Lot 49 in
Emerald Green Unit 6 Recorded as Document R77-101442; Thence Easterly along the
North Line of Said Lot 49, 94.72 Feet to the Centerline of the West Branch of
the Dupage River; Thence Southerly along the East Line of Said Lot 49, Being
the Centerline of the West Branch of the Dupage River to the Northeast Corner
of Emerald Green's Second Resubdivision Recorded as Document No. R74-009225;
Thence Westerly along the North Line of Emerald Green's Second Resubdivision to
the North Terminus of the Northerly Line of John Bardeen Drive; Thence Westerly
along the Northerly Line of John Bardeen Drive to the Centerline of Emerald
Green Drive; Thence Southerly along the Centerline of Emerald Green Drive to
the Centerline of Batavia Road; Thence Northwesterly along the Centerline of
Batavia Road to the Centerline of Riverside Avenue; Thence Northerly along the
Centerline of Riverside Avenue to the Centerline of Branch Avenue; Thence
Westerly along the Centerline of Branch Avenue to the Centerline of Sanchez
Drive; Thence Southerly along the Centerline of Sanchez Drive to the Centerline
of Batavia Road; Thence Northwesterly along the Centerline of Batavia Road to
the Place of Beginning, in Dupage County, Illinois.
(Ord. 2701, 3-5-2012; amd. Ord. O2022-33, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 8
CITY FINANCES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Depository For City Funds
1-8-2: Transfer Of Monies
1-8-3: Municipal Budget Procedures
1-8-4: Purchasing Procedures
1-8-5: Disposal Of Surplus Personal Property
1-8-1: DEPOSITORY FOR CITY FUNDS:
   A.   Monies received by the City shall be deposited in financial
institutions approved by the City Council pursuant to the Public Funds
Investment Act 1  as now existing or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
   B.   The amount of money deposited in any financial institution shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the bank's capital stock and surplus.
   C.   Checks written on the City's accounts shall be signed by the Mayor and
the Treasurer of the City or a facsimile signature thereof. In the absence of
the Mayor, the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to sign any such
checks which may be approved by the Mayor Pro Tem. In the absence of the
Treasurer, the Deputy Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to sign any
such checks which may be approved by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, as applicable.
(Ord. 1627, 11-3-1997; amd. Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003; amd. Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-
2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 235/1 et seq.
1-8-2: TRANSFER OF MONIES:
All transfers of funds from City accounts shall be approved by the City
Council. (Ord. 1627, 11-3-1997)
1-8-3: MUNICIPAL BUDGET PROCEDURES:
The City's budget shall be prepared and adopted in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.11, as now existing or hereafter
amended, and other applicable provisions of the Illinois Statutes. (Ord. 1025,
6-6-1989)
1-8-4: PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to assure that all services,
materials, equipment, labor, supplies, and personal property are purchased in a
manner to assure the best possible price giving due consideration to the
efficient operation of the City and the costs of administration of any
purchasing procedures. This section shall be construed and interpreted in a
manner consistent with the various Statutes of the State of Illinois as they
may relate to the procurement of services or personal property by the City. In
the event that a specific State Statute governs the manner of procurement, then
the specific requirements of the State Statute shall govern, over any
inconsistent provisions of this section.
   B.   Bid Procedures:
      1.   Generally: The City Administrator, or the Corporate Authorities,
upon recommendation of any department head or City officer, shall prescribe the
requirements to be met whenever free and open competitive bidding is utilized
or proposals are solicited or requested. In any instance where the procurement
is exempt by virtue of the provisions of this section, the procurement shall be
accomplished in a manner that will be most advantageous to the City, giving due
consideration to cost, cost of service or price, quality, ability of the vendor
to perform, or other relevant factors. The City Administrator, or the Corporate
Authorities in the absence of an Administrator, may also prescribe the
procedures by which competitive bids or proposals for any specific procurement
shall be received, the time limit for receiving such bids or proposals, and the
procedure by which bids or proposals shall be opened, accepted, examined, and
recommendations made to the Corporate Authorities for acceptance or rejection,
as the case may be.
      2.   Competitive Bidding: Any instance where competitive bidding is
required or a request for proposals is solicited from vendors, the bid or
proposal shall be disqualified from consideration unless the bid is submitted
to the City accordance with this section.
         a.   Submission of Bids:
            (1)   Hard copy bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk in a
sealed envelope. The exterior of the envelope shall contain only the following
information: the name, address and telephone number of the bidder or vendor
making the proposal, and the responsible person to be contacted concerning the
bid or proposal. No officer, official, or employee of the City shall accept a
hard copy bid or proposal that is not in sealed condition, and the information
clearly noted on the outside of the bid. The individual accepting the hard copy
bid shall note the date and time that the bid was received and affix his or her
name. All hard copy bids or proposals shall be forwarded to the City Clerk who
shall keep the sealed bids or sealed proposals in a secure location and shall
also keep a separate inventory of all bids received by project.
            (2)   Bids submitted through electronic means shall be submitted in
the manner and before the date and time specified in the invitation to bid.
Bids submitted electronically shall be received in such a manner that the time
and date of submittal, along with the contents of such bids, shall be securely
stored until the time and date set for the bid opening.
         b.   Opening of Bids: Bids or proposals shall not be opened and
examined until the date specified for opening; provided, however, that prior to
the bid or proposal opening, the bidder or vendor making the proposal shall be
entitled to withdraw the bid or proposal. All bids shall be opened in public.
If such a request to withdraw is made in writing to the Clerk, the Clerk shall
return the bid or proposal to the bidder or vendor and shall also notify the
City Administrator and the department head involved in the procurement. Once
bids are opened, they may not be withdrawn except upon the approval of the City
Council.
      3.   Security Deposits For Bids: On all contracts and purchases wherein
competitive bidding procedures are utilized or required, the security deposit
or bid bond shall be as provided in the advertisement, the invitation to bid,
or the bidding documents. The requirements of this section shall not apply to
any purchase exempt under subsection B6 of this section.
      4.   Purchasing Procedures: Free and open competitive bidding after
advertisement shall not be required for purchase orders specified in this
subsection, provided that any purchasing procedures or requirements designated
shall be followed:
         a.   Purchases in an amount not to exceed $5.000,00 may be authorized
by the Records Supervisor. Utility Division Crew Leader, Street Division Crew
Leader, Facilities Maintenance Lead Supervisor;
         b.   Purchases in an amount not to exceed $10,000.00 may be authorized
by the Assistant City Administrator, Chief Code Official, Deputy Police Chief,
Accounting Supervisor, Assistant Community Development Director, Capital
Maintenance Superintendent, and Utility Maintenance Superintendent.
         c.   Purchases in amounts of $10,000 to $25.000 may be made only after
obtaining three comparable written quotes.
         d.   Purchases in an amount not to exceed $25,000.00 may be authorized
and signed by the Chief of Police, Public Works Director, Community and
Economic Development Director, Finance Director, and the City Administrator or,
in the absence of the City Administrator, the Mayor. Nothing contained herein
shall limit the ability of a Mayor Pro Tern to sign on behalf of the Mayor.
         e.   Any purchase order or contract greater than $25,000.00 shall be
let by free and open competitive bidding as provided in subsection B5 of this
section, and requires approval by the City Council.
         f.   All purchase orders must be signed by the Director of Finance.
         g.   No official, officer or employee may circumvent the limitations
of this subsection by means of “string purchasing” or similar devices.
      5.   Bidding Procedures And Requirements: All purchase orders or
contracts of whatever nature, for labor, services, or work, the purchase, lease
or sale of personal property, materials, equipment or supplies involving
amounts in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) made by or on
behalf of the City, shall be let by free and open competitive bidding after due
advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder, or in the appropriate instance
to the highest responsible bidder, depending upon whether the City is to expend
or receive money.
      “Due advertisement”, as used herein, shall mean publication of the
advertisement for bids not less than ten (10) days prior to the bid opening.
      6.   Exemptions From Bidding Requirements:
         a.   The following purchases are exempt from the requirements set
forth in this section of open and competitive bidding:
            (1)   Purchase contracts for either labor, services, materials,
equipment, or a combination thereof, which by their nature are not adaptable to
award by competitive bidding, such as, but not limited to, contracts for the
services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where
the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part, and contracts
for supplies, materials, parts, or equipment which are available only from a
single source.
            (2)   All purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature for
labor, services or work, the purchase, lease or sale of personal property,
materials, equipment or supplies wherein the price to be paid by the City is
equal to or less than a price established by open and competitive bidding
through either an agency of the Federal government or an agency of the State,
within one year immediately preceding the letting of the proposed contract by
the City.
            (3)   All purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature, for
labor, services or work, the purchase, lease or sale of personal property,
materials, equipment or supplies, wherein the City Council, by a two-thirds (2/
3) majority affirmative vote of the members of the City Council then holding
office, waive the requirement of open and competitive bidding, except in such
instances where open and competitive bidding is required by the provisions of
section 8-9-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
         b.   The City Council may authorize procurement from any Federal,
State or local governmental unit or agency thereof of any such materials,
supplies, commodities or equipment as may be made available through the
operation of any legislation heretofore or hereinafter enacted without
conforming with the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter.
      7.   Additional Exemptions For Emergencies: In the event of an emergency
or disaster affecting the public health or safety which is either: a) declared
by the Mayor and City Council at a meeting therefor duly convened, which
declaration shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members present and set forth the nature of the danger to the public health or
safety; b) proclaimed by the DuPage County Board Chairman in a “proclamation of
emergency for DuPage County, Illinois”; c) proclaimed in a “proclamation of
disaster for DuPage County, Illinois”, proclaimed by the DuPage County Board
Chairman; or d) a proclamation of local emergency or local disaster by the
Mayor, the Mayor’s designee, or the Mayor Pro Tem, then contracts may be let to
the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without public advertisement or
compliance with the provisions of this section.
      8.   Exemption For Employees: Regular employment contracts in the
Municipal service or collective bargaining agreements, whether with respect to
the classified service or otherwise, shall not be subject to provisions of this
section.
      9.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate
the provisions of this section.
      10.   Environmentally Preferable Goods And Services:
         a.   As used herein, the term “environmentally preferable goods and
services” means a purchase of goods or services that:
            (1)   Includes environmental considerations (including human health
and safety) as part of the normal purchasing process.
            (2)   Emphasizes pollution prevention early in the purchasing
process.
            (3)   Examines multiple environmental attributes throughout a
product or service’s life cycle.
            (4)   Compares relevant environmental impacts when selecting
products and services.
            (5)   Collects and bases purchasing decisions on accurate and
meaningful information about environmental performance.
         b.   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the
City may purchase goods or services which, although not the least expensive in
price, are environmentally preferable subject to the following conditions:
            (1)   Additional costs may be allowed for environmentally
preferable purchases without competitive bidding in the following amounts:
            Up to 10 percent on purchases up to and including $1,000.00.
            Up to 5 percent on purchases of $1,001.00 to $10,000.00.
            Up to 2 percent on purchases of $10,001.00 to $25,000.00.
            (2)   Additional costs may be allowed for environmentally
preferable purchases that are subject to open and competitive bidding in
amounts to be set on a case by case basis and approved by the City Council. If
environmentally preferable goods or services are sought through the open and
competitive bidding process, a maximum additional cost percentage for
environmentally preferable goods or services shall be set forth in the bid
specifications. (Ord. 1718, 10-19-1998; amd. Ord. 2467, 8-4-2008; amd. Ord.
O2018-49, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. O2019-54, 10-7-2019; Ord. O2022-36, 10-3-2022;
Ord. O2022-39, 10-17-2022; Ord. O2025-38, 8-18-2025)
1-8-5: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   The City Administrator is authorized to dispose of any personal
property owned by the City with a current estimated value equal to or less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) that, in the City Administrator's determination,
is no longer necessary or useful to the City, in the manner that the City
Administrator determines is in the best interest of the City.
   B.   The City Council may authorize the disposal or donation of personal
property owned by the City with a current estimated value greater than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) that, in the City Council's determination, is no
longer necessary or useful to the City, by ordinance duly adopted. (Ord. O2023-
51, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 9
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: State Ethics Regulations
1-9-1-1: Definitions
1-9-1-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-9-1-3: Gift Ban
1-9-1-4: Ethics Advisor
1-9-1-5: Ethics Commission
1-9-1-6: Complaints/Hearings
1-9-1-7: Conflicts
1-9-1-8: Penalties
1-9-2: Conflicts Of Interest And Disclosures
1-9-3: Fair And Equal Treatment; Influence In Employment
1-9-4: Policy Making Employees
1-9-5: Use Of Public Property
1-9-1: STATE ETHICS REGULATIONS:
1-9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section
1-9-1, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
herein:
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
   COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4
of the election code 3 .
   EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city of Warrenville, whether on a full
time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to
the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
   EMPLOYER: The city of Warrenville.
   GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit toward pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or
participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2130,
4-19-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-9-1-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2130, 4-19-2004)
1-9-1-3: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Solicitation Or Acceptance Of Gifts Prohibited: Except as permitted by
this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as
"recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any
"prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law
or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift
that violates this section.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the
following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2130, 4-19-2004)
1-9-1-4: ETHICS ADVISOR:
   A.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
designate an ethics advisor for the city. The duties of the ethics advisor may
be delegated to an officer or employee of the city unless the position has been
created as an office by the city.
   B.   The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees
of the city concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such
other duties as may be delegated by the city council. (Ord. 2130, 4-19-2004)
1-9-1-5: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics
commission of the city of Warrenville. The commission shall be comprised of the
mayor, the city clerk and the most senior trustee. In the event of a conflict
of interest, the remaining trustees, in order of seniority, shall serve as
alternate commissioners.
   B.   The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
      2.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with section
1-9-1-6 of this chapter and refer violations of section
1-9-1-2 or
 1-9-1-3 of this chapter to the city prosecutor for prosecution. The commission
shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter and not upon its own prerogative.
      3.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the city to cooperate with the commission during the
course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by
the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
      5.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 2130, 4-19-2004)
1-9-1-6: COMPLAINTS/HEARINGS:
   A.   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with the
ethics commission.
   B.   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
   C.   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the
commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by
the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the
extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice
to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed
within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
   D.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-9-1-3 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then
the commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the receipt of the complaint. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the city prosecutor and request that
the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not
sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable
cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint,
and that notice shall be made public.
   E.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-9-1-2 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the city
prosecutor and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional
documents in the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
   F.   On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public
notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint
and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the open meetings
act.
   G.   Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: 1) dismiss the complaint or
2) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the
officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee, or impose a
fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any
recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public
information.
   H.   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand,
the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least
forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the
opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days
thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the
alleged violator and to the officer having authority to discipline the officer
or employee or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
   I.   If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date
of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall
render its decision as required under subsection G of this section within seven
(7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding
that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of
that election, if possible.
   J.   The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-9-1-3 of this chapter in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars
($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission
may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The
commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge.
   K.   A complaint alleging the violation of this section
1-9-1 must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. 2130, 4-
19-2004)
1-9-1-7: CONFLICTS:
Notwithstanding any policy, resolution, ordinance or portion of this code to
the contrary, the provisions of this section
1-9-1 shall prevail. (Ord. 2130, 4-19-2004)
1-9-1-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-9-1-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
 1-9-1-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   A violation of section
1-9-1-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the city
prosecutor by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules
of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   E.   A violation of section
1-9-1-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the
city prosecutor, or, if an ethics commission has been created, by the
commission through the designated administrative procedure.
   F.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-9-1-2 or
1-9-1-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2130, 4-
19-2004)
1-9-2: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND DISCLOSURES:
   A.   All officers and employees of the city shall comply with all pertinent
and applicable state laws regarding conflicts of interest and economic
disclosure, including, without limitation, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-
101 et seq., 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., 5/3.1-55-10 and
50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1, as now existing or hereafter amended.
   B.   No elected or appointed official or employee of the city, whether paid
or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible
with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest.
No elected or appointed official of the city, whether paid or unpaid, shall
vote or attempt to influence the vote of others with respect to any business or
transaction which may benefit such official or shall have financial or other
personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair
his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official
duties, and which is not fully disclosed to all other city officials who will
vote on any matter which may benefit such official. Such disclosure shall occur
in writing to the city clerk before any such vote shall take place. (Ord. 2040,
2-18-2003)
1-9-3: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT; INFLUENCE IN EMPLOYMENT:
No public official shall, directly or indirectly, attempt to influence the
hiring or obtain preferential consideration for any person seeking a salaried
municipal position with the city except as provided in section
1-9-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-9-4: POLICY MAKING EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Political Affiliations: A public official may not consider the
political affiliation of any candidate or incumbent, except for those in a
policy making salaried municipal position with the city, e.g., city
administrator.
   B.   Discrimination In Appointments: No person shall be appointed to, or
removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to
any appointive office because of his race, religion, national origin, sex,
political opinion or affiliations, if otherwise qualified for the position or
office. However, this provision does not impair the appointing authority's
discretion in determining the requirements for a position or job assignment of
a person holding such a position.
   C.   Promise Of Appointment: Except as provided in subsection A of this
section, no public official shall promise an appointment to any salaried
municipal position as a reward for any political activity or cause any city
employee to contribute to or perform services for any political party or cause
as a condition of continued employment. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
1-9-5: USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No public official shall request or permit the use of the city owned vehicles,
equipment, materials or property for convenience or profit or political
purposes, except when such services are available to the public generally or
are provided as city policy for the use of such public official.
(Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 10
ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
1-10-1: Annual Fee Ordinance
1-10-1: ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE:
   A.   The City Council will adopt an annual fee ordinance setting forth the
applicable fees and charges authorized by this Code and by other ordinances of
the City.
   B.   Whenever reference is made to the “annual fee ordinance”, the reference
means the most current annual fee ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.
Each provision of the most recently adopted annual fee ordinance remain in full
force and effect unless otherwise expressly provided or expressly amended by
subsequent ordinance, in which case the amended provision will be effective.
   C.   Each fee, charge, rate, or regulatory measure set forth in the annual
fee ordinance adopted pursuant to this section applies to the provisions of the
corresponding section of this Code, as amended, or other ordinances in which
reference is made to the “annual fee ordinance,” a “ordinance of the City
Council,” a “ordinance adopted by the City Council,” “a fee schedule has been
established by ordinance” or other similar reference. The annual fee ordinance
does not and will not apply to, or have any effect on, any fee, charge, rate,
or regulatory measure or any other amount for which there is not express
reference to “annual fee ordinance,” a “ordinance of the City Council,” a
“ordinance adopted by the City Council,” “a fee schedule has been established
by ordinance” or other similar reference.”
(Ord. O2024-05, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-
2024; Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025; Ord. O2025-48, 10-20-2025)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Composition
2-1-2: Appointments
2-1-3: Qualifications; Oath; Bond; Removal
2-1-4: Rules and Regulations; Powers and Duties Generally
2-1-5: Initial Appointment of Police Officers; Precertification Requirements
2-1-6: Secretary
2-1-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, which shall
consist of three (3) members whose terms of office shall be three (3) years or
until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. (Ord. 1276,
9-20-93)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
Vacancies on the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment.
The Board members shall elect a chairman to serve during the municipal fiscal
year.
A majority of the Board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business.
(Ord. 1276, 9-20-93)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL:
The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the City and shall
file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be required by the City
Council.
No person holding an office with the City shall be a member of the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners or the Secretary thereof. The acceptance of any
such office by a member of the Board shall be treated as a resignation of his
office as a member of the Board or the Secretary thereof. No person shall be
appointed a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who has been
convicted of a felony under the laws of this State or comparable laws of any
other state or the United States. No person shall be appointed a member of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who is related, either by blood or
marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of such
municipality. No more than two (2) members of the Board shall belong to the
same political party existing in such municipality at the time of such
appointments and as defined in section 10-2 of the Election Code of the State
of Illinois. If only one or no political party exists in such municipality at
the time of such appointments, then State or national political affiliations
shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be
determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or
their own defense, before a regular meeting of the City Council. A majority
vote of the City Council shall be required to remove any such member from
office. (Ord. 1276, 9-20-93)
2-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissions shall make all necessary rules and
regulations and shall make all appointments of sworn police officers.
Appointment and demotion of the Chief of Police shall be made by the Mayor and
City Council. Dismissal of police officers from the department shall be in the
manner provided by State law. All promotions shall be in the manner provided by
State law. (Ord. 1276, 9-20-93)
2-1-5: INITIAL APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS; PRECERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may require, at its option,
that all applicants possess, at the time of initial application, a public
safety resources certification which will provide the Board with at least the
following information:
      1.   An Aptitude Profile designed specifically to determine a
candidates's basic cognitive ability to participate in a mandated course of
training for the service applied for. The profile shall illustrate strengths
and weaknesses which may be used during initial training and probationary
periods.
      2.   A Physical Agility Profile designed specifically to determine a
candidate's basic fitness for a mandated course of training for the service
applied for. The basic performance scales shall include a) upper body
endurance, b) abdominal and hip flexor endurance, c) upper body strength and
endurance, d) body fat norms (percentage), and e) cardiovascular work
endurance.
      3.   A Behavioral Potential Profile designed to identify personality
characteristics and attitudes associated with counterproductive behavior. Such
profile shall review, but not be limited to, such areas as a) honesty; b) non-
violence; c) drug avoidance; d) emotional stability; e) safety consciousness;
and f) an orientation dealing with a candidate's perceptions of law
enforcement. This profile shall be used as an identifier to determine the need
for an in-depth clinical psychological evaluation.
      4.   A Historical Profile designed to provide a lifetime background of
the candidate, which has been validated for informational reliability.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners has been given the option to require
applicants to possess a public safety resources certification so that it may
utilize it for so long as it determines that it is useful to the Board in
screening applicants, as well as fair to the applicants themselves. If a public
safety resources certification is required by the Board, it shall do so in a
nondiscriminatory way; that is, all applicants evaluated for a given position
or list of eligibles shall be required to pass such a certification.
   B.   The public safety resources certifications shall be issued by third-
party testing firms found to be qualified by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners and, from time to time, the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall post a written list containing the name(s), address(es) and
telephone number(s) of all qualified third-party testing firms.
   C.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may use the Aptitude Profile
contained in the public safety resources certification in place of a written
examination which it would otherwise utilize, and the Physical Agility Profile
contained in the public safety resources certification in place of a physical
agility test which it would otherwise utilize, provided that, if it does so for
one applicant for a given position or list of eligibles, it shall do so for all
applicants for such position or list of eligibles.
   D.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may amend its Rules and
Regulations, as provided by law, to specify a more detailed policy and
procedure regarding public safety resources certificates. (Ord. 1276, 9-20-93)
2-1-6: SECRETARY:
The Board may employ a secretary or may designate one of its own members to act
as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings, shall
be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep
a record of all examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as the
Board shall prescribe. (Ord. 1276, 9-20-93)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2520, 6-1-2009)
CHAPTER 3
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Created, Membership
2-3-2: Qualifications
2-3-3: Powers And Duties
2-3-4: Meetings, Selection Of Officers
2-3-5: Compensation
2-3-1: BOARD CREATED, MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund of the
city, as provided and required by statute 1 . Membership shall be determined in
the following manner: (Ord. 534, 9-2-1980)
   A.   Members: Said board of trustees of the police pension fund of the city
shall be composed of five (5) members. Two (2) members of the board shall be
appointed by the mayor of the city, two (2) members of the board shall be
elected by and from the regular police force of the active members thereof, and
the fifth member shall be elected by and from among the beneficiaries of the
fund, if any. (Ord. 2891, 10-6-2014)
   B.   Term: One of the board members appointed by the mayor shall serve from
the date of his appointment until the second Tuesday in May 1981. The other
appointed member shall serve from the date of his appointment until the second
Tuesday in May 1982. The successors to the first two (2) members appointed
shall serve for two (2) years each from the effective date of their
appointment.
   C.   Election From Police Force:
      1.   There shall be an election of two (2) board members from the active
police force within thirty (30) days of the passage hereof. These members shall
serve from the date of their election and qualification for office until the
second Tuesday in May 1982.
      2.   The election of board members from the active police force shall be
held biennially thereafter on the third Monday in April at the city hall and
shall be by Australian ballot and such other regulations as shall be prescribed
by the appointed members of the board. The police shall be entitled to vote
only for the members coming from the active police force. Members elected under
this subsection C2 shall serve for a period of two (2) years beginning on the
second Tuesday of May 1982.
   D.   Election From Beneficiaries:
      1.   The election of the member representing beneficiaries, if any, shall
be held within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. This member shall
serve until the second Tuesday in May 1982.
      2.   The election of the member representing the beneficiaries, if any,
shall be held biennially thereafter on the third Monday in April and all
beneficiaries of legal age shall be entitled to vote, but only for the member
chosen among them. The member elected under this subsection D2 shall serve for
a term of two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of May 1982.
   E.   Vacancy: In the event of the death, resignation or inability to act of
any elected board member, a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term
at a special election to be called by the board. (Ord. 534, 9-2-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 40 ILCS 5/3-105.
2-3-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have such
qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law. (Ord.
534, 9-2-1980)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have such powers and
duties as are now, or may hereafter be, given to it under the applicable
provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 2040, 2-18-
2003)
2-3-4: MEETINGS, SELECTION OF OFFICERS:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall hold regular quarterly
meetings in July, October, January and April in each year and such special
meetings as may be called by the president.
The officers of the board shall be selected from its members at the first
regular meeting of the board. Said officers shall serve until the regular July
1981 meeting, at which time new officers shall be selected. Thereafter,
officers shall be selected from the members at the regular July meeting and
each officer shall serve for a period of one year. (Ord. 2891, 10-6-2014)
2-3-5: COMPENSATION:
No member of the board of trustees shall have any right to receive any money or
monies from the pension fund as salary for services performed as such member,
although the expenses of conducting the board's business may be paid from
monies held in the fund, if so authorized by the board. (Ord. 534, 9-2-1980)
CHAPTER 4
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-4-1: Establishment
2-4-2: Coordinator/Assistant Coordinator
2-4-3: Functions
2-4-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-4-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-4-6: Local Disaster Declaration
2-4-7: Emergency Action
2-4-8: Compensation
2-4-9: Reimbursement By State
2-4-10: Purchases And Expenditures
2-4-11: Oath
2-4-12: Office
2-4-13: Volunteer Member Requirements
2-4-14: Volunteer Member Duties And Responsibilities
2-4-15: Uniforms And Equipment
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Warrenville Emergency Management Agency (EMA) to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from any
natural or technological cause, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act 1 , as now existing or hereafter amended.
This EMA shall consist of the Coordinator, an Assistant Coordinator and such
additional volunteer members as approved by the Coordinator. (Ord. O2018-57,
12-3-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-4-2: COORDINATOR/ASSISTANT COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator and Assistant Coordinator of the EMA shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice of the Chief of Police and consent of the City Council
and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor or his designee as provided by statute. The Assistant
Coordinator shall assist the Coordinator in the performance of EMA related
duties and shall be subject to the Coordinator's direction and control.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Mayor with the advice of the Chief of Police, or any person
designated by him/her shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment
is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Warrenville EMA shall coordinate and perform such emergency management
functions within the City as shall be prescribed in and by the State emergency
operations plan and such programs, orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by Illinois Emergency Management Agency and by this chapter. In
addition, the Warrenville EMA shall conduct such functions outside the
corporate limits as may be required under mutual aid agreements and compacts as
are entered into as provided in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
The specific functions that the Warrenville EMA shall perform include, but are
not limited to, the following:
   A.   Developing emergency plans and standard operating procedures which
outline emergency responsibilities of City government, as well as activities
which ensure coordination among and between City, County, State and Federal
governments.
   B.   Developing and conducting emergency management training and education
programs for City personnel as well as the general public.
   C.   Coordinating with private relief agencies, such as the American Red
Cross and Salvation Army, in the development of capabilities to ensure the
provision of relief supplies and assistance to disaster victims as well as
emergency responders and their families.
   D.   Developing, conducting and evaluating emergency management exercises,
designed to test the ability of City government to respond to emergencies and
disasters.
   E.   Receiving and analyzing information regarding potential hazards,
regardless of their nature, and disseminating appropriate warning information
to City officials.
   F.   Supporting the incident command system at the scene of an emergency or
disaster, through the development of the incident command center.
   G.   Supporting the development and issuance of media releases in
preparation for, or during periods of, impending or actual disaster or other
emergency situations.
   H.   Providing emergency lighting and electrical generation capability at
the site of an emergency or following the loss of power at a governmental or
other facility.
   I.   Assisting law enforcement agencies in traffic and perimeter control
functions, as well as assisting in search and rescue situations.
   J.   Assisting fire/rescue agencies at an emergency scene with light rescue
and victim movement activities.
   K.   Enhancing the capability of City government to respond to disasters or
emergency situations by stockpiling and the possible delivery of critical
supplies and/or resources, i.e., sandbags, pumps, etc.
   L.   Establishing and maintaining a backup communications system capable of
communicating with key City departments, as well as with appropriate County,
State and Federal agencies.
   M.   Assisting in disaster recovery operations by providing support to the
various agencies involved.
   N.   Assisting any City department, as requested, with services within the
scope of the Warrenville EMA. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Warrenville EMA may be designated as members of a
mobile support team created by the Governor or the Director of the State
Emergency Management Agency ("State EMA"), as provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Director of
the State EMA.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a City employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of the Warrenville EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with
other political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord.
O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-6: LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATION:
A local disaster may be declared only by the Mayor of the City, or his
designee. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
(7) days except by or with the advice and consent of the City Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the City Clerk.
The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the emergency
operations plan of the City and to authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance thereunder. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-7: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States, from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of
the Warrenville EMA to cooperate fully with the State EMA and with the Governor
in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-
2018)
2-4-8: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Warrenville EMA who are paid employees or officers of the City,
if called for training by the State EMA Director, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such City employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the City Council.
(Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Director of Finance may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the Warrenville EMA as prescribed by the State EMA Director,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the City in response to a call by the Governor or State
EMA Director, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State
incident to EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018; amd.
Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-2021)
2-4-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The City Council may, on recommendation of the Coordinator of the Warrenville
EMA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the City in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Coordinator of the
Warrenville EMA is authorized, on behalf of the City, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as now existing or
hereafter amended; provided, that if the City Council meets at such time, he
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-11: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Warrenville EMA shall,
before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the oath required by
section 20 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 3305/20, which shall be filed with the Coordinator. (Ord.
O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-12: OFFICE:
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a City building, or elsewhere,
for the Warrenville EMA as its office. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-13: VOLUNTEER MEMBER REQUIREMENTS:
In order to be eligible to serve as a volunteer EMA member, a person must meet
at least the following qualifications:
   A.   Have no prior felony convictions and be of good moral character;
   B.   Possess a valid Illinois driver's license;
   C.   Pass a criminal history background check;
   D.   Pass an oral interview with the Coordinator or his designee;
   E.   Be at least eighteen (18) years old;
   F.   Subscribe to the oath required by section
2-4-11 of this chapter;
   G.   Live within a reasonable response time, as established by the
Coordinator, of the City of Warrenville City limits;
   H.   Be a citizen or legal resident of the United States; and
   I.   Be in an appropriate physical condition, as determined by the
Coordinator, to serve in any capacity as a volunteer member of EMA.
(Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018; amd. Ord. O2019-28, 6-3-2019)
2-4-14: VOLUNTEER MEMBER DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The duties and responsibilities of volunteer EMA members include, without
limitation:
   A.   Attending a minimum number of scheduled meetings, as determined by the
Coordinator;
   B.   Maintaining minimum training standards, as established annually by the
Coordinator; and
   C.   Participating in a minimum number of callouts, activations, weather
operations and other special events, as determined by the Coordinator. (Ord.
O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
2-4-15: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT:
Each volunteer EMA member must:
   A.   Wear the uniform and equipment issued to the volunteer by the EMA in
the manner, quantity, and frequency determined by the Coordinator; and
   B.   Maintain the volunteer's uniform and equipment in a neat, clean, and
serviceable condition and keep the uniform and equipment ready at all times for
immediate use; and
   C.   Refrain from modifying, removing from, or adding to the equipment,
accessories, and uniform issued to the volunteer unless the volunteer has
obtained written permission from the Coordinator. (Ord. O2018-57, 12-3-2018)
CHAPTER 5
SESQUICENTENNIAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2040, 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 7
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Establishment
2-7-2: Intent And Purpose
2-7-3: Commission Membership
2-7-4: Meetings
2-7-5: Roles And Responsibilities
2-7-6: Reports And Records
2-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The Environmental Advisory Commission is hereby established. Its functions and
duties shall be limited to those set forth within this chapter and as set forth
in any other duly enacted ordinance of the City. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as vesting legislative discretion or power in the commission.
(Ord. O2018-31, 8-6-2018)
2-7-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Environmental Advisory Commission to
support, encourage, and promote environmental awareness and behavior in the
City and to conduct an annual Arbor Day activity in Warrenville. (Ord. O2018-
31, 8-6-2018)
2-7-3: COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Appointment: The Environmental Advisory Commission shall consist of
five (5) members appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of
the City Council, to serve without compensation. Members shall reside within
the corporate limits of the City, provided that one member may live outside the
corporate limits.
   B.   Ex Officio Member: A staff member shall be appointed by the City
Administrator to serve as liaison to the commission. This person shall serve as
an ex officio member of the commission and shall not vote, but will provide
logistical staff support as needed.
   C.   Term: Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, with each
term commencing on May 1. Two (2) of the five (5) Commissioners initially
appointed shall serve for a term of approximately one-half (1/2) year (from
appointment date until April 30, 2008), two (2) of the five (5) Commissioners
initially appointed shall serve for a term of approximately one and one- half
(11/2) years (from appointment date until April 30, 2009), and one of the five
(5) Commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of approximately
two and one-half (21/2) years (from appointment date until April 30, 2010).
Determination of the terms of the five (5) Commissioners initially appointed
shall be by lot. Thereafter, all appointments shall begin on May 1 and end on
April 30, except for the initial appointments as provided in subsection A of
this section.
   D.   Vacancies: Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in
which original appointments are required to be made.
   E.   Removal: A commission member may be removed by the Mayor, with the
approval of a majority vote of the City Council.
   F.   Chairman: The Mayor shall designate one of the members of the
commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in May of
each year, except that the first Chairman shall be appointed as soon as
possible following the appointment of the initial five (5) Commissioners.
   G.   Secretary: The commission shall elect a Secretary who is a member of
the commission. (Ord. O2018-31, 8-6-2018)
2-7-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meeting dates shall be established by the
commission.
   B.   Special Meetings: Such special meetings shall be called as shall be
deemed by the commission to be advisable and necessary for the fulfillment of
the duties imposed upon the commission by this chapter. Such special meetings
of the commission may be called by the Chairman. Members of the commission
shall receive notice not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to a special
meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the City Hall not
less than forty eight (48) hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also
be called by the written request of any two (2) members of the commission. Such
written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five (5) days
prior to the requested date of meeting.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the commission members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at any regular or
special meeting of the commission.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The commission shall enact rules of procedure not
inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of
the commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, "Robert's Rules of Order"
shall govern the deliberations of the commission. (Ord. O2018-31, 8-6-2018)
2-7-5: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall have the following roles and responsibilities:
   A.   Plan programs, and initiatives, and educational information geared
towards enhancing environmental awareness within the City, such as through a
City newsletter.
   B.   Plan programs and initiatives and make recommendations to the City
Council to respond to environmental issues.
   C.   Utilize environmental resources of the City (i.e., website and Climate
Action Plan), the County of DuPage, the State of Illinois, the United States,
other municipalities, and other regional environmental authorities, as approved
by City Council.
   D.   Support and promote activities aimed at improving the quality of the
environment within the City, such as: 1) the cleanup of local water ways in
cooperation with other entities, or 2) conducting a City activity or event with
prior City Council approval.
   E.   Encourage and recommend, as appropriate, the use of native plants and
species on City-owned property and in the community.
   F.   Plan, staff, and execute an annual Arbor Day activity in the City.
   G.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the Mayor and City Council, all in general conformance with current approved
City Council plans and initiatives as they pertain to the commission's roles
and responsibilities. (Ord. O2018-31, 8-6-2018)
2-7-6: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   The commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.
   B.   The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the
Mayor and City Council in a timely manner.
   C.   The commission shall submit its recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to support
said recommendations.
   D.   A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. (Ord.
O2018-31, 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 8
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2334, 11-6-2006)
CHAPTER 9
COMPENSATION OF PLAN COMMISSION AND
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS MEMBERS
SECTION:
2-9-1: Compensation For Attendance At Meetings
2-9-1: COMPENSATION FOR ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
Each plan commission member and each zoning board of appeals member shall be
compensated for his/her attendance as a member at official meetings of his/her
respective commission or board, as hereinafter provided. The duly appointed
chairman of the plan commission and the duly appointed chairman of the zoning
board of appeals shall receive a stipend of thirty dollars ($30.00) per
official meeting attended. The other members of the plan commission and the
zoning board of appeals shall receive a stipend of twenty dollars ($20.00) per
official meeting attended.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the chairman or member has been appointed to
serve on both the plan commission and zoning board of appeals and if meetings
of the plan commission and zoning board of appeals occur on the same day, then
such chairman or member shall be entitled to receive a stipend for only one
meeting and not for both meetings. (Ord. 2048, 4-21-2003)
CHAPTER 10
TOURISM AND ARTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-10-1: Created
2-10-2: Intent And Purpose
2-10-3: Commission Membership
2-10-4: Meetings
2-10-5: Duties
2-10-6: Reports And Records
2-10-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the tourism and arts commission, which shall be
advisory to the city council and to city staff as requested by the council.
(Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
2-10-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the tourism and arts commission to
support, encourage and promote self-sustaining events and programs that
encourage tourism and the arts in the city. (Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
2-10-3: COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Appointment: The tourism and arts commission shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city
council, to serve without compensation. The initial terms of all original
members of the commission shall commence upon their appointments. Two (2) of
the five (5) commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of
approximately one year, from May 1, 2004 through April 30, 2005; and two (2) of
the five (5) commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of
approximately two (2) years from May 1, 2004 through April 30, 2006; and one
member initially appointed shall serve for a term of approximately three (3)
years from May 1, 2004 through April 30, 2007. Determination of the terms of
the five (5) commissioners initially appointed shall be by lot. Thereafter, all
appointments shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30. One alderman, chosen by
the mayor and city council voting jointly, shall be an ex officio, nonvoting
member of the commission.
   B.   Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, with each
term commencing on May 1, except for the initial appointments as provided in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2145, 7-6-2004)
   C.   Vacancies: Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in
which original appointments are required to be made.
   D.   Removal: A commission member may be removed by the mayor, with the
approval of a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
   E.   Chairman: The mayor shall designate one of the members of the
commission to be chairman. The chairman shall be appointed annually in May of
each year, except that the first chairman shall be appointed as soon as
possible following the appointment of the initial five (5) commissioners. (Ord.
2107, 12-15-2003; amd. Ord. 2145, 7-6-2004)
   F.   Secretary: The commission shall elect a secretary who is a member of
the commission.
   G.   Ex Officio Member: A staff member shall be appointed by the city
administrator to serve as liaison to the commission. This person shall serve as
an ex officio member of the commission, and shall not vote, but will provide
logistical staff support as needed. (Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
2-10-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as
determined by the chairman of the commission.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the commission may be called by
the chairman from time to time. Members of the commission must receive notice
not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said
special meeting must be posted in the city hall not less than forty eight (48)
hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written
request of any two (2) members of the commission. Such written request shall be
received by the chairman no less than five (5) days prior to the requested date
of meeting.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the commission members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at any regular or
special meeting of the commission, including the conduct of public hearings.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The commission shall enact rules of procedure not
inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of
the commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, "Robert's Rules Of Order"
shall govern the deliberations of the commission. (Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
2-10-5: DUTIES:
The commission shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Identify, support and promote self-sustaining events and programs that
encourage tourism in the city.
   B.   Utilize the city council's established evaluation criteria to consider
and recommend to the city council disposition of hotel/motel tax funding by
reviewing application requests from outside organizations, individuals, city
departments or city commissions.
   C.   Nurture and coordinate a community arts program by making
recommendations on public art, supporting efforts in the arts by all ages, and
fostering regional recognition of Warrenville's arts program through
established award programs.
   D.   Promote internally and externally new and existing amenities of the
city.
   E.   Assist, when asked, in the development and review of a budget for any
new celebration or special event for which city funding is provided and report
to the city council on such budget.
   F.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the mayor and city council. (Ord. 2107, 12-15-2003)
2-10-6: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   The commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.
   B.   The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the
mayor and city council in a timely manner.
   C.   The commission shall submit its recommendations to the mayor and city
council in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to support
said recommendations.
   D.   A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. (Ord.
2107, 12-15-2003)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLIST AND PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Created
2-11-2: Intent And Purpose
2-11-3: Commission Membership
2-11-4: Meetings
2-11-5: Roles And Responsibilities
2-11-6: Reports And Records
2-11-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the bicyclist and pedestrian advisory commission, which
shall be advisory to the city council and to city staff as requested by the
council. (Ord. 2344, 10-2-2006)
2-11-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the bicyclist and pedestrian advisory
commission to support, encourage and promote safe bicycling and walking
throughout the city through capital improvements, amenities, events and
programs. (Ord. 2344, 10-2-2006)
2-11-3: COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Appointment: The bicyclist and pedestrian advisory commission shall
consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and
consent of the city council, to serve without compensation. The initial terms
of all original members of the commission shall commence upon their
appointments. Two (2) of the five (5) commissioners initially appointed shall
serve for a term of approximately one year (from appointment date until April
30, 2008), and two (2) of the five (5) commissioners initially appointed shall
serve for a term of approximately two (2) years (from appointment date until
April 30, 2009), and one of the five (5) commissioners initially appointed
shall serve for a term of approximately three (3) years (from appointment date
until April 30, 2010). Determination of the terms of the five (5) commissioners
initially appointed shall be by lot. Thereafter, all appointments shall begin
on May 1 and end on April 30. One alderman, chosen by the mayor and city
council voting jointly, shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the
commission.
   B.   Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, with each
term commencing on May 1, except for the initial appointments as provided in
subsection A of this section.
   C.   Vacancies: Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in
which original appointments are required to be made.
   D.   Removal: A commission member may be removed by the mayor, with the
approval of a majority vote of the city council.
   E.   Chairman: The mayor shall designate one of the members of the
commission to be chairman. The chairman shall be appointed annually in May of
each year, except that the first chairman shall be appointed as soon as
possible following the appointment of the initial five (5) commissioners.
   F.   Secretary: The commission shall elect a secretary who is a member of
the commission.
   G.   Ex Officio Member: A staff member shall be appointed by the city
administrator to serve as liaison to the commission. This person shall serve as
an ex officio member of the commission and shall not vote, but will provide
logistical staff support as needed. (Ord. 2344, 10-2-2006)
2-11-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as
determined by the chairman of the commission.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the commission may be called by
the chairman from time to time. Members of the commission must receive notice
not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said
special meeting must be posted in the city hall not less than forty eight (48)
hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written
request of any two (2) members of the commission. Such written request shall be
received by the chairman no less than five (5) days prior to the requested date
of the meeting.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the commission members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at any regular or
special meeting of the commission.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The commission shall enact rules of procedure not
inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of
the commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, "Robert's Rules Of Order"
shall govern the deliberations of the commission. (Ord. 2344, 10-2-2006)
2-11-5: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall have the following roles and responsibilities:
   A.   Plan for bicyclists and pedestrians as part of a citywide and regional
multiuse transportation system.
   B.   Evaluate and prioritize ways to improve the level of bicycle and
pedestrian services, trails, paths, on street bikeways and other economically
feasible projects.
   C.   Identify high priority projects that improve safety for motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians, reducing car and bike/pedestrian conflicts.
   D.   Encourage bicycle commuting and walking in lieu of motorized
transportation and recreation.
   E.   Initiate bicycle and pedestrian safety programs and related events.
   F.   Host public meetings to create safe routes to schools and parks.
   G.   Provide resources and educational materials on cycling and walking.
   H.   Attain the designation of "bicycle friendly community" for the city of
Warrenville.
   I.   Establish communication with the League of Illinois Bicyclists,
Chicagoland Bicycling Federation, Illinois Prairie Path Association,
coordinator of the DuPage County trails system, and other related community
groups.
   J.   Make recommendations to the city council for the planning of bikeway
and pedestrian routes, including:
      1.   Providing a comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian routing plan that
serves a variety of user types, ages and abilities.
      2.   Building public consensus for bicyclist and pedestrian planning and
facility improvements by encouraging public participation in the planning
process and plan implementation.
      3.   Identifying strategies and economic feasibility for the design and
construction of recommended bike and pedestrian route improvements.
      4.   Utilizing the city of Warrenville 1999 sidewalk priority plan and
any other related plans, that establish policy for adding sidewalks and mapped
sidewalk priorities throughout the city.
   K.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the mayor and city council. (Ord. 2344, 10-2-2006)
2-11-6: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   The commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.
   B.   The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the
mayor and city council in a timely manner.
   C.   The commission shall submit its recommendations to the mayor and city
council in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to support
said recommendations.
   D.   A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. (Ord.
2344, 10-2-2006)
CHAPTER 12
INCLUSION, DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND AWARENESS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Created
2-12-2: Intent And Purpose
2-12-3: Commission Membership
2-12-4: Meetings
2-12-5: Duties
2-12-6: Reports And Records
2-12-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Awareness
Commission, which shall be advisory to the City Council and to city staff as
requested by the Council. (Ord. O2020-40, 11-16-2020)
2-12-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and
Awareness Commission to support, encourage, and promote initiatives and
programs that inspire inclusivity, diversity, and equity. (Ord. O2020-40, 11-
16- 2020)
2-12-3: COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Appointment: The Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Awareness Commission
shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the City Council, to serve without compensation. The initial
terms of all original members of the Commission shall commence upon their
appointments. Two of the seven commissioners initially appointed shall serve
for a term of approximately one year, from January 1, 2021 through April 30,
2022; two of the seven commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term
of approximately two years from January 1, 2021 through April 30, 2023; and
three of the seven commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of
approximately three (3) years from January 1, 2021 through April 30, 2024.
Determination of the terms of the seven commissioners initially appointed shall
be by lot. Thereafter, all appointments shall begin on May 1 and end on April
30.
   B.   Non-Resident Membership: The Mayor may appoint up to one non-resident
commissioner to serve on the Commission.
   C.   Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years, with each
term commencing on May 1, except for the initial appointments as provided in
Section
2-12-3(A).
   D.   Vacancies: Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in
which original appointments are required to be made.
   E.   Removal: A Commission member may be removed by the Mayor, with the
approval of a majority vote of the City Council.
   F.   Chair: The mayor shall designate one of the members of the Commission
to be the Chair. The Chair shall be appointed annually in May of each year,
except that the first chairman shall be appointed as soon as possible following
the appointment of the initial seven commissioners.
   G.   Secretary: The Commission shall elect a secretary who is a member of
the Commission.
   H.   Ex Officio Membership: In addition to the seven voting members provided
for by Section
2-12-3(A), the Commission may also include the following ex-officio members who
shall each serve for one-year terms and have the same responsibilities as a
commissioner, except for voting:
      1.   One Student Commissioner enrolled at, and nominated by, Wheaton
Warrenville South High School. The Student Commissioner must be enrolled in
either their Junior or Senior year in high school.
      2.   The Executive Directors, or the Executive Director's designee, of
the Library, Park District, Fire Protection District, and Community Unit School
District 200.
      3.   A staff member appointed by the City Administrator to serve as
liaison to the Commission, and to provide logistical staff support as needed.
      4.   One Alderman appointed by the City Council to be a liaison between
the Commission and City Council. (Ord. O2020-40, 11-16-2020)
2-12-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as
determined by the Chair of the Commission.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by
the Chair from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not
less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting
must be posted in the City Hall not less than 48 hours before said meeting.
Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members
of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chair no less
than five days prior to the requested date of meeting.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or
special meeting of the Commission, including the conduct of public hearings.
   D.   Rules of Procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of procedure not
inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of
the commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, "Robert's Rules of Order"
shall govern the deliberations of the Commission. (Ord. O2020-40, 11-16-2020)
2-12-5: DUTIES:
The commission shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Serve as an advisory body to the City Council.
   B.   Promote mutual understanding and foster equity, inclusion, and respect
among all people regardless of race, color, religion, age, marital status,
familial status, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, national origin
or ancestry, physical and mental ability, political affiliations, and economic
status.
   C.   Evaluate City practices and procedures for opportunities to improve
communication and engagement with the community, identify barriers that may
prevent some from participating, and provide recommendations to the City
Council.
   D.   Create and share educational materials and programs aimed at informing
the public to encourage understanding and open dialog on issues of
discrimination and inequity.
   E.   Work with other community partners and taxing districts on initiatives
and programs that encourage diversity, equity, and inclusion throughout the
community.
   F.   Participate in diversity and inclusion training to increase awareness
and develop cultural competence.
   G.   Create and present an annual work plan with goals and initiatives to
further the City's diversity goals.
   H.   Present an annual report of accomplishments to the City Council. (Ord.
O2020-40, 11-16-2020)
2-12-6: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.
   B.   The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the
mayor and City Council in a timely manner.
   C.   The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the mayor and City
Council in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to support
said recommendations.
   D.   A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. (Ord.
O2020-40, 11-16-2020)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-1-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-1-3: Use Tax
3-1-4: Automobile Renting Taxes
3-1-5: Hotel Operator's Tax
3-1-6: Restaurant/Bar Tax
3-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A home rule tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at
retail in the city at the rate of one and one-fourth percent (1.25%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect. This home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax shall
not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages,
soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of this home rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
The tax hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue
of the state of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2267, 3-6-2006,
eff. 7-1-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
3-1-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A home rule tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of services at the rate of one and one-fourth
percent (1.25%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. This home
rule municipal service occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of
food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is
sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes, and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of this home rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
The tax hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue
of the state of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2267, 3-6-2006,
eff. 7-1-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
3-1-3: USE TAX:
   A.   Property Involved: This tax shall apply to any item of tangible
personal property purchased at retail from a retailer outside the state of
Illinois which is registered or titled by any agency of the state of Illinois.
   B.   Use Tax Rate: The rate of this tax shall be one percent (1%) of the
selling price as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955 1 . (Ord.
195, 11-18-1974, eff. 8-26-1974)
 
Notes
1 2. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
3-1-4: AUTOMOBILE RENTING TAXES:
   A.   Automobile Renting Use Tax: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege
of using in the city an automobile which is rented from a renter outside
Illinois, and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's
government in the city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of
such automobile while this subsection is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code. Such tax shall be
collected from persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration
purposes is given as being in such municipality. Such tax shall be collected by
the Department of Revenue for the City. Such tax must be paid to the State, or
an exemption determination must be obtained from the Department of Revenue,
before the title or certificate of registration for the property may be issued,
all in the manner provided by law. The proceeds of said tax shall be disbursed
to the City pursuant to the provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
   B.   Automobile Renting Occupation Tax: A tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the City at the rate
of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business while this subsection is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. The tax imposed by
the City pursuant to this section and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereof shall be collected and enforced by the State Department
of Revenue. The certificate of registration which is issued by the department
to a retailer under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act or under the Automobile
Renting Occupation and Use Tax Act shall permit such person to engage in a
business which is taxable under this section without registering separately
with the department. The department shall have full power to administer and
enforce this section; to collect all taxes and penalties due hereunder; to
dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner hereinafter provided;
and to determine all rights to credit memoranda, arising on account of the
erroneous payment of tax or penalty hereunder, all in the manner provided by
law. The proceeds of said tax shall be disbursed to the City pursuant to the
provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 2414, 12-3-
2007)
3-1-5: HOTEL OPERATOR'S TAX:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall be defined as hereinafter set forth:
   HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses,
rooming houses and apartment houses.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Ord. 3036, 10-3-2016; amd. Ord. O2019-07, 3-4-2019)
   B.   Tax Imposed; Administration:
      1.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel in the City,
including online travel companies, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the
monies, revenues or any other consideration received from such renting, leasing
or letting activities, excluding, however, from the rental income calculation
the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that
hotel.
      2.   Rules And Regulations: The City Finance Director may promulgate
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this section
concerning the enforcement and application of this section. The terms "rules"
and "regulations" include, but are not limited to, a case by case determination
as to whether or not the tax imposed by this section applies.
      3.   Books And Records: Every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, including online travel companies, shall
keep accurate books and records of its business activity in the City. The books
and records shall include original source documents and books of entry denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this section.
It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, including online travel companies, to keep
accurate and complete books and records to which the City Finance Director, or
his/her authorized representative, shall at all times have full access for
inspection and auditing, which records shall include a daily sheet showing: a)
the number of hotel or motel rooms rented in the City during the twenty four
(24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room
where such shall occur; and b) the actual hotel or motel monies, revenues or
any other consideration collected with respect to rental activities for the
date in question.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
city's finance director or his/her authorized representative in the discharge
of his/her duties in the performance of this section.
      4.   Transmittal Of Tax Revenue:
         a.   The person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting
rooms in a hotel within the city, including online travel companies, shall file
tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel and motel
room during each month commencing on and including the first day of each month,
on forms prescribed by the city finance director. The returns shall be due on
or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar month.
         b.   At the time of filing said tax returns, the person engaged in the
business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city
including online travel companies, shall pay to the city finance director all
taxes due for the period to which the tax returns apply. Any payment made by
check which is returned to the city because of insufficient funds may result in
the director requiring that future payments be made by cashier's check or money
order.
         c.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
      5.   Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, the city attorney shall, upon the request of the city finance
director, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3036,
10-3-2016)
   C.   Reimbursement: Persons subject to this tax may reimburse themselves for
their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with state tax imposed under "the hotel operator's occupation tax act"
1 .
   D.   Limitation On Authority: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize the city to impose a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any
business which under the constitution of the United States may not be made the
subject of taxation by this state. (Ord. 859, 9-2-1986)
   E.   Distribution Of Revenue:
      1.   Applications shall be made on forms provided by the tourism and arts
commission. Funding requests shall be in accordance with the application.
      2.   Any event or program for which a grant application is made must meet
the following criteria:
         a.   It must be in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
3-14.
         b.   It must be permissible under both the state and federal
constitutions. (Ord. 2316, 8-21-2006)
      3.   All completed applications shall be filed with the tourism and arts
commission and with the director of finance and shall be first considered by
the public safety and finance committee of the whole meeting in January. The
city council reserves the right to request additional information to assist in
its consideration of any application. (Ord. O2017-07, 3-6-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
         a.   Applications will be due on the second Monday in September.
Applications submitted after the filing deadline shall not be considered,
except as provided in subsection E3c of this section.
         b.   The tourism and arts commission shall review the applications and
shall make recommendations to the city council with respect to funding the
event or program.
         c.   If there are "available funds" in a category (i.e., "nonawarded"
funds as opposed to unspent awarded funds) at the end of the grant award cycle,
the commission shall review and make recommendations to the council for "new
programs" that meet the following criteria:
            (1)   The program must be a totally new event or program and not a
new component of an existing program.
            (2)   Anyone who is eligible to apply under the existing
regulations can apply for a "new" event.
            (3)   Applicants must submit applications and must comply with all
other normal criteria.
If a "new" applicant applies but there are no "available funds", the commission
shall invite the applicant to complete the application and receive the benefit
of a commission "courtesy review", which will be geared toward giving the
applicant feedback on an application to be submitted during the regular grant
cycle.
      4.   The commission staff liaison shall review the applications to
determine whether the application is complete and accurate and if it meets the
criteria established in subsection E2 of this section. The application shall
specify who will be served by such event or program; the nature and quality of
the event or program; the city's ability to accommodate the event or program;
the city services that will be required; and other sources of funds available
for the grant program at the time of application.
      5.   Consideration of all applications and the award, denial,
modification, amendment or restriction of each application shall be in the sole
discretion of the city council. If a grant is awarded to any applicant, the
applicant shall meet the following additional requirements:
         a.   Applications shall include the words "Funded partially or wholly
by the City of Warrenville" on all printed material distributed in conjunction
with the event or program.
         b.   Submission of any requests for advances not later than forty five
(45) days prior to the event. Advances shall be granted only to those with
treasury insurance or in order to settle an invoiced service or product.
         c.   Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion of the event, a
final written report shall be filed, which shall include an analysis of the
impact of the program or event on tourism and conventions or on the attraction
of nonresident overnight visitors to the city, including the postal zip codes
and/or postal addresses of attendees where practicable, and a complete and
proper accounting of the use of grant funds. Attached to the final written
report shall be the following:
            (1)   A full and proper accounting of all expenses incurred,
including copies of all receipts, bills, charges or expenses of any nature
incurred as a result of the event or program. If this information was
previously filed with the city director of finance and information services at
an earlier date pursuant to a reimbursement request under subsection E5b of
this section, then such prior filing may be incorporated into the final written
report by reference;
            (2)   A full and proper accounting of any and all revenues received
by or pledged to the applicant during or pursuant to the event in the form of
admission fees, concession fees, food and/or beverage sales, drawings, and any
and all other revenues collected from whatever source for the benefit of the
applicant, its agents, assignees or designees;
            (3)   If the applicant is awarded an advance of grant funds
pursuant to a request filed under subsection E5b of this section, and should
the full and proper accounting included as part of the final written report
establish that the amount of the advance exceeds the actual expenses approved
for reimbursement, then the applicant shall attach as part of the final written
report a check payable to the City of Warrenville in an amount equal to the
difference between the total expenses approved for reimbursement and the amount
of the advance;
            (4)   Any and all outstanding invoices.
         d.   Comply with all other requirements established in this subsection
E.
      6.   No further funding requests shall be considered by the City Council
for any applicant until the applicant has complied fully and to the
satisfaction of the City Council with all report and payment provisions set
forth herein. The Director of Finance and Information Services shall deposit
all payments to the City pursuant to subsection E5c(3) of this section into the
City's Hotel/Motel Tax Fund in accordance with approved accounting practices
utilized by the City at the time such payment is tendered.
      7.   The provisions of subsections E5a and E5b of this section shall not
apply to the City or any entity or group which is a subsidiary part of the
City, including committees, commissions or boards. (Ord. 2316, 8-21-2006)
      8.   Should the City Council determine that it is necessary or desirable
to transfer Hotel Operator Tax funds for other City purposes, the City Council
shall specify the amount of Hotel Operator Tax funds which shall thereupon be
transferred to any other nonenterprise City fund as deemed appropriate and
necessary. (Ord. 2440, 4-7-2008)
   F.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to any penalties prescribed in
chapter 16, "Locally Imposed And Administered Taxes", of this title and, to the
extent permitted by law, the general penalty provisions in
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. O2019-07, 3-4-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
3-1-6: RESTAURANT/BAR TAX:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall be defined as hereinafter set forth:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: A beverage that contains alcohol.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of Finance of the City.
   RESTAURANT/BAR: A business that provides for on premises consumption of food
or alcoholic beverages.
   SALE AT RETAIL: Sale at retail as that term is defined in the Illinois
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, as amended, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/
1 et seq.
   B.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the food prepared for
immediate consumption and on alcoholic beverages sold by a restaurant/bar in
the City, which provides for on premises consumption of said food or alcohol.
The rate of the tax shall be 1.50 percent of the selling price of all food and
alcoholic beverages sold at retail by the restaurant/bar. The tax imposed by
this section shall be upon the consumer and shall be in addition to any other
taxes upon the selling price of food and alcoholic beverages sold at retail
that may be permitted by law.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   Sales of food and alcoholic beverages that may not be taxed under
applicable law, if any, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
      2.   Sales of food and alcoholic beverages by governmental agencies,
religious, educational or charitable not for profit organizations shall be
exempt from the tax imposed by this section.
   D.   Tax Payments And Returns: Each restaurant/bar shall collect and shall
pay or remit the tax imposed by this section to the Director of Finance. Tax
returns shall be filed with the Director on a monthly basis on or before the
final business day of each month with respect to sales occurring during the
prior month.
   E.   Rules And Regulations: The Director is authorized to adopt, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this section.
   F.   Books And Records: Every person required to pay or remit the tax to the
Director shall keep accurate and complete books and records of its business or
activity, including original source documents, such as purchase orders,
invoices and receipts, and other documents listing, summarizing or pertaining
to the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to the tax
liability or exemption that may be claimed. All such books, records and
accounts shall be available for inspection by the Director or his designee at
all reasonable times during business hours of the day.
   G.   Delinquent Payment: If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a
penalty at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per calendar month, or
portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected.
   H.   Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, the City Attorney shall, upon the request of the City Finance
Director, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for
the amount of the tax due plus any penalties. A separate offense shall be
determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2541, 9-21-2009)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-4: License Required
3-2-5: Application Requirements
3-2-6: Term Of Licenses
3-2-7: License Classification, Fees, Number
3-2-8: Investigation And Examination Of Applicant
3-2-9: Persons Not Qualified For License
3-2-10: Insurance Required
3-2-11: License Limitations, Conditions
3-2-12: License Renewal
3-2-13: Display Of License
3-2-14: Hours Of Operation
3-2-15: Location Restrictions
3-2-16: Minors, Certain Persons Restricted
3-2-17: Employees
3-2-18: Condition Of Premises/Conduct Of Licensed Businesses
3-2-19: Peddling Liquor Prohibited
3-2-20: Liquor Sales/Possession Outside Of Licensed Premises
3-2-21: Right Of Entry
3-2-22: Happy Hours Prohibited
3-2-23: Suspension Or Revocation Of License/Appeals
3-2-24: Violation Of Tax Laws
3-2-25: Penalty
3-2-1: TITLE:
Whenever reference herein is made to the Illinois liquor control act, it shall
mean and refer to "an act relating to alcoholic liquors 1 ", approved January
31, 1934, as amended.
This chapter may be referred to as the WARRENVILLE LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 494, 3-17-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS.
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, all words and phrases used in
this chapter which are defined in the act of the general assembly of the state
of Illinois entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January
31, 1934, as now or hereafter amended, shall have the meaning given to said
words in that act, and all regulations, restrictions and requirements of said
act relating in any manner to the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail shall be
taken as a part of this chapter as fully and completely as though the same were
set forth herein:
   MICROBREWERY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Warrenville
zoning ordinance.
   PALCOHOL: Any powder or crystalline substance containing alcohol which is
produced for human consumption.
   SMOKING ALCOHOL INHALATION: A process by which ethanol or alcoholic liquor
is inhaled directly into the respiratory system using a vaporizing, nebulizing
or similar device. (Ord. O2017-24, 5-1-2017)
3-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. The mayor of this city shall be the local liquor control commissioner for
the territory within the corporate limits of this city and shall be charged
with the administration of the applicable provisions of the Illinois liquor
control act and the provisions of this chapter, as well as such ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted.
B. The local liquor control commissioner, in addition to the powers and duties
herein given and provided, shall have all the powers and duties as provided for
in the Illinois liquor control act.
C. The local liquor control commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to
make such reasonable rules as may be necessary in the performance of his duties
and to aid in the administration of this chapter and to effectuate the purposes
established herein. (Ord. 494, 3-17-1980)
3-2-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive
orders for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail or to permit the
consumption of any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes on business premises
in any area within the corporate limits of the city without first having a
valid retail liquor license issued by the local liquor control commissioner of
the city. It shall be unlawful to operate in violation of the terms of such
liquor license or the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2236, 9-6-2005)
3-2-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
No retail liquor license shall, at any time after the effective date hereof, be
granted by the local liquor control commissioner except as hereafter provided.
The local liquor control commissioner shall grant retail liquor dealers’
licenses in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state and the
provisions of this chapter. Any person requiring a license under this chapter
shall make written application for a retail liquor dealer’s license to the
local liquor control commissioner and shall file said application with the
director of finance and information services who shall provide a blank form for
that purpose, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by each and every
member of the partnership, if the applicant be a partnership, or by the duly
authorized president and secretary if a club or corporation, verified by oath
or affidavit, and shall contain the following information: (Ord. 494, 3-17-
1980; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004)
   A.   The name, age, date of birth, address and telephone number of the
manager or agent who conducts the business and the applicant in the case of an
individual; and in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or of a
club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized and the
names and addresses of the officers and directors and any stockholder owning in
the aggregate more than five percent of the stock (if said stockholder should
be a corporation, then disclosure of the stockholders of that corporation as
specified herein should be made) and any and all information which may be
reasonably requested by the local liquor control commissioner in order to
determine whether the applicant, manager and other individuals, persons,
officers, directors or shareholders named herein properly qualify under the
terms of this chapter.
   B.   Reserved.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character; and in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   E.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license.
   F.   The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased, and
the date of expiration of the lease.
   G.   The amount and nature of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the
time application is made.
   H.   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for
another similar license on premises other than described in the application,
and the disposition of such application.
   I.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or the ordinances of the city or the laws of this
state.
   J.   A statement as to whether a previous license issued by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has been revoked and the
reason therefor.
   K.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the city in the
conduct of his place of business.
   L.   Evidence that the applicant has in force and effect the insurance
required by statute, and such other and further information as the local liquor
control commissioner may, by rules or regulations, prescribe as necessary in
the performance of his duties and to effectuate the purposes established
herein, including, but not limited to, the information specified in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1. (Ord. 494, 3-17-1980; amd. Ord. O2025-48, 10-
20-2025)
3-2-6: TERM OF LICENSES:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to grant retail
liquor licenses for the selling at retail of alcoholic liquor for the period of
one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same year, except as
to Class D licenses set forth herein, which are valid for a period of 24 hours,
unless the license is otherwise earlier terminated pursuant to this Chapter;
provided, however, licenses issued for a term commencing May 1, 2025 and ending
April 30, 2026 will be extended so that they will expire on December 31, 2026,
but only upon payment of a pro-rated renewal fee prior to April 15, 2026. (Ord.
494, 3-17-1980; amd. Ord. O2025-48, 10-20-2025)
3-2-7: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION, FEES, NUMBER:
   The fees for liquor licenses are set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The
fee for any license described in this section must be submitted upon approval
of a liquor license and prior to the license being issued to the applicant.
Fees will not be prorated except that the initial fee if a license is issued on
or after October 1 shall be one-half the stated fee. Forfeiture of a license,
whether voluntary or involuntary, is not be the basis for refund of any part of
the fee.
The number of liquor licenses is specifically limited to the number listed in
each of the license classifications set forth in the Section. In the event any
one of the licenses expires, is revoked, or is terminated in any manner, the
license will be deemed to no longer exist and will not be available for
issuance to any other applicant. Within a reasonable amount of time, the local
liquor commissioner will submit an ordinance amending this code to reflect the
number of licenses. Failure to amend the city code to reflect the then-current
number of licenses does not and will not affect the actual number of licenses.
Retail liquor licenses shall be and are hereby divided into the following
classes, and none other:
   A.   Class A1:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class A1 licenses is specifically limited to four
(4).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A1 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   B.   Class A2:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises as an adjunct to meals served. Such licenses shall
be issued only to establishments having a seating capacity for not less than
one hundred (100) customers and having kitchen, sanitary and parking lot
facilities adequate for the seating capacity.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class A2 licenses is specifically limited to
seven (7).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A2 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   C.   Class A3:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises as an adjunct to meals served. Such licenses shall
be issued only to establishments having a seating capacity of not less than
forty (40) customers and having kitchen, sanitary and parking lot facilities
adequate for the seating capacity.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class A3 licenses is specifically limited to
three (3).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A3 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   D.   Class A4:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in
connection with the operation of a catering business within the City, which
sale shall be made at the registered office of the licensee, which shall be the
licensed premises, and nowhere else. Alcoholic liquor shall only be sold and
served by the licensee in connection with the catering of foods.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class A4 licenses is specifically limited to zero
(0).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A4 licensed premises. Class A4
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   D-1. Class A5:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises as an adjunct to meals served. The licensee shall
also be permitted to maintain facilities on premises for the manufacture of
beer, to make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises to importing
distributors, distributors and to nonlicensees for use in consumption, to store
the manufactured beer upon the premises, and to sell and offer for sale at
retail from the licensed premises beer previously manufactured on premises;
provided, however, that such licensee shall not sell for off premises
consumption more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per year. The licensee
shall obtain and maintain in good standing a State of Illinois brewpub license
as authorized under section 5/5-1(n) of the Illinois liquor control act of
1934, as amended.1 In addition to all records required to be kept by the terms
and conditions of the state brewpub license, licensee shall maintain accurate
records as to the total gallonage of beer manufactured on premises and the
total gallonage of beer manufactured on premises and sold for consumption off
premises. That portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the brewing of
beer shall be segregated from the remainder of the premises and shall not be
generally accessible to the public. This class of license shall be issued only
to establishments having a seating capacity of not less than one hundred (100)
customers; having kitchen, sanitary, and parking lot facilities adequate for
the seating capacity; having a current state of Illinois brewpub license issued
pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1(n); and having segregated on
premises facilities for the manufacture of beer.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such class A5 licenses is specifically limited to one.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A5 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   D-2. Class A6:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to
guests invited to private parties in connection with the operation of a banquet
room facility within the city, which sale shall be made at the licensed
premises and nowhere else. The license is designated as a banquet facility with
hours open to the general public limited to no more than six (6) hours per
week.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such class A6 licenses is specifically limited to one.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A6 licensed premises. Class A6
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   D-3. Class A7:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
in two (2) specified areas of the premises, which areas shall be physically
separated from one another pursuant to a floor plan, as approved by the liquor
commissioner. In the first area of the premises, only the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises shall be allowed; provided,
however, that liquor sales in such area of the premises shall comply with and
are subject to all the terms and conditions applicable to either a class A1,
class A2, class A3 or class C license, which classification shall be determined
by the liquor commissioner at the time that the initial license is issued. In
the second area of the premises, only the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption off the premises shall be allowed.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such class A7 licenses is specifically limited to
three (3).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A7 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   D-4. Class A8:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine, and
mixed drinks (“alcoholic beverages”) only for consumption on the licensed
premises, as a secondary and accessory use to a principal movie theater
business.
      Service of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to a designated lobby
area.
      Service of alcoholic beverages may be made only to persons purchasing a
movie ticket and wearing a tamper resistant wristband approved by the city. The
wristband shall be valid only for the date on which it is obtained from the
movie theater. Alcoholic beverages may only be drawn, poured, or served, and a
wristband may only be issued, by theater personnel who are twenty one (21)
years of age or older.
      The containers in which alcoholic beverages are served must be of a
different color, size and design than those in which nonalcoholic beverages are
served.
      No more than one alcoholic beverage may be delivered to a customer in any
one trip to the designated lobby area, and no customer shall be served more
than three (3) alcoholic beverages on any day. The number of alcoholic
beverages served to a customer each day shall be recorded on that customer’s
wristband.
      There may be no service of alcoholic beverages unless the movie theater
is actually open for the showing of movies. Under no circumstances may
alcoholic beverages be served more than one hour prior to the advertised
showing time of the first movie to be shown on any day, except for private
rentals and events.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class A8 licenses is specifically limited to one.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class A8 licensed premises. Class A8
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   E.   Class B1:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor, but not
for consumption on the premises.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class B1 licenses is specifically limited to five
(5).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class B1 licensed premises. Class B1
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   F.   Class B2:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on or off the premises, provided that the principal use of the
premises is as a tavern.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class B2 licenses is specifically limited to
three (3).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class B2 licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   G.   Class B3:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and
premixed, bottled alcoholic beverages with an alcohol content not exceeding
seven and one-half percent (7.5%) only, but not for consumption on the
premises.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class B3 licenses is specifically limited to one
(1).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/
1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class B3 licensed premises. Class B3 licensees
are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   H.   Class B4:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of beer and ale that
has been produced on the premises of a microbrewery. No retail sales of beer or
ale produced off the premises shall be permitted. Consumption of beer or ale on
the premises is prohibited except that up to three (3) samples may be provided
without charge to a customer in amounts which do not exceed two (2) fluid
ounces per sample.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class B4 licenses is specifically limited to one
(1).
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class B4 licensed premises. Class B4
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   H-1. Class B4A:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of wine that has
been produced on the premises of a winery or vineyard, with annual production
not to exceed five hundred (500) gallons. No retail sales of wine produced off
the premises shall be permitted. Consumption of wine on the premises is
prohibited; provided, however, that the licensees and their family members and
personal guests may consume wine on the premises for non-commercial purposes.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class B4A licenses is specifically limited to
one.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class B4A licensed premises. Class B4A
licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   I.   Class C:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises, granted to a corporation of national scope,
organized not for profit.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such Class C licenses is specifically limited to one.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class C licensed premises without the
licensee additionally obtaining a Class V license, subject to the criteria,
qualification and regulations for Class V licenses set forth in this section.
   I-1. Class C-1:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises of a special event, for which a temporary use
permit has been authorized by the City Council, granted to a not for profit
organization.
      2.   The City Council may waive the required license fee for an
organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis
with no personal profit incurring to anyone as a result of the operation.
      3.   The term of the Class C-1 license shall not exceed the temporary use
permit period. The hours of operation shall not exceed the operating hours
allowed under the temporary use permit.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class C-1 licensed premises. Class C-
1 licensees are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   J.   Class D:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises specified for a period of twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   The City Council may waive the required license fee for an
organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis
with no personal profit incurring to anyone as a result of the operation. The
City Council shall consider waiver requests by established not for profit
organizations on an annual basis at its last meeting in December.
      3.   No more than seven (7) such licenses shall be issued to any
organization or person representing such organization in any calendar year.
      4.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class D licensed premises. Class D licensees
are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
   K.   Class E:
      1.   A license which shall be issued only to the holder of a valid class
“B3" license and shall authorize the sale and service of wine, beer, and
premixed bottled or canned alcoholic beverages with an alcohol content not
exceeding se en and one-half percent (7.5%) by the glass for consumption on the
licensed premises. Such license shall be issued only to establishments having a
seating capacity for not more than sixty (60) customers.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of such class E licenses is specifically limited to zero
(0).
   L.   Class V Video Gaming License:
      1.   Class V licenses shall be supplemental in nature and shall only be
issued to the holder of a Class A1, A2, A3, A5, A7, B2, and C license. A Class
V license authorizes the licensee to:
         a.   Sell or serve alcoholic liquor in accordance with the
restrictions and regulations of licensee’s Class A1, A2, A3, A5, A7, B2, and C
license; and
         b.   Install and allow the use of video gaming terminals, as defined
by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., on the licensed
premises subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
            (1)   All video gaming terminals installed in a Class V licensed
premises must be licensed pursuant to a valid video gaming terminal license
issued by the City in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
            (2)   In addition to any other eligibility criteria for a Class V
liquor license set forth in this section or incorporated by reference, any
applicant for a Class V license must at the time of initial application or
renewal:
               (A)   Have held the Class A1, A2, A3, A5, A7, B2, or C liquor
license for at least twelve (12) consecutive months prior to the Class V
license application date and have not had the liquor license suspended or
revoked during the twelve (12) months before the Class V license application
date; provided, however, that, in order to avoid a 12-month interruption in the
operation of existing licensed video gaming terminals, this subsection 3-2-7.L
(1)(b)(2)(A) does not apply to applications for Class V licenses related to a
change in ownership of an existing Class V licensed premises, but only if:
                  (i)   The existing licensed premises is currently in
operation; and
                  (ii)   The new owner will be applying for the same class(es)
of liquor license(s); and
                  (iii)   The existing Class V license is in good standing and
has not been suspended during the 12-months prior to the application by the new
owner applicant; and
                  (iv)   The new owner applicant has applied for the same
number or fewer video gaming terminal licenses pursuant to Section
3-3-2  of the City Code as currently held by the existing licensee.
               (B)   Not owe the City any outstanding debts, fees, or other
sums of money;
               (C)   Submit a copy of the video gaming terminal license for
establishment if already issued, or, if the video gaming terminal license has
not yet been issued, the completed video gaming terminal license application
for the establishment;
               (D)   Submit a site plan of the premises showing the proposed
location of the video gaming terminals; and
               (E)   Except for Class C licensees, submit proof, in a form
acceptable to the City, demonstrating that the licensed establishment serves
meals in accordance with subsection L.1.b.(3) of this section.
            (3)   Except for those with a Class C license, all Class V
licensees must serve meals. For the purposes of this section
3-2-7 .L only, a licensee will be deemed to “serve meals” if:
               (A)   Meals are prepared in and served to patrons from a
commercial kitchen located on the premises;
               (B)   The licensed establishment has entered into a written
agreement with an establishment with a commercial kitchen to provide meals to
patrons; or
               (C)   Food sales constitute at least twenty percent (20%) of the
licensed establishment’s annual revenue.
            (4)   All video gaming operations must be conducted pursuant to and
in strict accordance with all City Codes and ordinances, including, without
limitation, Chapters 2 and 3 of Title 3 of the City Code, and all applicable
State and Federal laws, including, without limitation, the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the Illinois
Gaming Board.
            (5)   Video gaming terminals may only be operated and used during
such times as the holder of the liquor license hereunder is authorized to serve
alcohol.
            (6)   Licensees must immediately notify the Finance Director in the
event the Illinois Gaming Board revokes or suspends the video gaming terminal
operator’s Illinois video gaming license. Any denial, revocation or suspension
of an Illinois video gaming license by the Illinois Gaming Board or of a video
gaming terminal license by the City shall constitute an automatic revocation or
suspension of a Class V license for the same period without a hearing or refund
of any fees; provided however, that an automatic revocation or suspension of a
Class V license will not constitute an automatic revocation or suspension of
the rights and privileges of the licensee’s underlying Class A1, A2, A3, A5,
A7, B2, B3, and C liquor license.
            (7)   Only complete applications for a Class V license will be
accepted for review by the City.
            (8)   Use Of Video Gaming Terminals By Underage Persons Prohibited:
               (A)   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area
restricted to persons over twenty-one (21) years of age. No licensed
establishment, or its employee or agent may permit any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years to be within the restricted area. Licensed establishments
that admit individuals under the age of twenty-one (21) must have the video
gaming restricted area separated from the rest of the premises by a constructed
divider that shields gaming machines from view of seated patrons outside the
restricted area. The entrance to the restricted area must be within the view of
at least one (1) employee of the establishment who is over twenty-one (21)
years of age. Each underage person located within the restricted area
constitutes a separate and distinct violation of this subsection.
               (B)   No licensed establishment, or its employee or agent may
permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to use, play, or
operate a video gaming terminal. Each underage person using, playing, or
operating a video gaming terminal constitutes a separate and distinct violation
of this subsection.
               (C)   It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years
of age to play or operate a video gaming terminal.
            (9)   Video Gaming Cafes Prohibited: Video gaming cafes are
prohibited pursuant to Section
3-3-3  of this Code.
            (10)   Signage:
               (A)   Signage Required By State: Signage must be posted at the
entrance to, and inside of, the designated gaming area in accordance with the
regulations adopted by the Illinois Gaming Board.
               (B)   On-Premises Signs: All exterior signage at the
establishment, including any signage pertaining to video gaming, shall comply
with the City’s sign regulations set forth in
Chapter 14 of Title 8  of this Code and shall not feature any flashing,
blinking or intermittent lights; provided, however, that temporary advertising
banners, as described in Section
8-14-6 .B.2.d of this Code, advertising video gaming are not permitted.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   Number Of Licenses: The number of Class V licenses is specifically
limited to five (5).
   M.   Class F:
      1.   A license which shall authorize the retail serving or sale of beer
and wine, for consumption only on the licensed premises, and only as an
incidental part of a full-service personal care services business, subject to
the following conditions:
         a.   The service of beer and wine must be merely incidental to the
primary business function of the full-service personal care business function
of the licensee such that (i) sales of alcoholic beverages may not comprise
more than 10 percent of the gross revenue of the business; (ii) no more than 10
percent of the floor area of the business may be dedicated to the service or
storage of alcoholic beverages; and (iii) alcoholic beverages may only be
served to patrons of the business who are on the licensed premises for the
purpose of receiving a personal care service.
         b.   The licensee may only provide patrons of the business with
individual servings of beer or wine in glasses or unsealed single-serving
containers, including, without limitation, beer cans and bottles.
         c.   No more than two servings of beer (each serving not to exceed 12
ounces) or two servings of wine (each serving not to exceed four ounces), or
one serving of beer and one serving of wine, may be provided to a patron of the
business per calendar day, regardless of whether the alcoholic beverage is
provided as a compliment or sold for a fee.
         d.   Notwithstanding the provisions of
3-2-16  of this chapter, no person under the age of 21 shall serve beer and/or
wine on behalf of the licensee.
         e.   In no case shall the serving or consumption of beer and/or wine
on the licensed premises take place outside of the normal business hours of the
licensed premises, and in no event outside of the hours for liquor service as
permitted in section
3-2-14  of this chapter.
         f.   The licensee, and its officers, associates, members,
representatives, agents, or employees, shall not permit any patron to leave the
licensed premises with an open container of beer or wine.
         g.   No live entertainment such as live music, theater or dance
performances, shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
         h.   No sign shall be permitted on the licensed premises or
surrounding property that is visible from the public right-of-way that
indicates that alcoholic liquor is available for service or consumption on the
licensed premises. Any sign that is posted inside the licensed premises in
compliance with this subsection and any other marketing materials (including
social media posts) must make clear that alcoholic liquor is only incidental to
the primary business and is only available for patrons on the premises for the
purpose of receiving a personal care service.
         i.   Any beer or wine served by the establishment as part of a “paid
package” service or for participation in an offering is subject to the
provisions of the City Amusement Tax, see
Title 3 Chapter 12 .
         j.   A Class F license shall not be issued to any business which holds
any other class license under this chapter.
         k.   For the purposes of a Class F license, a “full service personal
care establishment” shall mean a business that offers at least four different
personal care services, which may include, without limitation, hair treatments,
haircuts, nail treatments, body packs and wraps, exfoliation, waxing,
aromatherapy, and facials, but shall not include any massage services as
defined in Title 3 Chapter 26 of this Code or any reflexology services.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   The number of Class F licenses shall be limited to zero.
      4.    Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq., is not allowed in a Class F licensed premises. Class F licensees
are ineligible for a supplemental Class V license.
(Ord. 494, 3-17-1980; amd. Ord. 1083, 3-5-1990; Ord. 1259, 6-7-1993; Ord. 1562,
1-20-1997; Ord. 1638, 12-1-1997; Ord. 1659, 3-2-1998; Ord. 1775, 8-2-1999; Ord.
2043, 4-7-2003; Ord. 2091, 10-6-2003; Ord. 2114, 2-2-2004; Ord. 2245, 10-17-
2005; Ord. 2428, 1-28-2008; Ord. 2516, 6-1-2009; Ord. 2562, 1-4-2010, eff. 2-
15-2010; Ord. 2699, 2-21-2012; Ord. 2706, 3-19-2012; Ord. 2814, 11-18-2013;
Ord. 2846, 6-2-2014; Ord. 2896, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2904, 1-19-2015; Ord. 2956, 9-
8-2015; Ord. O2018-25, 6-4-2018; Ord. O2018-42, 9-17-2018; Ord. O2018-43, 9-17-
2018; Ord. O2018-45, 10-1-2018; Ord. O2019-44, 8-5-2019; Ord. O2019-61, 12-2-
2019; Ord. O2020-10, 3-2-2020; Ord. O2020-21, 5-4-2020; Ord. O2020-33, 9-8-
2020; Ord. O2020-39, 11-16-2020; Ord. O2021-12, 4-19-2021; Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-
2021; Ord. O2022-03, 3-21-2022; Ord. O2022-19, 5-16-2022; Ord. O2022-24, 7-18-
2022; Ord. O2022-30, 8-15-2022; Ord. O2023-12, 4-3-2023; Ord. O2023-18, 4-17-
2023; Ord. O2023-19, 4-17-2023; Ord. 2023-41, 10-2-2023; Ord. O2023-42, 10-16-
2023; Ord. O2023-47a, 12-4-2023; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-08, 2-5-
2024; Ord. O2024-42, 10-21-2024; Ord. O2024-58, 12-16-2024; Ord. O2024-59, 12-
16-2024; Ord. O2025-45, 9-15-2025; Ord. O2025-48, 10-20-2025; Ord. O2025-51,
10-20-2025)
3-2-8: INVESTIGATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Investigation: No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant
shall have been investigated by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and a
report filed by said Commissioner approving the issuance of such license. As a
part of this investigation all new applicants not heretofore licensed shall be
fingerprinted and photographed by a law enforcement agency designated by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The applicant's fingerprints and photographs
shall be submitted to the investigation departments of the following law
enforcement authorities: State of Illinois and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. A copy of the fingerprints and photographs shall be held by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   B.   Examination: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right
to examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local
license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the
performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue the subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any
of the information desired by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this
chapter, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as provided by
statute.
(Ord. 494, 3-17-1980; amd. Ord. 1083, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 1259, 6-7-1993; amd.
Ord. 1562, 1-20-1997; amd. Ord. 1638, 12-1-1997; amd. Ord. 1659, 3-2-1998; amd.
Ord. 1775, 8-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2043, 4-7-2003; amd. Ord. 2091, 10-6-2003; amd.
Ord. 2114, 2-2-2004; amd. Ord. 2245, 10-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2428, 1-28-2008;
amd. Ord. 2516, 6-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2562, 1-4-2010, eff. 2-15-2010; amd. Ord.
2699, 2-21-2012; amd. Ord. 2706, 3-19-2012; amd. Ord. 2814, 11-18-2013; amd.
Ord. 2846, 6-2-2014; amd. Ord. 2896, 11-17-2014; amd. Ord. 2904, 1-19-2015;
amd. Ord. 2956, 9-8-2015; amd. Ord. O2018-25, 6-4-2018; amd. Ord. O2018-42, 9-
17-2018; amd. Ord. O2018-43, 9-17-2018; amd. Ord. O2018-45, 10-1-2018; amd.
Ord. O2019-44, 8-5-2019)
3-2-9: PERSONS NOT QUALIFIED FOR LICENSE:
No retail liquor license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a bona fide resident of the United States of
America prior to the making of the application for such license;
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides;
   C.   A person when the manager listed on the application does not reside in
the State of Illinois;
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law, if the Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has
not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   G.   A person whose license issued under the Illinois Liquor Control Act has
been revoked for cause;
   H.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   I.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   J.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision;
   K.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation
Act 1  to transact business in Illinois;
   L.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   M.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
pursuant to Illinois Revised Statutes ch. 43, sec. 120(12), or has forfeited
his bond to appear in court to answer charges for such violation;
   N.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;
   O.   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman or member of the city council or
commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license
may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located
within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the
issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission;
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   Q.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of sec. 281 of, or as proscribed by
sec. 283 of, the "Criminal Code of 1961," approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore
or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a Statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;
   R.   A person to whom a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period;
   S.   A copartnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a Federal gaming device
stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax
period;
   T.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20 percent of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering
stamp for the current tax year;
   U.   Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
waging stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period; (Ord. 494, 3-17-80)
   V.   Any person, partnership or corporation offering for sale at retail of
any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school or hospital, any
home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses and children,
or any military or naval station; provided that this prohibition shall not
apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not
the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or
school where such church or school has been established within such 100 feet
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the
distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
   W.   Any person, partnership or corporation operating as a restaurant or
club unless he or it has met the qualifications of a restaurant or club
established by Illinois Revised Statutes ch. 43, paragraphs 95.23 and 95.24,
incorporated by Section
3-2-2  of this Chapter. (Ord. 494, 3-17-80; amd. Ord. 1063, 10-2-89; Ord.
O2025-48, 10-20-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 32, §§157.1 et seq.
3-2-10: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued to any person, association or corporation that
cannot produce a policy of insurance in a solvent and responsible company
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois insuring said person,
association or corporation against liability for any injury or death which said
parties may incur while operating under the provisions of the Illinois Liquor
Control Act, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
individual and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for
bodily injury liability; fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property
damage liability; and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) loss of means of
support.
Each applicant shall show by evidence satisfactory to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, the issuance of a policy of liquor liability insurance, and in
the event he is not the owner of the premises described in said application,
that he has a lawful right to possession of the same until the expiration of
the term of license for which application is made. (Ord. 494, 3-17-80; amd.
Ord. 1083, 3-5-90)
3-2-11: LICENSE LIMITATIONS, CONDITIONS:
   A.   Any license issued hereunder shall embrace only one place of business.
   B.   A retail liquor dealer's license shall be a purely personal privilege,
good for a period not to exceed one year after issuance (unless sooner revoked
or terminated as herein provided) and shall not constitute property; nor shall
it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated.
   C.   Such license shall cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee
and shall not descend by the laws of the State or intestate succession;
provided, however, that the executor or administrator of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but in no event
for a period longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee.
   D.   Any change made with respect to owners or shareholders of a corporation
shall be reported immediately to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   E.   Any and all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject
to any and all changes or amendments which may be hereafter made, and any and
all rules adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. (Ord. 494, 3-17-80)
   F.   No building, structure or kiosk shall be simultaneously used for the
sale of beer, wine or other intoxicating liquors and for the sale of or receipt
of payment for the sale of gasoline products. (Ord. 868, 12-1-86)
3-2-12: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Any licensee may renew his license prior to the expiration thereof, provided
the licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and provided the licensee
complies with the regulations and ordinances then in force and effect in the
city governing the issuance of retail liquor licenses; and provided further,
that renewal privileges herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the local liquor control commissioner
from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the jurisdiction in
accordance with the then existing ordinances of the city. Applicant shall pay
all fees required at the time said renewal application is made. All
applications for renewal shall be submitted no more than 30 days prior to the
expiration thereof. Beginning in 2026, any application for renewal submitted
after December 15, shall be charged a renewal fee equal to the initial license
fee for the given class of license. Such applications shall be made and proceed
in the same manner provided for in section
3-2-5  of this chapter. (Ord. 2730, 6-18-2012; amd. Ord. O2025-48, 10-20-2025)
3-2-13: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The city certificate of license issued in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place in said licensed
establishment. (Ord. 494, 3-17-1980)
3-2-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or consumed on any licensed premises on
weekdays between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. or on Saturday between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) A.M., or on Sunday between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., the sole exceptions being as follows:
   A.   Packaged liquor for consumption off the premises shall not be sold on
Sundays between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M.; and
   B.   On January 1 of each year, and on no other day of the year, sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises shall not take place
between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(Ord. 2726, 6-4-2012)
3-2-15: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   1. A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only when and upon written authorization to make such change
shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner, and only after the
payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location complies with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.
      2.   Application for such change of location shall be made on a form or
forms therefor approved by the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 961, 4-
4-1988)
   B.   The sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is hereby permitted at the
Warrenville Community Building, city hall and Albright Studio. Such sale or
delivery may be by the city or by the holder of a class D license whose use of
the building has been approved by the city. (Ord. 2046, 4-7-2003)
3-2-16: MINORS, CERTAIN PERSONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited:
      1.   No holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, nor any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to:
         a.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years; or
         b.   Any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be a
habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of
mental treatment.
      2.   a. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale
or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
         b.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty one (21)
years.
         c.   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent,
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of any license based thereon.
   B.   False Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
transfer, alter or deface such an identification card, use the identification
card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain
an identification card by means of false information.
   C.   Sale To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver
such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   D.   False Identification By Minor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years to present or offer to any
licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the
purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring
or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or who has in
his possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of age and identity.
   E.   Possession Or Consumption By Minor Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age to purchase or to
accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or to have such alcoholic liquor in his
possession or to consume alcoholic liquor.
      2.   In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to have any alcoholic beverage in his possession on any
street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public.
      3.   The term "possession", as used in this subsection, shall also
include, but is not limited to, the presence of any amount of alcohol within
the body of a person.
      4.   This subsection does not apply to possession by a person under the
age of twenty one (21) years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in
pursuance of the order of his parent or in pursuance of his employment. (Ord.
1394, 5-1-1995)
   F.   Minors Serving Liquor Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided herein,
it shall be unlawful for persons under the age of twenty one (21) years to
draw, pour, mix or serve any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises.
      1.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in restaurants: a) in which not less
than seventy percent (70%) of the gross restaurant receipts are attributable to
the sale of food on the restaurant premises, and b) which have not less than
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet devoted exclusively to the dining
area (excluding any area used for bar service), and c) which hold a class A-
2 restaurant liquor license, persons who are at least nineteen (19) years of
age may be employed as members of the waitstaff for the purpose of selling,
serving, giving or delivering alcoholic liquor in the dining area of the
licensed premises subject to the following terms and conditions. It shall be
unlawful for anyone who is nineteen (19) or twenty (20) years of age, employed
as a member of the waitstaff of such restaurant liquor licensee, to sell,
serve, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person, without first having: 1)
requested and obtained identification establishing that the person is twenty
one (21) years or older; and 2) a supervisory employee of the licensee, who is
himself or herself twenty one (21) years or older, having also reviewed said
identification for purposes of ascertaining that the person providing the same
is twenty one (21) years or older.
      2.   Any class A-2 restaurant liquor licensee which desires to utilize
waitstaff of less than twenty one (21) years of age, as provided in subsection
F1 of this section, shall further comply with the following reporting and
training requirements:
         a.   The licensee shall make a separate application, on forms approved
by the liquor commissioner, to the liquor commissioner to allow the use of
waitstaff less than twenty one (21) years of age;
         b.   The licensee shall provide an annual report, certified by the
licensee, to the liquor commissioner, not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration date of the license, showing: 1) the gross sales receipts from
the business; 2) the gross sales receipts from food and nonalcoholic beverage
sales; 3) the gross sales receipts from alcoholic liquor sales; 4) the
percentage relationship between alcoholic liquor sales and total sales; and 5)
such further information as the liquor commissioner may reasonably require to
assure compliance with this subsection; and
         c.   The licensee shall require that all waitstaff receive appropriate
training with respect to alcoholic liquor service, i.e., beverage alcohol
sellers and servicers education and training program (BASSET) approved by the
educational foundation of the national restaurant association or have completed
such training at a facility approved under 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 301/
15-10, or such equivalent training as may be authorized by the liquor
commissioner, prior to the commencement of their employment at the restaurant.
Proof of training for each waitstaff employee shall be provided as part of the
annual report referred to above. (Ord. 1946, 12-3-2001)
   G.   Minors Prohibited On Licensed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to be present or to remain in any room of the licensed premises where alcoholic
liquor is permitted to be drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for
consumption on the premises; provided, however, the foregoing prohibition shall
not apply: 1) to any room of the licensed premises used as a restaurant, food
shop or other use where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business
carried on in said room; and 2) to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years who is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1394, 5-
1-1995)
3-2-17: EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation of or
distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 494, 3-17-1980)
3-2-18: CONDITION OF PREMISES/CONDUCT OF LICENSED BUSINESSES:
   A.   The licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a clean, orderly
and sanitary condition and shall comply with the building code and all other
health and safety codes of the city.
   B.   Every licensee shall conduct his business in a quiet, decent and
respectable manner.
   C.   A licensee shall not permit any violent, tumultuous, offensive,
obstreperous or disorderly conduct on the premises, in a parking lot or in any
other area adjacent to the premises and under control of the licensee. Every
licensee shall immediately report to the city police any act by any person on
the premises in violation of this subsection.
   D.   A licensee shall not give, deliver, sell or otherwise convey any
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any
person who is intoxicated.
   E.   A licensee shall not engage in, permit or suffer the solicitation of
drinks or prostitution on the licensed premises.
   F.   A licensee shall not engage in, permit or suffer any person on the
licensed premises to:
      1.   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
      2.   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
      3.   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof; or
      4.   Engage in a male or female strip tease, lingerie (either male or
female) fashion show, wet T-shirt contest, mud or jello wrestling or wrestling
in any substance other than air, nor any similar contest or performance; or
      5.   Engage in any act or form of entertainment which, when considered as
a whole, would be considered obscene (i.e., having its predominant appeal to
prurient interests) as such term is defined by state law.
   G.   The licensee shall not engage in, permit nor suffer any of the
following acts to be conducted on the licensed premises:
      1.   Performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or other sexual
acts.
      2.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.
      3.   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
      4.   Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes
to public view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva or
anus.
   H.   The licensee shall not engage in, permit or suffer any form of illegal
gambling on the licensed premises.
   I.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections F and G of this section,
a mother may breast feed her baby in the licensed premises, as permitted by the
"right to breastfeed act", as now existing or hereafter amended.
   J.   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant, hotel, recreational
facility or club), no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall
be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor
inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which
shall prevent a clear view of the entire interior from the street, road or
sidewalk. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to inspect the
premises in order to determine whether the view is unobstructed as aforesaid.
In addition, all rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises
shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or
artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall
be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required
by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or be
permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall
be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the
provisions of this section, the liquor commissioner shall have the right to
require the filing of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of
the view as above required.
   K.   From and after August 15, 2010, a new liquor license shall not be
issued for any premises where alcoholic liquor is sold for on site consumption
unless the exterior site and parking lot of the premises comply with the
illumination and glare standards set forth in section 9.I of the city of
Warrenville zoning ordinance, as now existing or hereafter amended. The
foregoing shall not apply to renewals of existing license with respect to
premises for which a liquor license has been issued prior to August 15, 2010.
   L.   The licensee shall have at least one manager, or person designated by
the licensee to have operational decision making authority, who has been
approved after a police records check by the city, to be on the licensed
premises at all times that such premises is open for business. The licensee
shall notify the liquor commissioner of any change of manager, or person
designated by the licensee to have operational decision making authority, and
shall provide such information as may be necessary for the police records
check.
   M.   The licensee shall retain receipts for liquor purchases for a minimum
of thirty (30) days and shall make them immediately available to the liquor
commissioner upon request.
   N.   Those licensees with video surveillance systems shall maintain them in
good working condition and shall place them for optimal surveillance, as
recommended by the system installer/manufacturer, and shall make videos
immediately available to the liquor commissioner upon request. The licensee
shall retain all video recordings for a minimum of thirty (30) days.
   O.   The licensee shall notify the liquor commissioner at the time a
business is sold (either the corporation, limited liability company or the
assets) or when a contract for sale is signed, whichever first occurs.
   P.   Licensee shall be current on all federal, state and local taxes and on
city fees including court fines and costs.
   Q.   Licensed premises shall be in compliance with all city building, fire
and property maintenance codes.
   R.   The licensee shall not give, deliver, sell, offer for sale, receive or
possess palcohol anywhere on the licensed premises. The licensee shall not
suffer or permit palcohol inhalation or consumption on the licensed premises.
   S.   The licensee shall not give, deliver, sell, offer for sale, receive or
possess smoking alcohol inhalation equipment anywhere on licensed premises. The
licensee shall not suffer or permit smoking alcohol inhalation or consumption
on the licensed premises. (Ord. O2017-24, 5-1-2017)
3-2-19: PEDDLING LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (Ord. 494, 3-17-
1980)
3-2-20: LIQUOR SALES/POSSESSION OUTSIDE OF LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to sell liquor
or other beverages, to provide entertainment, or to conduct business in any
manner outside the building unless the property has been zoned by the city so
as to permit such activity outside the building.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase alcoholic liquor at
business premises licensed for sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption only
on the premises and then to leave the business premises in possession of
alcoholic liquor purchased on the premises.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee whose premises are licensed for
sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises to knowingly
permit any person who has purchased alcoholic liquor on the licensee's premises
to leave the business premises in possession of liquor purchased on said
premises. (Ord. 2236, 9-6-2005)
3-2-21: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises at any time
upon the verbal request of the local liquor control commissioner, or any police
officer or health officer authorized by him, of the city, for the purpose of
determining whether or not the Illinois liquor control act or the provisions of
this chapter are being violated. (Ord. 494, 3-17-1980)
3-2-22: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
   A.   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of prices charged for
all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse
establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at
retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that
establishment.
   B.   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
      1.   Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe.
      2.   Sell, offer or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of
alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public. (Ord. 1075, 12-18-1989)
      3.   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date without charge or at a reduced price other than that
charged other purchasers of such drinks on that day, except as authorized in
subsection C7 of this section. (Ord. 1241, 2-1-1992)
      4.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in one drink of
alcoholic liquor without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged
for that drink on that day.
      5.   Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises.
      6.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections B1 through B5 of
this section.
   C.   Nothing contained in subsection B of this section shall be construed to
prohibit a licensee from:
      1.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time.
      2.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package.
      3.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package.
      4.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between
a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show.
      5.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel.
      6.   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time.
      7.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole
or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled.
   D.   A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the retailer's license in addition to any other penalties
otherwise provided for. (Ord. 1075, 12-18-1989)
3-2-23: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE/APPEALS:
   A.   The local liquor control commissioner may suspend for any period up to
thirty (30) days or revoke any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation
of the provisions of this chapter or for any violation of any state law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor as well as for any violation of such
other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted
or for any violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the local
liquor control commissioner as provided herein.
In addition to a suspension as provided in the liquor control act, the local
liquor control commissioner may also levy a fine on the licensee for such
violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), as provided in the Illinois liquor code, for each violation, and
each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this section
may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds
from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the municipal
treasury. (Ord. 2297, 6-19-2006)
   B.   Notice of hearings regarding such suspension, fine or revocation shall
be sent to the Chief of Police, and the Mayor and City Council of the City. No
such license shall be so revoked or suspended or a fine imposed except after a
public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, with a three (3) day
written notice to the licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear
and defend. The provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-3 and related
paragraphs pertaining to the procedure for revocation, fines and suspension of
a liquor license shall be followed.
   C.   Should any applicant for license make a false statement or fraudulent
statement in such application, the same shall be cause for revocation of such
license by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   D.   All appeals to the State Liquor Control Commission by a City liquor
licensee of a decision, order or action by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or designee having the effect of fining a licensee or suspending
or revoking the City liquor license shall be limited to review of the official
record of the formal proceedings before the Commissioner. (Ord. 1449, 11-20-
1995)
3-2-24: VIOLATION OF TAX LAWS:
In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the Liquor Control
Commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail license, or suspend
or revoke such license, for any of the following violations of any State of
Illinois Tax Statutes, or of any Municipal tax ordinance:
   A.   Failure to make a tax return;
   B.   The filing of a fraudulent return;
   C.   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to
be due;
   D.   Failure to keep books and records;
   E.   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate or
registration;
   F.   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation relating to the
administration and enforcement of tax liability. (Ord. 2297, 6-19-2006)
3-2-25: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues to occur. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord.
O2025-48, 10-20-2025)
CHAPTER 3
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-3-1: Video Gaming
3-3-2: Video Gaming Terminal License Required
3-3-3: Video Gaming Terminal License Regulations
3-3-4: Compliance; Inspection
3-3-5: Penalties
3-3-6: Revocation Or Suspension Of Video Gaming Terminal License
3-3-1: VIDEO GAMING:
   A.   Definitions: The terms “video gaming”, “video gaming terminal”, and
“video gaming terminal operator” have the definitions set forth for those terms
in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.,
as may be amended from time to time.
   B.   Video gaming is prohibited in the City except in accordance with, and
subject to the provisions, conditions, and restrictions of, Chapters 2 and 3 of
Title 3 of this Code.
   C.   No video gaming terminals, activities or operations are permitted
within the City unless the following licenses are obtained:
      1.   A Class V liquor license from the City, in accordance with, and
pursuant to, Section
3-2-7 of this Code;
      2.   The terminal operator video gaming license issued by the Illinois
Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming
Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.; and
      3.   A video gaming terminal license issued by the City covering each
video gaming terminal, in accordance with, and pursuant to, Section
3-3-2 of this Code. (Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021; amd. Ord. O2022-22, 7-5-2022)
3-3-2: VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
Prior to installing a video gaming terminal in an establishment with a Class V
liquor license, the terminal operator, as defined in the Illinois Video Gaming
Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., must apply for and obtain a
video gaming terminal license from the City that covers each video gaming
terminal to be operated on a Class V licensed premises.
   A.   Application: An application for a video gaming terminal license must be
submitted on the form provided by the City, which must include at least the
following:
      1.   The number of video gaming terminals to be installed on the
premises, which number may not exceed six (6);
      2.   The serial numbers of each video gaming terminal to be installed on
the premises;
      3.   A site plan of the premises providing information about the location
and operation of the proposed video gaming terminals;
      4.   A copy of the applicant's terminal operator's video gaming license
issued by the Illinois Gaming Board;
      5.   The video gaming terminal license fee required by this section; and
      6.   A copy of the Class V liquor license issued to the premises if
already issued. If the Class V liquor license has not yet been issued by the
City, a copy of the completed Class V liquor license application.
   B.   Fees: For the operation of video gaming terminals within the City in
establishments holding a Class V liquor license, an annual license fee is
hereby imposed as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The annual fee must be
submitted by the video gaming terminal operator at the time of submission of an
application for the video gaming terminal license, and annually thereafter.
   C.   License Term: A video gaming terminal license shall terminate on the
April 30 immediately following its issuance. No prorations are allowed for
partial year video gaming terminal license applications.
   D.   License Is A Personal Privilege Only: A video gaming terminal license
is purely a personal privilege and does not constitute property nor is the
video gaming terminal license saleable or transferable to any person or entity.
Any change in ownership of a licensed premises or video gaming terminal
operator will render the video gaming terminal license null and void.
(Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-3-3: VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL LICENSE REGULATIONS:
Video gaming terminal licenses are issued subject to the following conditions
and restrictions with which all video gaming terminal licensees must comply:
   A.   Display Of Licenses:
      1.   The terminal operator's State-issued video gaming license must be
clearly displayed at all times.
      2.   A valid City-issued video gaming terminal license must be clearly
displayed at all times.
   B.   Number Of Terminals Allowed: No more than six (6) video gaming
terminals may be located on the licensed premises.
   C.   Compliance With City Ordinances, State And Federal Laws: The licensee
and all licensed video gaming terminals must fully comply with all applicable
City ordinances, Federal and State laws and regulations, including the Illinois
Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended, and
all rules, regulations, and restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board.
   D.   Notification Of State License Revocation Or Suspension: Licensees must
immediately notify the Finance Director in the event the Illinois Gaming Board
revokes or suspends the licensed terminal operator's video gaming license. The
revocation, loss, or suspension of a valid State video gaming license shall
automatically, and without hearing, result in the revocation, loss, or
suspension of the City video gaming terminal license for all video gaming
terminals without any refund of any fee.
   E.   Video Gaming Cafes Prohibited: Notwithstanding any provision of this
Code to the contrary, video gaming cafes are not permitted in the City. In the
event any provision of the City Code conflicts with this subsection E, the more
restrictive provision shall apply. A "video gaming cafe" is defined for
purposes of this section as an establishment whose primary or major focus is
video gaming, and the service of alcohol and food is secondary to the video
gaming operation. The following factors may be considered when determining if a
proposed or operating establishment is a video gaming cafe:
      1.   The layout and design of the establishment;
      2.   The extent and variety of food and beverages offered;
      3.   Whether the number of video gaming terminals relative to the
customer seating capacity of the establishment is less than ten (10) customer
seats to one (1) terminal;
      4.   Whether the square footage of space devoted to video gaming relative
to the amount of space devoted to other activities is less than four (4) square
feet for non-gaming to one (1) square feet for gaming;
      5.   The percentage of proposed or actual revenue derived from food and
beverage sales as a percentage of total gross revenues for the establishment on
an annual basis based on audited financial statements, corporate financial
reports, tax return information, state liquor license reports, or any other
form of information deemed acceptable by the City;
      6.   Whether the establishment is proposed to be marketed as a gaming
establishment or have a gambling theme;
      7.   The number of employees at the establishment and their proposed
function; and
      8.   Any other factors as deemed relevant by the Finance Director. (Ord.
O2021-34, 9-7-2021)
3-3-4: COMPLIANCE; INSPECTION:
The City and its agents must be allowed unrestricted access to enter the
licensed establishment at any time upon the verbal request of the City, or any
person authorized by the City, for the purposes of determining compliance with
this Chapter and the Illinois Video Gaming Act. (Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021)
3-3-5: PENALTIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter 3.
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, any person found liable of
violating or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this Chapter 3 shall
be subject to the following penalties:
   A.   First offense in 12-month period: 72-hour video gaming terminal license
suspension, in accordance with Section
3-3-6 of this Code, and one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine;
   B.   Second offense in 12-month period: 72-hour video gaming terminal
license suspension, in accordance with Section
3-3-6 of this Code, and one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) fine;
   C.   Third offense in 12-month period: Revocation of video gaming terminal
license, in accordance with Section
3-3-6 of this Code, and two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) fine.
A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021)
3-3-6: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL LICENSE:
   A.   Except as provided in Section
3-3-3.D, no video gaming terminal license shall be revoked or suspended until a
hearing has been conducted in accordance with the hearing procedures set forth
in Section
3-10-12 of this Code; provided, however, that no hearing will be required to
revoke or suspend a City video gaming terminal license for an establishment
that has its State video gaming license revoked or suspended.
   B.   In addition to all penalties authorized in this section, in the event
that the liquor license of the establishment be suspended or revoked, the video
gaming terminal license will likewise be suspended or revoked concurrently.
   C.   In the event of a revocation or denial of any license or registration
under this section, such person shall not be issued any license provided for in
this section for one calendar year following the revocation or any appeal
thereof.
   D.   The local liquor control commissioner may treat any violations of the
provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code as a violation of the applicable
establishment's Class V City liquor license and may proceed accordingly with
respect to the enforcement authority over the establishment's liquor license.
(Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose, License Required
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: License
3-4-4: License Fees
3-4-5: License Card, Display
3-4-6: Reserved
3-4-7: Time Of Activity
3-4-8: Exceptions
3-4-9: Revocation Of License
3-4-10: Penalty
3-4-11: Duty To Observe Notice
3-4-12: Limitations On Soliciting In Streets
3-4-13: Additional Limitations On Soliciting
3-4-1: PURPOSE, LICENSE REQUIRED:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the residents of the City from the
operations of unreliable solicitors by requiring that solicitors be licensed.
(Ord. 831, 4-7-1986; amd. Ord. 2018, 10-7-2002)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
   APPLICANT: Any person that files an application for a solicitation license
as provided for in this chapter.
   PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.
   PREMISES: Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit
contained within any occupied building or structure, of any type within the
City.
   SOLICITATION OR SOLICIT: Engaging in any one or more of the following
activities:
   A.   Seeking or offering to sell, selling and delivering, peddling,
bartering, exchanging, or obtaining, for profit or any kind of consideration
any goods or services;
   B.   Distribution to the public - by leaving at a premises or on any public
property anywhere within the City - any of the following items of a commercial
nature: card, circular, handbill, sample, merchandise, newspaper, advertising
material, document, or other items used in conjunction with solicitation;
   C.   Asking for or seeking to collect contributions of money, gifts, or
goods of any kind;
   D.   Selling tickets;
   E.   Seeking to obtain customers for application, purchase of, or enrollment
in any public utility service or program; and
   F.   Going upon any public property, public street or other right-of-way, or
private property within the City for the purpose of engaging in any of the
activities described in subsections A through E of this definition.
Religious proselytizing and political canvassing are not solicitation and are
not regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
   SOLICITOR: A person who engages in solicitation and any person that employs
or engages a person or persons to solicit. (Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018)
3-4-3: LICENSE:
   A.   Application: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the
City without first having obtained a license therefor. Any person desiring to
secure a solicitation license shall complete an application form. All
information required on the form shall be supplied, including:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant and all persons who will be
soliciting.
      2.   If the applicant is employed by another, the name and business
address of such other person, association, organization, company or
corporation.
      3.   A copy of a government-issued identification card for each person
who will be soliciting under the requested license.
      4.   If the applicant is a corporate entity, evidence that the applicant
is registered to conduct business in the State of Illinois and is in good
standing with the State.
      5.   If the applicant is a charitable organization, as defined by the
Illinois Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1 et
seq., evidence that the applicant is registered with the Illinois Attorney
General.
      6.   A statement that the applicant and all persons who will be
soliciting under the requested license have never been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a felony, any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation, or
unauthorized entry to property, or a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other municipal, county or state ordinance, statute ,or
regulation regulating solicitation.
      7.   Description and license number of any motor vehicle used.
      8.   Nature of the services, subscriptions, or goods offered for sale, or
of the cause for which contributions are sought, or of the information sought.
      9.   Date(s) and time for which a license is desired; provided no license
will be issued for a period in excess of 60 days.
      10.   Signature of the applicant.
      11.   Every applicant must to submit to fingerprinting and photographing
by the police department in connection with the application .
      12.   Such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary to process the application.
The application shall be submitted to the City Clerk together with two (2)
photographs (2 inches x 2 inches) acceptable to the City Clerk as a likeness
for each person who will be soliciting under the requested license and a copy
of the current certificate of registration from the Illinois Department of
Revenue showing applicant’s Illinois State Sales Tax number. The City Clerk may
request such additional identification and credentials as may be reasonably
required.
   B.   Issuance, Denial: Within ten business days after receiving a complete
application, the City Clerk shall issue a solicitation license unless the Chief
of Police, or their designee, determines and finds that:
      1.   Any material statements made in the application are false;
      2.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has, within
five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to (i) a felony or any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation, or
unauthorized entry to property under the laws of the State of Illinois, any
other state, or the United States, or (ii) a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or any other municipal, county or state ordinance, statute ,or
regulation regulating solicitation; or
      3.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has had a
previously issued solicitation permit revoked by the City within five (5) years
prior to the date of the application.
   C.   Denial: If an application is denied, then the City Clerk will notify
the applicant in writing of the denial, including the reason for the denial.
The notice of denial will be delivered in person at the City Hall, or by first
class U.S. mail addressed to the address set forth in the application, or by e-
mail if the applicant has requested to receive communications by e-mail. An
application will be deemed denied on the day the notice of denial is delivered
in person or is placed in the U.S. mail, or is sent by e-mail to the e-mail
address provided by the applicant. Any rejection may be appealed by the
applicant to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If an
application is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. O2018-
48, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. O2022-26, 8-1-2022)
3-4-4: LICENSE FEES:
   The following fees shall apply and shall be submitted with the application
for license:
   A.   License fee: The license fee is set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   B.   There shall be no fee for licenses for representatives of religious,
political or not for profit organizations. The City Clerk shall have authority
to decide whether any such organization falls within the meaning of this
section. The City Clerk may refer any such question to the Mayor or to any
Alderman who shall make the decision.
(Ord. 1284, 11-15-1993; amd. Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. O2022-26, 8-
1-2022; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-4-5: LICENSE CARD, DISPLAY:
The license shall be in the form of a card suitable for carrying on the person
and shall have securely attached to it one of the two (2) photographs supplied.
It shall carry the name of the individual solicitor and, if applicable, the
name of the employer or licensed entity, a brief description of the business of
the licensee and the dates of the validity of the license.
At all times when engaged in his business within the City, the licensee shall
carry the license upon his person and shall exhibit the same on request of any
police officer, any City official or any person solicited.
Each license shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned
to the City Clerk upon its expiration. (Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018)
3-4-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018)
3-4-7: TIME OF ACTIVITY:
All licenses shall be valid only between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) A.M.
and nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 1284, 11-15-1993; amd. Ord. O2022-26, 8-1-
2022)
3-4-8: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any officer or employee of the City, of DuPage County, of the State of
Illinois, of the Federal government or of any subdivision thereof when engaged
on official business.
   B.   The operation of such local activities as school activities, church
activities or community activities. (Ord. 26, 4-8-1968)
3-4-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license may be revoked and confiscated by the Chief of Police or by any
City official because of any violation by the licensee of this Code or of any
State or Federal law. (Ord. 2743, 9-17-2012)
3-4-10: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code, any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
3-4-11: DUTY TO OBSERVE NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto premises in the City
to first examine any notice which may have been placed on such premises and to
be governed by any statement contained in such notice. If the notice states,
"No Trespassing Or Soliciting Allowed", the solicitor, whether registered or
not, and whether required to be registered or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises. Any such solicitor who has gained entrance
to any premises, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
to create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant to such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting either as herein defined or
otherwise, in defiance of the notice exhibited. (Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018)
3-4-12: LIMITATIONS ON SOLICITING IN STREETS:
Solicitation of contributions from the occupant of any vehicle or pedestrian on
the public rights-of-way within the City of Warrenville shall be permitted upon
the following terms and conditions:
   A.   Organizations with Two or More Solicitors:
      1.   An organization that desires to have two or more people solicit
contributions from vehicles or pedestrians on public rights of way within the
City shall be engaged in a fundraising activity for which a street solicitation
license has been obtained from the City of Warrenville. Said license shall be
issued by the City Clerk’s Office and shall be valid for one or two consecutive
days. A license for a two day fundraising activity shall be issued only if the
second day of the fundraising activity is a Saturday. No more than one
organization with two or more solicitors may solicit on public rights-of-way on
any given day. Said license shall be issued by the Clerk on a first come, first
served basis.
      2.   The applicant shall furnish to the City a certificate of insurance
and a release and hold harmless agreement executed by each participant acting
on behalf of the soliciting agency, which shall indemnify the City from any
injury to any person or property during the solicitation. Any person engaged in
the act of solicitation shall be sixteen (16) years of age or more and shall be
wearing a high visibility vest.
      3.   The applicant must comply with the general regulations set forth in
Subsection B of this Section.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Soliciting shall be permitted only at intersections where all
traffic is required to come to a full stop. There shall be no soliciting on any
public roadway intersection where, in the opinion of the Police Chief or his
designee, the solicitation shall constitute a hazard to safety and traffic.
      2.   Soliciting shall be permitted only during daylight hours.
      3.   Solicitors may not interfere with or block pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
      4.   No Person shall stand in a public right-of-way within the City for
the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle, or for the
purpose of Soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
      5.   Every solicitor engaged in soliciting on any real property owned by
the City, and the business or organization represented by the solicitor, shall
be liable for all injuries to any person or property that occurs during or as a
result of the soliciting and that is causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the solicitor or the business or organization the Solicitor
represents.
      6.   Every solicitor engaged in soliciting on any real property owned by
the City, and the business or organization represented by the solicitor, shall
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its elected and appointed
officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives from and against
any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expense,
including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, or failures to act or misconduct of the
solicitor if such acts, omissions, or failure to acts cause material damage to
the City or its property, or damage to the person or property of a third party
while the solicitor is Soliciting; provided, however, that solicitor’s
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses, or expenses arising out of or resulting
from the negligence, misconduct or breach of any provision of this Code by the
City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. Nothing in
this subsection shall be read to require indemnity by a solicitor if the damage
was not caused by the solicitor directly and personally, and solicitors shall
not be liable for any damages caused by a person or persons objecting to the
nature or purpose of the solicitation.
      7.   In addition to any other remedies and fines provided for within this
chapter, any violation of this section shall constitute grounds for denial of a
license the following year.” (Ord. O2018-48, 10-15-2018; amd. Ord. O2022-26, 8-
1-2022)
3-4-13: ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS ON SOLICITING:
No solicitor shall be permitted to solicit from any person under the age of
seventeen (17) without such minor's parent's consent and presence. (Ord. 2743,
9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 5
GARAGE, YARD SALES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Sales Permissible for Limited Time
3-5-2: Exceptions
3-5-1: SALES PERMISSIBLE FOR LIMITED TIME:
Informal sales of the type commonly referred to as garage sales, yard sales,
neighborhood sales, etc., are permitted on any residential premises for not to
exceed ten (10) days in any calendar year; provided, that they are actually
operated by the residents of the premises used. They will not be considered to
be a home occupation.
If any residential premises public sale is carried on for more than ten (10)
days in any calendar year, such sale shall be considered to be a home
occupation and is subject to regulation as a home occupation. (Ord. 99, 7-19-
71)
3-5-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter does not to any degree cover church bazaars, school sales or any
comparable activity not carried out on residential premises. (Ord. 99, 7-19-71)
CHAPTER 6
FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required; Fees
3-6-3: Duration Of Vending Licenses
3-6-4: Display Of License
3-6-5: Eligibility For License
3-6-6: Receptacles To Be Provided
3-6-7: Exceptions
3-6-8: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter 1 :
   FOOD: Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where food is prepared and intended
for, though not limited to, individual portion service, and includes the site
at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place,
regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of
whether there is a charge for the food. The term also includes delicatessen
type operations that prepare foods intended for individual portion service and
mobile food units and temporary food service establishments. The term does not
include lodging facilities serving only a continental breakfast (a continental
breakfast is one limited to only coffee, tea and/or juice and commercially
prepared sweet baked goods), or private homes or a closed family function where
food is prepared or served for individual family consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT: A vehicle mounted food service establishment designed to
be readily movable, including, but not limited to, ice cream trucks.
   PERSON: An individual, aggregation of individuals, partnership, corporation,
association or firm.
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A food service establishment that
operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen
(14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. (Ord.
1336, 7-18-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment
unless such person possesses a valid vending license issued by the director of
finance and information services, who shall keep a record of such licenses
issued. Such vending license shall not be issued by the city unless the
applicant presents or has presented on his behalf, to the director of finance
and information services, satisfactory evidence of the possession of a valid
permit from the board of health of the county of DuPage. It shall be a
prerequisite to the continuance to its expiration date of the vending license
to hold a valid permit from the board of health and the county of DuPage during
the entire term of the vending license issued by the city. The applicable
license fee set forth in the annual fee ordinance must be paid prior to the
issuance of the license.
(Ord. 1336, 7-18-1994; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-6-3: DURATION OF VENDING LICENSES:
The vending license issued by the city under this chapter shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which it became effective. (Ord. 22, 2-12-1968)
3-6-4: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license required by this chapter, or a copy of such license, shall be
prominently displayed in the place of business of the licensee within the city
and on each vehicle used in the city for the delivery or transportation of food
by the licensee or his representatives. (Ord. 22, 2-12-1968)
3-6-5: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A license shall be issued only for premises, or for mobile equipment which is
in such condition as to be suitable for the licensed use. (Ord. 22, 2-12-1968)
3-6-6: RECEPTACLES TO BE PROVIDED:
When food is sold for consumption not within a building, it shall be the
responsibility of the operator of such business to provide suitable receptacles
for the resultant refuse and to maintain the affected area free of such refuse.
Failure to do so may be grounds for revocation of license. (Ord. 1336, 7-18-
1994)
3-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
No license shall be required for:
   A.   Vehicles delivering food to licensed establishments.
   B.   The sale of produce locally grown.
   C.   The sale of food at such local activities as meetings and picnics of
local organizations, church suppers, bake sales, etc., or comparable
noncommercial local activities, including public and parochial schools. (Ord.
22, 2-12-1968)
3-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions in this chapter shall, upon conviction of
offense, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues; provided, there be written notification of
violation by a duly constituted city official. (Ord. 22, 2-12-1968)
CHAPTER 7
TAXICAB OPERATION FRANCHISE
SECTION:
3-7-1: License Required
3-7-2: Application
3-7-3: Insurance Required
3-7-4: License Fees
3-7-5: Taximeters
3-7-6: Vehicle Inspection
3-7-7: Continued Maintenance And Periodic Inspection Required
3-7-8: Transfer Of License
3-7-9: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-7-10: Driver's License Required
3-7-11: Rates Of Fare
3-7-12: Right Of Operator To Demand Fare In Advance; Refusal To Convey
Passengers
3-7-13: Duty To Pay Fare
3-7-14: Additional Passengers
3-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
If the principal office of any taxicab or limousine service is located within
the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit a motor
vehicle owned by such service to be operated as a taxicab or limousine within
the city without first obtaining a license as herein provided. A person shall
be deemed to be operating a taxicab or limousine in the city when he/she picks
up a passenger within the corporate limits of the city.
The vehicle license provisions of this code shall apply to all taxicabs and
limousines licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-2: APPLICATION:
Applications for license under this chapter shall include the following
information:
   A.   Applicant's name and address; business name and address.
   B.   The make, model, year of manufacture, state vehicle license plate
number, and seating capacity of each vehicle proposed to be operated under the
license.
   C.   The location of the applicant's proposed place of business and/or
vehicle depot.
   D.   A statement of applicant's ability to provide the bond or insurance
required by this chapter. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-3: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued, renewed or continued in operation unless the
applicant has met the insurance requirements of the state for operators of
taxicabs or limousines. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-4: LICENSE FEES:
   No license shall be issued or renewed for any taxicab or limousine company
unless the company shall have paid to the director of finance and information
services the fee ‘set forth in the annual fee ordinance. Such fee shall be for
the calendar year and shall be payable in full regardless of when during the
calendar year the license issues.
(Ord. 798, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004'; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-7-5: TAXIMETERS:
Any taximeter used in a vehicle operated under the authority of this chapter
shall be fastened in front view of the passengers and visible to them at all
times during the day or night; the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated
between the hours of sunset and sunrise. It shall be sealed at all points and
connections which if manipulated would affect its correct reading and
recording. Taximeters are required for any vehicle that charges on a per mile
basis. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-6: VEHICLE INSPECTION:
Upon issuance of renewal of a taxicab or limousine license, and before
operation thereunder, the licensee shall present each vehicle authorized to be
operated under said license to the chief of police, or his designee, for
inspection. The fee for such inspection shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per
vehicle.
The chief of police shall cause to be inspected each vehicle licensed under
this chapter for overall safety, cleanliness, adequacy of facilities for
transportation of passengers, conditions and accuracy of taximeter, if
applicable, and general compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon
request by the chief of police, licensee shall have the taximeter independently
tested, pay the cost thereof, and submit the results to the chief.
If the inspection determines that such vehicle is safe and suitable for its
intended purpose, a sticker shall be issued to the operator, who shall affix
said sticker to the rear window of the inspected vehicle.
If the inspection determines that such vehicle failed to meet the requirements
of this chapter, the chief of police shall so notify the licensee within seven
(7) calendar days detailing the particular grounds for such failure.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to accept, in lieu of the inspection
required herein, the inspection by another agency when, in the chief's opinion,
such inspection meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-7: CONTINUED MAINTENANCE AND PERIODIC INSPECTION REQUIRED:
Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall be maintained in a safe, clean and
mechanically sound condition, and any taximeter in each taxicab shall be
maintained in an accurate working condition. At least once every year, or more
often upon bona fide complaint, the chief of police shall cause every vehicle
licensed hereunder to be inspected in the manner provided in section
3-7-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under this chapter are not transferable. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-9: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended if the licensee has:
   A.   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
   B.   Discontinued operations for more than four (4) weeks; or
   C.   Violated any city ordinance, state law, or federal law, the violation
of which reflects unfavorable upon the fitness of the licensee to offer public
transportation.
Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given written notice
of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-10: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine licensed under this chapter, and
no person who owns or controls a taxicab or limousine licensed under this
chapter, shall permit it to be so operated, unless the driver of said vehicle
shall have first obtained and shall have then in full force and effect a valid
Illinois taxicab or limousine driver's license. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-11: RATES OF FARE:
   A.   Taxicabs: Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have a rate
card, setting forth the authorized rates of fare, displayed in such a place as
to be in view of all passengers.
   B.   Limousines: The rates per mile and/or cost of each trip shall be
available to the user of a service licensed under this chapter upon request at
the time his trip is scheduled.
Each licensee shall submit to the city clerk a list of current rates, which
list shall be updated by the licensee whenever a change is made. (Ord. 798, 9-
16-1985)
3-7-12: RIGHT OF OPERATOR TO DEMAND FARE IN ADVANCE; REFUSAL TO CONVEY
PASSENGERS:
The operator in control of any vehicle licensed hereunder may demand in advance
the payment of the fare of the person desiring to be carried by such vehicle
and may refuse to convey any person who shall not comply with the demand; but
no operator of a taxicab or limousine shall otherwise refuse or neglect to
convey any orderly person anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or
unable to do so. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
3-7-13: DUTY TO PAY FARE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any
vehicle licensed hereunder after having hired said vehicle. (Ord. 798, 9-16-
1985)
3-7-14: ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS:
No driver of any taxicab licensed hereunder shall carry any person other than
the first person to occupy or ride in said vehicle unless the person first
hiring the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of another passenger or
passengers. (Ord. 798, 9-16-1985)
CHAPTER 8
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Authority
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: Conditions Of License; Application
3-8-4: License Fees; Issuance
3-8-5: License Issue Restrictions
3-8-6: Conduct Of Raffles
3-8-7: Raffles Manager; Bond
3-8-8: Records Required
3-8-9: Additional Restrictions
3-8-1: AUTHORITY:
The city council hereby authorizes and permits lotteries to be conducted within
the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "lotteries" shall
include "raffles". (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
   FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not
for profit basis with no personal profit incurring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE; APPLICATION:
Lotteries shall be conducted only by organizations licensed pursuant to this
section, and such licenses are subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The application for license must specify the area or areas within the
city in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during
which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of
winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined.
   B.   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the
not for profit character of the prospective license organization, signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of their organization.
   C.   Each such license shall be valid for only one raffle.
   D.   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members, and which have been in existence for a period of five
(5) years and have a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-4: LICENSE FEES; ISSUANCE:
   A.   The license fee for each raffle conducted under the terms of this
chapter is as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The city council shall
consider waiver of fees requests by organizations qualified under this chapter
on an annual basis at its last meeting in December.
   B.   When all the requirements of this chapter have been met, the license
shall be issued by the director of finance and information services.
(Ord. 608, 3-15-1982; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004; Ord. 2591, 6-21-2010; Ord.
O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-8-5: LICENSE ISSUE RESTRICTIONS:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   D.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B or
C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed.
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not.
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-6: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this chapter.
   E.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   F.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-7: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the city in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties.
Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the
licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
The city council may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization under this chapter;
provided, that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only
by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 1957, 1-
21-2002)
The city council shall consider waiver requests by established not for profit
organizations on an annual basis at its last meeting in December. (Ord. 2562,
1-4-2010, eff. 2-15-2010)
3-8-8: RECORDS REQUIRED:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
the records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deductions, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. (Ord. 608, 3-15-
1982)
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the director of finance and information services, its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this section. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982; amd.
Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004)
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
3-8-9: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle should not exceed two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
should not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 608, 3-15-1982)
CHAPTER 9
AMUSEMENT DEVICES; GAME ROOMS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: License Required, Game Rooms
3-9-3: Application For License
3-9-4: Investigation Fee
3-9-5: Examination Of Applicant Or Licensee
3-9-6: Regulations For Operation Of Game Rooms
3-9-7: License Fees
3-9-8: Taxation For Amusement Devices
3-9-9: Display Of License
3-9-10: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall be applicable:
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, game, table or device which is designed,
intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game, test of skill or
entertainment, and may be operated by the public upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disc, the use of which is made available for any valuable
consideration. Such device is operated by the manipulation of buttons, dials,
balls, wheels, trigger devices or electrical impulses, whether or not
registering a score, offering a prize or offering free replays. "Amusement
device" shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as pinball
machines, marble machines, video games, electronic games, skill ball, pool,
billiard and snooker tables (whether coin operated or not), and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be
indicated. Not included within the definition of "amusement device" are
regulation bowling alleys, children's rides and jukeboxes.
   GAME ROOM: Any business establishment having two (2) or more amusement
devices, whether or not operated as a principal use.
   JUKEBOX: Any device, machine or mechanism designed solely for the protection
or reproduction of music.
   OPERATOR: Any person or entity which leases or operates a business
establishment which is or has contained within it a game room.
   OWNER: Any person or entity who owns or leases an amusement device or
devices. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982; amd. Ord. 680, 1-16-1984; Ord. 1340, 9-6-1994)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, GAME ROOMS:
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a game room without first having
obtained a license to do so and to own or operate a game room which does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license required from the owner or operator of a game room
shall be made to the director of finance and information services, in writing,
signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent
thereof if a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit. The application shall
contain at least the following information: (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982; amd. Ord.
2111, 1-19-2004)
   A.   The applicant's name and mailing address.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business if such business was
in operation prior to the passage of an ordinance requiring the aforesaid
license, or if a proposed business, the name and address of the proposed game
room.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business with the county clerk.
   D.   A drawing of the proposed layout of the premises drawn to scale and
showing the location of amusement devices, aisles, counters and other
significant details.
   E.   In case of a copartnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; or in the case before incorporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act 1  to transact business in the State of Illinois.
   F.   If the applicant is an owner, the name and address of the proposed
operator.
   G.   If the applicant is an operator, the name and address of the proposed
owner.
   H.   Whether the applicant is an owner or operator of any other game room
within the State, and if so, the name and address of such other operation.
   I.   If the game room is not to operate as the principal business at the
location, a statement as to the type of business which will be the principal
business at the location in question.
   J.   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any retailers'
occupation tax; and if so, the reasons therefor.
   K.   Whether the applicant has made an application in another municipality
for a liquor license or a game room and whether such application has been
denied and if so, the reasons therefor.
   L.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense or
felony, and if so, the particulars thereof.
   M.   The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, social security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business; and the name, sex, date
of birth, social security number, position and percentage of ownership in the
property if an owner or in the business if an operator or every sole owner,
partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns five
percent (5%) or more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent
corporations of the applicant business entity; where the applicant is a
corporation or partnership. The answers to each question relating to this
application shall be given with regard to any person who owns or controls an
interest of more than five percent (5%) within the partnership or corporation.
(Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
3-9-4: INVESTIGATION FEE:
There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a game room
a nonrefundable investigation fee of three hundred seventy five dollars
($375.00). No investigation fee shall be required for the license of an owner
of a game room. The investigation fee shall not be required for any applicant
who then holds a valid liquor license within the City. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
3-9-5: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT OR LICENSEE:
At any time during the pendency of an application or during a license period,
the Mayor personally or through the delegation of some other persons who may
carry out the function shall have the right to compel the owner or operator to
submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the
judgment of the person conducting the investigation, are material to the
determination of whether the applicant or license holder is qualified to
receive or to retain a license under the provisions of this Chapter. The person
conducting the investigation shall have the right to require the person being
investigated to answer any charges made in any written objection received to
the issuance or continuation in force of the license. The failure of any
applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the person conducting the
investigation for the examination or a failure to produce books and records as
requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that
the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
3-9-6: REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF GAME ROOMS:
In addition to such regulations or conditions as may be contained within a
special use permit for a game room, or such other special conditions as may be
imposed by the Mayor at the time that the license is issued, the following
items shall constitute rules and regulations for the operation of any game room
operating within the City. Neither the owner nor operator of a game room shall
cause or permit the operation of a game room to take place contrary to these
regulations: (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
   A.   Manager:
      1.   Game Rooms With Five Or More Amusement Devices: Whenever any game
room with five (5) or more amusement devices installed on the premises is
operating, a manager of not less than twenty five (25) years of age shall be
present in the game room.
      2.   Game Rooms With Four Or Less Amusement Devices: Whenever any game
room with four (4) or less amusement devices installed on the premises is
operating, a manager of not less than eighteen (18) years of age shall be
present in the game room. (Ord. 1736, 12-21-1998)
   B.   If the game room is not an incidental use to a business which possesses
a liquor license, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed in the game
room.
   C.   If the game room is not an incidental use to another business, no
cigarettes or other smoking product shall be sold on the premises.
   D.   Signs shall be posted in the game room denoting any curfew law then in
force within the City.
   E.   No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall be permitted to operate
an amusement device between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and two
thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. on days in which school is in session, unless said
person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
   F.   The manager or other security personnel shall periodically inspect the
area outside of the entrance and, where applicable, parking lot adjacent to
assure that persons are not allowed to congregate in such areas where the
congregation of such persons takes place under conditions which cause
disturbances to patrons of other business establishments, nearby residents or
property owners. The owner or operator of the game room or his agent will
direct such persons to leave the premises and absent their compliance with that
order, he will swear out a complaint for trespass or other applicable violation
of the laws of the State or City with the Police Department of the City.
   G.   All game rooms will close not later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.;
provided, however, that where the game room is located in a premises where
alcoholic liquors are sold, the game room may continue in operation until the
closing hour of that establishment.
   H.   No gambling shall take place within the game room.
   I.   No cash prizes shall be awarded within the game room.
   J.   Neither the owner nor the operator of the game room shall cause or
permit loud noises or disturbances to take place within the game room. Persons
who cause such loud noises or disturbances shall be promptly expelled by the
game room management.
   K.   Amusement devices within game rooms shall be placed so that the manager
shall have a clear and unobstructed view of all amusement devices. The
placement of such devices may not obstruct entrances or aisles. There shall be
devoted a minimum of forty (40) square feet for each amusement device. The
owner or applicant shall submit at the time of application a drawing indicating
the proposed location of amusement devices within the game room. Once the game
room license is issued, the location of machines may be changed; provided,
however, that the new placement of machines must be in compliance with those
standards set forth within this Chapter.
   L.   No amusement device shall be operated within any business establishment
whose premises is located within two hundred feet (200') of a school, church or
playground adjacent to a school or church. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
3-9-7: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The license fee for the operator of any game room shall be as set forth
in the annual fee ordinance.
   B.   The license period shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
   C.   The license fees shall be due in full upon the issuance of the licenses
and are not transferable. Where the event which results in a license fee being
payable shall take place during the second half of a license year, the amount
of the license shall be prorated to one-half ( 1/2) of the annual license fee.
   D.   No refund shall be given in the event that a license is voluntarily
terminated or revoked.
(Ord. 1285, 11-15-1993; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-9-8: TAXATION FOR AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any amusement device located within the city which
is available for public use upon the payment of a fee. The amount of the annual
tax shall be as follows:
 
Class A - (Reserved)
Class B - 1 or more amusement devices       $100.00 per device (sticker)
Class C - Pool, snooker or billiard tables, 50.00 per table (sticker)
whether coin-operated or noncoin-operated
Transfer fee                                5.00 per device (sticker)
 
(Ord. 1657, 3-2-1998)
For all amusement devices for which a sticker has been previously issued, such
annual tax shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year. When
an amusement device that is not a substitute for another amusement device ("new
amusement device") is installed during the first half of the year, the entire
annual tax shall be due and payable. When any such new amusement device is
installed during the second half of the year, one-half (1/2) of the annual tax
shall be due and payable. The annual tax for such devices shall thereafter be
due and payable on or before January 1 of the following year. Upon payment of
the tax, the taxpayer shall receive a sticker which shall be affixed to each
device upon which the tax is imposed. In the event that the device upon which
the tax was imposed is to be permanently withdrawn from the city, and another
machine permanently substituted in its place, the taxpayer, upon the payment of
a transfer fee, may receive an additional sticker. At the time that the annual
tax is paid, and at the time that the transfers are requested, the taxpayer
shall inform the city as to the exact device for which the tax is being paid.
(Ord. 1736, 12-21-1998)
3-9-9: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All licenses required of persons or entities pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent location on the premises of a game room, visible to
both the public and an enforcement officer of the city. (Ord. 625, 6-21-1982)
3-9-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The city council, upon the recommendation of the mayor or some person or
committee delegated by the mayor to carry out the functions ascribed to the
mayor pursuant to this chapter, may revoke or suspend any license issued by the
city to the owner or operator of a game room. If a committee is delegated, the
mayor may serve on the committee. The committee shall determine which member
shall write its recommendation to the city council. Provided, however, that no
such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing
conducted by the mayor or a designee with not less than a three (3) day written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. After conducting the hearing, the mayor or designee shall prepare a
report summarizing the evidence and making a recommendation to the city
council. The city council may accept the recommendation of the mayor or
designee or by motion revoke or suspend the license for a period other than
that period recommended by the mayor or designee. In any instance where an
alleged violation is the first charge attributable to the premises, the mayor
or designee, after a hearing as provided above and without the need for a
consideration of the matter by the city council, may suspend the license of the
game room for a period of not to exceed seven (7) days.
Provided further, that if the mayor has reason to believe that any continued
operation of the game room will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without further notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the owner and operator
an opportunity to be heard during that period. In the event that the license to
a game room is revoked either through the revocation of the license of an owner
or operator, no new license for a game room shall be issued for the premises
within a period of one year from the date of the revocation. (Ord. 625, 6-21-
1982)
CHAPTER 10
BUSINESS REGISTRATIONS AND LICENSES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Business Registrations And Licenses Required
3-10-2: Applications Generally
3-10-3: Preparing And Filing Forms
3-10-4: Approved Licenses To Bear Signatures Of Mayor And City Clerk
3-10-5: Investigations And Inspections Generally
3-10-6: Admittance Of City Officers Or Employees To Premises For Inspection
Purposes
3-10-7: Fees; Exemption
3-10-8: Payment; Disposition
3-10-9: Expiration Notice
3-10-10: Business Applications Or Acts Not Complying With Certain Regulations
3-10-11: Change Of Location Of Business Or Occupation
3-10-12: Revocation Or Suspension Of Licenses
3-10-13: Display, Registration And License
3-10-14: Cash Register
3-10-15: Late Fee
3-10-1: BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct any business or
establishment or to do business or engage in any activity or occupation in the
City without having first obtained a business registration (and, as applicable,
a separate license for certain businesses as required by this Title 3), unless
Municipal registration or licensure of the business has been preempted by State
law.
   B.   Any person shall be subject to the requirement for a business
registration (and, as applicable, a separate license) if, by himself or through
an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the
business or occupation, solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the
City.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 1959, 1-21-2002; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-2: APPLICATIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Applications for all registrations, licenses and permits required by
this chapter or other ordinance of the City shall be made in writing to the
City of Warrenville in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
   B.   Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or
license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee
to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as
may be needed for the proper issuance of the permit or license applied for.
   C.   Any application for a business conducted from a vehicle shall contain
the identification number and State license number of said vehicle.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-3: PREPARING AND FILING FORMS:
   Forms for all licenses, permits and applications therefor shall be prepared
and kept on file by the Director of Finance and Information Services.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004)
3-10-4: APPROVED LICENSES TO BEAR SIGNATURES OF MAYOR AND CITY CLERK:
   Each license or permit issued shall be approved by the Mayor and bear the
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to
the contrary.
   The Mayor shall be responsible for the approval or denial of a business
license application. Upon receipt of the investigatory documents regarding the
application, the Mayor may require the applicant to appear at any reasonable
time and place for further examination under oath regarding the application.
The Mayor’s decision with respect to the approval or denial of the application
shall be a final decision and is subject to judicial review in the manner
provided by law. If approved, the Mayor shall issue the license in a timely
manner.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-10-5: INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS GENERALLY:
   Upon the receipt of any application for a business registration, license, or
permit where the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit
or license, such application shall be referred to the proper City official,
staff, department or division for making such investigation within two business
days of the time of such receipt. Those charged with the duty of making such
investigations or inspections shall make a report thereof, favorable or
otherwise, within 10 business days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. Such inspections may include on-site inspection of structures or
buildings that will be used or occupied by the business for compliance with
applicable City Building, Life, Safety and Fire Code requirements.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-6: ADMITTANCE OF CITY OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES TO PREMISES FOR INSPECTION
PURPOSES:
   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a business or operation are provided for or required by provisions
of this Code or other ordinances of the City or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with this chapter or to detect any violation thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to
be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any
officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed to make such
inspection, at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-7: FEES; EXEMPTION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, an initial license fee and
subsequent renewal fee for each business licensed pursuant this chapter are as
set forth in the annual fee ordinance. Business licenses shall be renewed
annually. Failure to timely file applications for license or license renewal
shall result in assessment of late fees as set forth in section
3-10-15 of this chapter.
   B.   Each business registration (and license, as applicable) shall expire on
the next succeeding December 31 subsequent to its date of issuance.
   C.   In cases where two or more separate and distinct businesses are
operated from the same address, two or more registrations (and, as applicable
licenses) are required.
   D.   Business registrations (and, as applicable licenses) must be visibly
displayed on the front door of the business establishment 1 .
   E.   The fee for issuance of a replacement registration or license in the
event the original becomes lost, mutilated or destroyed is set forth in the
annual fee ordinance.
   F.   The fees set forth hereinabove shall not apply to any corporation
existing under State law as a not for profit corporation. In order to claim
such an exemption, the not for profit corporation shall submit to the City
Administrator a photostatic copy of its charter, showing its State registration
number.
(Ord. 1959, 1-21-2002; amd. Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; Ord. O2018-02, 2-5-2018; Ord.
O2024-03, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-10-13 of this chapter
3-10-8: PAYMENT; DISPOSITION:
   All fees and charges for registrations, licenses or permits shall be paid in
advance at the time of application.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-9: EXPIRATION NOTICE:
   The City shall mail to all registered and licensed businesses a statement of
the time of the expiration at least three weeks prior to the date of such
expiration; provided, however, that a failure to send out such notice, or the
failure of the business to receive it, shall not excuse the business from a
failure to secure a new registration or license or a renewal thereof, nor shall
it be a defense in action for operation without a registration or license.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-10: BUSINESS APPLICATIONS OR ACTS NOT COMPLYING WITH CERTAIN REGULATIONS:
   No business registration, license, or permit will be issued if the premises
and building to be used for such purpose does not fully comply with the
requirements of this Code, the Zoning Ordinance, or other ordinances of the
City.
   No such registration, license or permit shall be issued to any applicant who
has falsified any information on the business registration or license
application or who has engaged in criminal conduct, past registration or
license revocation, prior business-related ordinance violations or other
matters which are reasonably related to the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-11: CHANGE OF LOCATION OF BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION:
   The location of any registered business or licensed occupation, or any
permitted act, may be changed, provided 10 days’ notice thereof is given to the
Director of Finance and Information Services, in the absence of any provision
to the contrary; provided, that the building, zoning and frontage consent
requirements of this Code and other City ordinances are met.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. 2111, 1-19-2004; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF REGISTRATIONS AND LICENSES:
   A.   Registrations, permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor of the City for cause after
notice and hearing as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Notice of the hearing for revocation or suspension of a business
registration or license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically
the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing.
   No registration or license shall be revoked or suspended, until written
notice of violation has been provided by the City. The notice shall set forth
the allegations of why the license should be revoked or suspended. Said notice
shall be served upon a registration/license holder by delivering the same
personally or by delivery to the place of business or residence of the
registration/license holder. All registration/license holders shall notify the
City within 24 hours of any change of address. If the service of such notice
cannot be made in the manner provided herein, a copy of such notice shall be
sent certified mail return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the last
known address of the registration/license holder contained in the City’s files.
   No registration or license issued under this chapter shall be suspended or
revoked except after a hearing before the Mayor that would be open for the
public to attend and observe with a minimum seven-day written notice to the
registrant/licensee affording the registrant/licensee an opportunity to appear
and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven-day notice
provision shall begin the day following deposit of the certified mail with the
United States Post Office or by personal service.
   The registrant/licensee shall have the right to legal counsel, to present
evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. Any registrant/licensee, determined by
the Mayor after the hearing to have committed one or more violations of
subsection C of this section, shall be immediately subject to suspension or
revocation of its business registration and license.
   Judicial review, in the manner provided by law, shall apply to all orders of
the City which revoke or suspend any registration and license, as provided for
in this chapter.
   C.   A business registration and license may be revoked or suspended after a
hearing before the Mayor that would be open for the public to attend and
observe if it is found that:
      1.   The registrant/ licensee has violated any provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   The registrant/licensee has violated any terms or provisions of this
title which serve to regulate operation of the particular type of business
engaged in by the registrant/licensee.
      3.   Any employee of the registrant/licensee has engaged in any conduct
at the registrant/licensee’s premises which violates any terms or provision of
this title which serve to regulate operation of the particular type of business
engaged in by the registrant/licensee and which the registrant/licensee knew,
or by due diligence should have known of.
      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      5.   Conviction of the registrant/licensee, operator or manager of any
crime, felony or misdemeanor committed on the business premises, including, but
not limited to, pornography, prostitution, gambling, illegal possession or
distribution of drugs or cannabis, bribery of a governmental official, etc.
      6.   Conviction of any customer of any crime, felony or misdemeanor
committed on the business premises with the sufferance of permission of the
registrant/licensee, operator or manager, including, but not limited to,
pornography, prostitution, gambling, illegal possession or distribution of
drugs or cannabis, bribery of a governmental official, etc.
      7.   Any applicant for a business registration or license has made a
false statement on the application.
      8.   A registrant or licensee has refused to allow any duly authorized
police officer or other City enforcement officer to inspect the business
premises.
      9.   A registrant or licensee has failed to correct City identified
violations of Building, Health, or Fire Codes on the business premises in a
timely manner.
      10.   The registration/license holder has committed an act(s) of fraud or
deceit in the application for license, or renewal thereof.
      11.   The registration/ license holder has committed an act of
fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising, or other acts of fraud
while operating the business.
      12.   A registration/ license holder is delinquent in payment to the City
for ad valorem taxes and other taxes related to the business.
      13.   No registered and licensed business or establishment shall be so
conducted or operated by the registrant/licensee as to constitute a breach of
the peace or nuisance in fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot,
premises, or part thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in
connection with any business or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance,
or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-13: DISPLAY, REGISTRATION AND LICENSE:
   The registration and license must be posted on the cash register, or in a
prominent place in the view of the public 1 .
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd. Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  3-10-7D of this chapter.
3-10-14: CASH REGISTER:
   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a registered business in the
City to have any cash register so situated in said business so as to enable
customers to view prices as rung up on said cash register. The purpose of this
section is to permit customers of said business to view the cash register while
their purchases are being registered.
(Ord. 1082, 3-5-1990; amd Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024)
3-10-15: LATE FEE:
   A late fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance shall be assessed for:
   A.   Any license renewal application filed up to thirty (30) days after the
due date (December 1) for such application.
   B.   Any new application filed up to thirty (30) days after the due date (10
days after receipt of application forms).
   An additional fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance shall be assessed
for each thirty (30) day period thereafter during which fees remain due and
unpaid.
(Ord. 1959, 1-21-2002; amd. Ord. 1120, 9-17-1990; Ord. O2024-03, 2-5-2024; Ord.
O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
CHAPTER 11
OUTDOOR RETAIL DISPLAY PERMIT
SECTION:
3-11-1: Permit Required
3-11-2: Applications Generally
3-11-3: Inspections
3-11-4: Fees; Term
3-11-5: Revocation Of Permit
3-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to display merchandise for retail sale outdoors without
having first obtained a permit to do so. (Ord. O2017-71, 11-20-2017, eff. 1-1-
2018)
3-11-2: APPLICATIONS GENERALLY:
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made in writing to
the Building and Code Enforcement Department and shall contain, in addition to
such other information as may be deemed necessary by the City, an accurate
survey showing the setback lines of the property on which the outdoor retail
display is to be placed and listing the articles to be displayed within the
designated outdoor display area (the "outdoor display site plan"). (Ord. 1205,
4-20-1992)
3-11-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Building and Code Enforcement Department shall cause an inspection to be
made of the outdoor display area to determine that such display conforms to the
requirements of the ordinances of the City and the outdoor display site plan.
(Ord. 1205, 4-20-1992)
3-11-4: FEES; TERM:
   A.   A permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be payable upon
initial application for or application for renewal of each permit hereunder.
   B.   Permits may be issued for annual, seasonal and/or temporary display,
and the term of any permit shall not exceed one calendar year; all renewals for
annual permits shall be due on January 1.
   C.   An additional fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged if
an additional inspection is required to ensure compliance with the ordinances
of the City and with the approved outdoor display site plan. (Ord. 1205, 4-20-
1992)
3-11-5: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Building and Code Enforcement Department shall have the authority to revoke
the outdoor display permit and remove or cause to be removed items that do not
conform to the approved outdoor display site plan. (Ord. 1205, 4-20-1992)
CHAPTER 12
AMUSEMENT TAX
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Amusement Tax
3-12-3: License Required
3-12-4: Application For License
3-12-5: Investigation Fee
3-12-6: Examination Of Applicant Or Licensee
3-12-7: Display Of License
3-12-8: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
   ADMISSION FEES OR OTHER CHARGES: Fees, charges, or other consideration paid
for the right to participate in a recreational activity or entertainment, as
well as fees charged for entrance to an amusement or the right or license to
view an amusement.
   AMUSEMENT: Any and all participatory, spectator, and exhibitive
entertainment, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following
activities: any motion picture, movie, video, videotapes, theatrical, dramatic,
musical or spectator performance; carnival; circus; rodeo; animal act;
amusement ride; amusement attraction; athletic contest; sport or similar
exhibition; sports; games; animal shows; craft shows; flower shows; skating;
dancing; swimming; racing or riding on animals or vehicles; basketball;
softball; football; tennis; golf; hockey; track and field games; bowing;
billiard and pool games; video games; pinball games; boxing; wrestling.
   AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION: Either:
   A.   Any game of skill, show, exhibition or entertainment device, or
   B.   Any enclosed building or structure, including electrical equipment
which is an integral part of the building or structure, through which people
walk without the aid of any moving device,
which provides amusement, thrills, entertainment or excitement.
   AMUSEMENT FACILITY: Any arena, auditorium, exhibition center, exposition
center, golf course, golf driving range, indoor tennis court, outdoor tennis
court, stadium, theater, movie theater, concert hall, building, structure,
place, park, open space, or any area whatsoever, whether enclosed or open air,
where amusements are conducted.
   AMUSEMENT RIDE: Any mechanized device or combination of devices, including
any electrical equipment which is an integral part of the device or devices,
which carries passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted course
for the primary purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills
or excitement.
   CARNIVAL: An enterprise to offer amusement or entertainment to the public by
means of amusement attractions or amusement rides.
   GROSS RECEIPTS: All fees or charges received or collected in the form of
admission fees or other charges for admission to and/or for the use of any
amusement and/or amusement facilities for the purpose of witnessing,
participating in, or utilizing any amusement regardless of whether such fees or
charges are characterized as admission fees, membership fees, use charges,
rent, rental or service charges. A fee or charge which entitles the patrons in
any amusement operated within the corporate limits of the city to bona fide
services in addition to, or unrelated to the witnessing or participating in the
amusement, shall not be subject to the tax provided for in this chapter, except
however:
   A.   Where a fee or charge is comprised of identifiable components, packages
or tiers, the tax provided for herein shall be imposed on any such components,
packages or tiers which provide solely for admission to any facility and/or the
use of any facility or equipment for the purposes of witnessing or
participating in any amusement, and
   B.   Where a single fee or charge for admission to any facility and/or the
use of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing or participating
in any amusement also entitles the patron of the amusement to the incidental
use of parking, restaurant, bar, refreshment, locker room, changing room,
washroom and/or shower facilities or services, the tax provided for herein
shall be imposed on such fee or charge, provided the predominant activity of
such facility is an amusement.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, organization, society, foundation,
institution, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other
representative appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized
by law. (Ord. 1862, 8-7-2000, eff. 10-1-2000)
3-12-2: AMUSEMENT TAX:
   A.   Imposed; Amount:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons operating amusements within
the corporate limits of the city, and upon all persons operating places of
amusement or amusement facilities within the corporate limits of the city in an
amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts for each amusement.
Said tax shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law.
      2.   Any owner, operator or other person subject to the amusement tax
imposed herein may separately itemize and charge to patrons in addition to any
admission fee or other charge, the amount of amusement tax attributable to such
admission fee or other charge. In the event the tax imposed by this section is
not shown or collected as a separate charge, all admission fees or other
charges shall be deemed exclusive of the amusement tax specified hereinabove.
      3.   In addition to all other taxes due on account of the amusement, for
any tax not paid when due there shall be added an additional amusement tax
equal to an amount of one and one- quarter percent (1.25%) of the tax due for
each month or fraction of a month that the payment is past due. (Ord. 1870, 10-
16-2000, eff. 12-1-2000)
   B.   Time Of Payment:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, the tax herein
imposed shall be due and payable on the thirtieth day of the following month
for the preceding calendar month, provided however that the tax herein imposed
upon amusements not conducted as a continuing and permanent amusement but as a
temporary or one time event shall be due on the day following the holding of
said event. Said tax shall be payable to and collected by the city
administrator or his designee.
      2.   If the tax due and payable for any calendar quarter or anticipated
to become due for any calendar quarter based upon taxes for the same calendar
quarter of the prior year, is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or less for
the three (3) months of the calendar quarter, then the tax shall, in such
instance only, be due and payable on the thirtieth day of the month following
the end of the calendar quarter.
   C.   Returns; Accounting:
      1.   At the time of tendering the final payment of the tax due, the
person responsible for payment of the tax shall file with the city
administrator or his designee a written amusement tax return in such form as
the finance director of the city of Warrenville may from time to time provide,
requiring such information regarding the business enterprise for which the
amusement is conducted as the city administrator or his designee deems
appropriate. The report shall be verified under oath by any person authorized
in the state of Illinois to administer oaths. Acceptance by the city of any
amount tendered in payment of the amusement tax shall be without prejudice to
the city of any claim, demand, or right on account of any deficiency in the
payment of the tax.
      2.   Any amusement tax collected from patrons by any owner and operator
who is required to remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be deemed the
property of the city of Warrenville upon collection. Such owner, operator or
other person subject to the amusement tax shall be considered trustee(s) of
said monies and shall properly account to the city of Warrenville for all such
monies collected, which accounting shall be satisfied upon the filing of an
amusement tax return that accurately discloses all information required in said
return or which may bear upon the amount of tax due.
   D.   Books And Records: There shall at all times be maintained all canceled
admission tickets, a complete and accurate record of all receipts and
disbursements, and books and accounts which provide a detailed and accurate
record of all receipts together with a description of the nature and type of
receipt. These books and records shall be kept at the place of amusement or
such other place in the city of Warrenville as may be designated by the person
or persons liable for the tax, in writing, addressed to the city administrator
or some person designated by him. All authorized agents or employees of the
city shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect and examine the
books and records of either the amusement or the business enterprise conducting
the amusement. Such reasonable times shall include, but not be limited to,
Monday through Friday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M.
   E.   Liability For Payment Of Tax: Each and every owner, operator or other
person subject to the amusement tax herein imposed shall be jointly and
severally liable for the collection and remittance of all taxes and penalties.
In addition, any officer, partner, director, or joint venturer of any entity
which is or may be responsible for the collection, remittance and payment of
any taxes and penalties due under this chapter shall be individually liable for
the full extent of any penalties and taxes if the entity fails to remit and pay
all penalties and taxes when due.
   F.   Determination Of Tax Due By City Administrator Or Finance Director: If
an owner, operator or other person who may be subject to the amusement tax
fails to file a return or accounting as required by this chapter, or if the
city administrator or finance director has reasonable cause to believe an
erroneous statement has been filed, the city administrator or finance director
may proceed to determine and assess the amount of tax due and any penalty
incurred by reason of nonpayment thereof, and in connection therewith shall
make such investigations and take such testimony and evidence as may be
necessary; provided however, that the owner, operator or other person subject
to the amusement tax shall be given notice and an opportunity to be heard
before any determination is made by the city administrator or finance director.
Any tax and penalty determined and assessed pursuant to this subsection shall
be due and collectible immediately upon notice to the owner, operator or other
person subject to the amusement tax.
   G.   Rules And Regulations: The city administrator or finance director shall
have the power to adopt such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
terms of this chapter for the purposes of carrying out the assessment and
collection of the tax herein established. A copy of such rules and regulations
shall be on file and available for public examination in the office of the city
clerk. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated
under this subsection shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   H.   Enforcement: The city administrator is hereby authorized to develop,
adopt and implement such forms and procedures as may be necessary and/or
appropriate to enforce and administer the terms of this chapter and to collect
all monies due to the city and is authorized to employ attorneys and agents for
such purposes and institute such proceedings as may be necessary to collect any
monies due to the city. In the event that any person fails to remit any tax or
other monies due under this chapter when due, and the city incurs any fees,
costs, or expenses in collecting same, then such person or organization shall,
in addition to any tax or other monies due the city, pay to the city all
reasonable fees, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, costs
and expenses of litigation incurred by the city in collecting any tax or other
monies due to the city.
   I.   Exemptions: Any amusement sponsored or conducted by and the proceeds of
which inure exclusively and solely to the benefit of any bona fide religious,
charitable, or not-for-profit person or organization shall be exempt from the
payment or collection of the amusement tax imposed under this chapter; provided
however, that such persons have received an exemption from the state of
Illinois and the internal revenue service exempting said organization from the
payment of state or federal income taxes.
   J.   Nonapplicability: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
      1.   To any coin operated amusement device as set forth in chapter 9 of
this title;
      2.   To any amusement(s) whenever both of the following conditions exist:
         a.   The amusement is operated or conducted by a municipality, park
district, school district, or any other unit of local government, whether
individually or jointly; and
         b.   The place the amusement is conducted is owned by a municipality,
park district, school district, or any other unit of local government, whether
individually or jointly.
      3.   To any amusement(s) whenever both of the following conditions exist:
         a.   The amusement is operated or conducted by a bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans', not for profit, or
homeowners' organization that operates without profit to its members and which
has been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application hereunder and which has had during that entire five
(5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its objects; and
         b.   The place the amusement is conducted is owned by the same bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans', not for
profit, or homeowners' organization that operates without profit to its members
and which has been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years
immediately before making application hereunder and which has had during that
entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its
objects. (Ord. 1862, 8-7-2000, eff. 10-1-2000)
   K.   Severability: Each of the provisions of this chapter are severable, and
if any provision is held invalid, the remaining provisions shall not be
affected but shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1862, 8-7-2000, eff.
10-1-2000; amd. Ord. 2092, 10-20-2003)
3-12-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a place of amusement for which a tax
would be applicable under this chapter without first having obtained a license
to do so or to own or operate a place of amusement which does not comply with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
3-12-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license required from the owner or operator of a place of
amusement shall be made to the city clerk, in writing, signed by the applicant,
if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a corporation,
verified by oath or affidavit. The application shall contain at least the
following information:
   A.   The applicant's name and mailing address.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business if such business was
in operation prior to the passage of an ordinance requiring the aforesaid
license, or if a proposed business, the name and address of the proposed
business.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business with the county clerk.
   D.   A drawing of the proposed layout of the premises drawn to scale.
   E.   In case of a partnership or corporation, the date of the formation of
the partnership or corporation; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the
date of its incorporation; or in the case of a foreign (out of state)
corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming
qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact business in
the state.
   F.   If the applicant is an owner, the name and address of the proposed
operator.
   G.   If the applicant is an operator, the name and address of the proposed
owner.
   H.   Whether the applicant is an owner or operator of any other places of
amusement within the state and, if so, the name and address of such other
operation.
   I.   If the place of amusement is not to operate as the principal business
at the location, a statement as to the type of business which will be the
principal business at the location in question.
   J.   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any retailers'
occupation tax and, if so, the reasons therefor.
   K.   The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, social security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business; and the name, sex, date
of birth, social security number, position and percentage of ownership in the
property if an owner or in the business if an operator or every sole owner,
partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns five
percent (5%) or more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent
corporations of the applicant business entity; where the applicant is a
corporation or partnership. The answer to each question relating to this
application shall be given with regard to any person who owns or controls an
interest of more than five percent (5%) within the partnership or corporation.
With respect to any publicly owned corporation or other entities, the
requirements of this subsection may be met by the furnishing of: 1) the latest
proxy statement filed by such entity with the securities exchange commission
(the SEC) under the securities act of 1934 (the 1934 act); 2) a certificate
from an officer of such entity indicating any changes in the directors or
executive officers of such entity since such proxy statement; and 3) any form
13(d) relating to changes in beneficial ownership of such entity filed with the
SEC under the 1934 act covering the period subsequent to such proxy statement.
(Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
3-12-5: INVESTIGATION FEE:
There shall be filed with each application for a license a nonrefundable
investigation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
3-12-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT OR LICENSEE:
At any time during the pendency of an application or during a license period,
the mayor personally or through the delegation of some other persons who may
carry out the function, shall have the right to compel the owner or operator to
submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the
judgment of the person conducting the investigation, are material to the
determination of whether the applicant or license holder is qualified to
receive or to retain a license under the provisions of this chapter. The person
conducting the investigation shall have the right to require the person being
investigated to answer any charges made in any written objection received to
the issuance or continuation in force of the license. The failure of any
applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the person conducting the
investigation for the examination or a failure to produce books and records as
requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that
the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. (Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
3-12-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All licenses required of persons or entities pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent location on the premises, visible to both the public
and an enforcement officer of the city. (Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
3-12-8: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The city council, upon the recommendation of the mayor or some person or
committee delegated by the mayor to carry out the functions ascribed to the
mayor pursuant to this chapter, may revoke or suspend any license issued by the
city to an owner or operator hereunder who does not comply with the provisions
of this chapter. If a committee is delegated, the mayor may serve on the
committee. The committee shall determine which member shall write its
recommendation to the city council. Provided, however, that no such license
shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing conducted by the
mayor or a designee with not less than a ten (10) day written notice to the
licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. After
conducting the hearing, the mayor or designee shall prepare a report
summarizing the evidence and making a recommendation to the city council. The
city council may accept the recommendation of the mayor or designee or by
motion revoke or suspend the license for a period other than that period
recommended by the mayor or designee. In any instance where an alleged
violation is the first charge attributable to the premises, the mayor or
designee, after a hearing as provided above and without the need for a
consideration of the matter by the city council, may suspend the license for a
period of not to exceed seven (7) days. (Ord. 1566, 2-18-1997)
CHAPTER 13
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: Tax Imposed
3-13-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-13-4: Returns To Department
3-13-5: Resellers
3-13-6: Refund Of Tax
3-13-7: Repealer
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the
city regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination
point within the city and charges for that portion of the interoffice channels
provided within the city. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel
connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the city, shall be determined by
the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the
interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary
of the city and the denominator of which is the total number of channel
termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross
charge" shall not include any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act.
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
city.
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity.
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices.
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the city and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by
this chapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 2696, 2-21-2012, eff. 7-1-
2012)
3-13-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the
city intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall
be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the
municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the
municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent
(6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this
state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant
to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax
properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in
a municipality in this state which was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other state or local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States or the state of Illinois, be made the subject of
taxation by the city. (Ord. 2696, 2-21-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
3-13-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2007, 8-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-13-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this chapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified
municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this
act. (Ord. 2007, 8-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-13-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the
grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale
number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2007, 8-19-2002, eff. 1-1-
2003)
3-13-6: REFUND OF TAX:
The following persons, units of local government and school districts shall be
eligible for a refund of the telecommunications tax, subject to the conditions
hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Beginning July 1, 2012, units of local government and school districts
whose territorial boundaries lie within the corporate boundaries of the city
shall be entitled to a full refund of the telecommunications tax that they have
paid to the city pursuant to this chapter. On or after January 31, 2013, each
such unit of local government and school district may apply for a refund of the
telecommunications tax that they have paid for the period July 1, 2012 through
December 31, 2012. Thereafter, each such unit of local government and school
district may apply once annually to the city finance director for a refund of
the telecommunications tax they have paid for the previous twelve (12) months.
To claim a refund under this section, the unit of local government or school
district shall present evidence of:
      1.   Payment of the city telecommunications tax; and
      2.   Such other information as the city finance director may require.
   B.   Residents aged sixty five (65) years or older who receive federal
housing assistance pursuant to 42 USC section 1437f ("section 8") may apply
once annually to the city finance director for a refund of the
telecommunications tax they have paid for the previous twelve (12) months. To
claim a refund under this section, residents shall present evidence of:
      1.   Age;
      2.   Residency;
      3.   Eligibility for federal housing assistance;
      4.   Payment of the telecommunications tax; and
      5.   Such other information as the city finance director may require.
(Ord. 2738, 8-20-2012)
3-13-7: REPEALER:
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if the provisions
adopted by this chapter are repealed or become ineffective for any reason, then
ordinance 1631, passed November 3, 1997, and ordinance 1873, passed October 16,
2000, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date public act 92-
0526 or this chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2007, 8-19-2002,
eff. 1-1-2003; amd. Ord. 2101, 11-17-2003)
CHAPTER 14
BODYWORKS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definitions
3-14-2: Administration
3-14-3: Licensing
3-14-4: Regulations; Violations And Penalties
3-14-5: Hearing Rights
3-14-6: Fees
3-14-7: Renewal And License Term
3-14-8: Penalty
3-14-9: Injunction
3-14-10: Effect Of Partial Invalidity
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
   BODYWORKS AND PRACTICE OF BODYWORKS: Any method of applying pressure on or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating
or stimulating the human epidermis of another living human, by an individual
with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance,
and with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar
preparations, when the foregoing is performed for any commercial purpose,
regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and regardless
of the form of consideration, which includes, but is not limited to, money in
the form of salary, wages, tips and gratuities.
Bodyworks includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
accupressure, Alexander technique, Asian bodywork, craniosacral therapy,
Feldenkrais, jin shin acutouch, jin shin do bodymind acupressure, jin shin
jyutsu, manual lymphatic drainage, myofascial release therapy, orthobionomy,
polarity therapy, reflexology, reiki, Rolfing, shiatsu, therapeutic touch,
Trager approach, and trigger point therapy. The term "bodyworks" excludes,
however, the practice of massage, massage therapy or the like, for which a
massage license has been issued to the practitioner by the state of Illinois
department of professional regulation.
   BODYWORKS ESTABLISHMENT: Any proprietorship, corporation, limited
partnership, general partnership, limited liability company or any other
organization, having a source of income or compensation derived directly or
indirectly from the practice of bodyworks.
   BODYWORKS PRACTITIONER: Any natural person who performs bodyworks.
   CITY: The city of Warrenville, an Illinois body politic and corporate.
   CONVICTION AND CONVICTED: Shall include any plea of guilty, finding of
guilty, plea of nolo contendere, and dispositions of probation, supervision and
the like, without regard to whether such dispositions are otherwise treated as
convictions.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city administrator of the city, or any person
employed by the city whom the city administrator assigns to perform the duties
of the enforcement officer in his or her absence. This definition shall not be
construed to limit the authority of the city administrator or the city council
to direct the enforcement of various provisions of this chapter as may be
deemed appropriate.
   EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended
to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial purpose. It
shall not mean lactation as part of breast feeding an infant, unless performed
or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast feeding an infant.
   NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device,
costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any specified
anatomical areas.
   PATRON: Any person who receives a bodyworks service.
   SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque
covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any
portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the female
breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and
opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar matter applied directly
to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: A. Any of the following offenses, as set forth
in the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially similar
offenses to those set forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local
jurisdiction, state, country, or international law: indecent solicitation of a
child, indecent solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public
indecency, sexual exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct,
presence within school zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual relations
within families, bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution, solicitation of a
sexual act, soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute,
pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a place of juvenile
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, patronizing a juvenile prostitute,
pimping, juvenile pimping, exploitation of a child, obscenity, child
pornography, commercial film and photographic print processor - reports,
harmful material, tie-in sales of obscene publications to distributors,
criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual assault, predatory criminal
sexual assault of a child, criminal sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual
abuse, criminal transmission of HIV, ritualized abuse of a child, female
genital mutilation, violation of the sex offender registration act, stalking
(if the basis of the conviction is the threat of immediate or future sexual
assault, or placing a person in reasonable apprehension of immediate or future
sexual assault), first degree murder (if the basis for the conviction is 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1(a)(3), commonly known as felony murder, where
the predicate felony is any felony otherwise set forth in this definition),
burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony
otherwise set forth in this definition), residential burglary (if the basis for
the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this
definition), armed violence (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to
commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), attempt to commit
any of the foregoing crimes, conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes,
and any other felony or misdemeanor for which an element of the offense is the
commission of any of the foregoing crimes or an intent to commit any of the
foregoing crimes.
   B.   For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor, business
offense or petty offense; or 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a "specified criminal activity" as defined herein.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female
breasts, regardless of whether the massage therapist or patron is clothed, in a
state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual,
including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anilingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism,
and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
   C.   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or
with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A BODYWORKS ESTABLISHMENT: Shall mean
one of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person or business
entity possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000; amd. Ord.
2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the administration and
interpretation of this chapter. In the performance of his/her duties, the
Enforcement Officer may delegate or refer to the appropriate City official,
staff, department or division, such as, but not limited to, the Director of
Community and Economic Development, the Zoning Department or official, the
Building Department or official, and/or the Police Department, the enforcement
of any provisions of this Code, the investigation of any applicant or the
inspection of any premises for which a license is sought, or the implementation
of any other act or action authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-
2000; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
3-14-3: LICENSING:
   A.   Bodyworks Establishment License Required: Unless a valid and current
bodyworks establishment license, granted pursuant to the authority of this
chapter, is held by a bodyworks establishment, it shall not:
      1.   Receive any consideration for the performance of a bodyworks
treatment by or for any person; and/or
      2.   Permit, authorize or encourage, any person, employee, independent
contractor, partner, officer, director, agent, member or other person having
any form of ownership or control of the bodyworks establishment, to engage in
the practice of bodyworks.
   B.   Bodyworks Establishment License For Each Location: A valid and current
bodyworks establishment license shall be required for each location where
bodyworks is performed.
   C.   Bodyworks Practitioner License Required: No person shall practice
bodyworks, whether as an employee of a bodyworks establishment or otherwise,
without a valid and current bodyworks license issued pursuant to the authority
of this chapter. Bodyworks practitioner licenses shall be issued only to
natural persons. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
   D.   Exemptions From Licensing: The following persons and organizations
shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter, under the
following circumstances. Any person having a valid and current license from the
state of Illinois for the practice of:
      1.   Acupuncture, pursuant to the acupuncture practice act, provided they
are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      2.   Athletic trainer, pursuant to the Illinois athletic trainers
practice act, provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      3.   Dentistry, pursuant to the Illinois dental practice act, provided
they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      4.   Hearing instrument dispenser, pursuant to the hearing instrument
consumer protection act, provided they are performing acts for which they are
so licensed;
      5.   Home medical equipment and services provider, pursuant to the home
medical equipment and services provider license act, provided they are
performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      6.   Hospitals and nursing homes licensed by the state of Illinois;
      7.   Medicine, including chiropractic, osteopathy and allopathy, pursuant
to the medical practice act of 1987, and the osteopathic and allopathic
healthcare discrimination act, provided they are performing acts for which they
are so licensed;
      8.   Naprapathy, pursuant to the naprapathic practice act, provided they
are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      9.   Nursing, pursuant to the nursing and advanced practice nursing act,
provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      10.   Occupational therapy, pursuant to the Illinois occupational therapy
practice act, provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      11.   Optometry, pursuant to the Illinois optometric practice act of
1987, provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      12.   Physical therapy, pursuant to the Illinois physical therapy act,
provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      13.   Physician assistant, pursuant to the physician assistant practice
act of 1987, provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      14.   Podiatry, pursuant to the podiatric medical practice act of 1987,
provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed;
      15.   Respiratory care, pursuant to the respiratory care practice act,
provided they are performing acts for which they are so licensed; (Ord. 1853,
6-19-2000)
      16.   Massage therapist, pursuant to the massage licensing act, provided
they are performing acts for which they are so licensed; (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
      17.   Any other person licensed by the state of Illinois, provided they
are performing acts for which they are so licensed.
   E.   Requirements For Licensing: An applicant must complete and return an
application for a bodyworks practitioner license or a bodyworks establishment
license. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
      1.   Bodyworks Practitioner License: No person shall receive a bodyworks
practitioner license unless he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age
and has complied with the training/licensing requirements set forth in
subsection E1i of this section. An application for a bodyworks practitioner
license shall request and the applicant shall provide the following
information: (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
         a.   Name, including any aliases or nicknames;
         b.   A recent photograph clearly showing the applicant's face;
         c.   Residence address, and the length of time applicant has resided
at such address;
         d.   Telephone number;
         e.   Driver's license number, along with a clear photocopy of said
driver's license;
         f.   Social security number;
         g.   Date of birth;
         h.   A complete listing of any and all specified criminal activities
of which the applicant has been convicted; (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
         i.   Written evidence which shall be attached to the application that
the applicant has:
            (1)   Been approved by the governing body of his or her particular
type of bodyworks practice on a minimum level of training, demonstration of
competency, and adherence to ethical standards; or
            (2)   Successfully completed a course of training in bodyworks, by
a school accredited and approved by the Illinois state board of education; or
            (3)   Successfully passed the national certification exam for the
particular type of bodyworks practiced by the individual and offered by its
governing body;
         j.   Written evidence of full membership in the Associated Bodywork &
Massage Professionals; (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
         k.   A nonrefundable registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
payable to the city upon submission of application. (Ord. 1893, 1-15-2001)
      2.   Bodyworks Establishment License: An application for a bodyworks
establishment license shall request and the applicant shall provide the
following: (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
         a.   The name, including nicknames and aliases, residence address,
telephone number and date of birth of the sole proprietor, general or limited
partners, officers, directors, shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of
the common stock, members and managers, of any applicant, and of the person or
people who will run the day to day operations of the proposed establishment,
along with a recent photograph of each of the foregoing people, clearly showing
their face;
         b.   A complete list of any convictions or pleas of nolo contendere to
any specified criminal activity of any sole proprietor, general or limited
partners, officers, directors, shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of
the common stock, members, managers, and person or people who will run the day
to day operations of the proposed establishment; (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000; amd.
Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
         c.   The location of the bodyworks establishment;
         d.   A drawing of the proposed location and building of the bodyworks
establishment, showing all dimensions, accurate to within one foot (1');
         e.   A description of any activities other than bodyworks which has
been or will be conducted at said location; and (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
         f.   A current certificate of inspection for the premises from the
DuPage County board of health. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
      3.   Other Application Requirements: Each applicant for a bodyworks
practitioner license and each sole proprietor, general or limited partners,
officers, directors, shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of the
common stock, members, managers, and person or people who will run the day to
day operations of any business organization applying for a bodyworks
establishment license shall present themselves to the Warrenville chief of
police and submit their fingerprints for the purpose of completing a criminal
background investigation. No bodyworks practitioner license shall be issued to
any person who has been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to any specified
criminal activity. No bodyworks establishment license shall be issued to any
business organization or individual if any sole proprietor, general or limited
partners, officers, directors, shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of
the common stock, members, managers, or person or people who will run the day
to day operations of any business organization have been convicted of or pled
nolo contendere to any specified criminal activity, or is not eighteen (18)
years of age. No bodyworks practitioner license or bodyworks establishment
license shall be issued to any person or business organization if the person or
the business organization's sole proprietor, any general or limited partners,
officers, directors, shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of the
common stock, members, managers, or any person or people who will run the day
to day operations of any business organization, have had a bodyworks
practitioner license or bodyworks establishment license revoked within five (5)
years prior to the date of the application. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
   F.   Processing Of Application:
      1.   An application shall not be considered proper or filed until all
information and material required of the applicant has been submitted,
including fingerprints.
      2.   Upon receipt of a proper and complete application, the enforcement
officer shall investigate the information contained in the application and
shall determine whether the applicant and premises designated, if applicable,
are in full compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances of the city.
      3.   The enforcement officer shall complete the investigation required by
this chapter and if the applicant is qualified to receive a license, and has
paid the fee, the enforcement officer shall issue a license within thirty (30)
days of the date a completed application has been filed. If the Warrenville
chief of police has not completed his investigation within said time, and the
applicant is otherwise entitled to receive a license, the enforcement officer
shall issue a temporary license which may be revoked by the enforcement officer
upon finding that the criminal history of the applicant is in violation of this
chapter. Revocation of a temporary license shall be treated like a denial of a
license application, and there shall be no stay pending appeal. (Ord. 1853, 6-
19-2000)
      4.   If the applicant is not qualified to receive a license as set forth
in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall notify the applicant in writing,
setting forth the reason(s) for the denial, and shall serve the written denial
on the applicant by placing it in a United States postal service box, certified
mail, postage prepaid, directed to the home address, if the applicant sought a
bodyworks practitioner license, and at the business address if the applicant
sought a bodyworks establishment license, as set forth in the application, on
or before thirty (30) days after a proper and completed application was filed
with the enforcement officer.
      5.   Upon the issuance of a bodyworks practitioner license, the
enforcement officer shall issue the licensee an identification badge bearing a
photograph of the licensee's face.
   G.   Transfers Of Licenses: Any transfer or attempted transfer of any
bodyworks establishment license or any bodyworks practitioner license, whether
by an individual or pursuant to a transfer of ownership control in a
corporation or other business entity, shall be ineffective and void. (Ord.
2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-4: REGULATIONS; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   General Regulations: The following regulations shall be applicable to
holders of any bodyworks establishment license and any bodyworks practitioner
license:
      1.   Certain Activities Prohibited: No bodyworks practitioner or other
person employed by the bodyworks establishment or patron on the premises of a
bodyworks establishment, or at some other location including a patron's
residence or workplace, may engage in or offer to engage in any specified
criminal activity, specified sexual activities or excretory functions.
      2.   Nudity Of Employees Prohibited: No bodyworks practitioner or other
person employed by the bodyworks establishment may be in a state of nudity or
seminudity when at the bodyworks establishment, or at some other location
including a patron's residence or workplace before, during, or after a
bodyworks treatment, if the bodyworks employee or other person employed by the
bodyworks establishment can be viewed by the patron.
      3.   Nudity Of Patrons Prohibited: No patron may be in a state of nudity
when at the bodyworks establishment, or at some other location including a
patron's residence or workplace before, during, or after a bodyworks service,
if the patron can be viewed in the state of nudity by the bodyworks
practitioner or other person employed by the bodyworks establishment.
      4.   Hours Of Operation: Bodyworks establishments may remain open, and
bodyworks practitioners may practice bodyworks, only during the following
hours: seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on Sundays.
      5.   Exterior Display: No bodyworks establishment shall be operated in
any manner that permits the observation from outside the premises of any image,
materials or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions,
specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, or any person in a
state of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign,
window or any other means.
      6.   Advertising Or Characterizations Of Prohibited Activities
Electronically Or Otherwise, Prohibited: No bodyworks practitioner, bodyworks
establishment or employee of any bodyworks establishment may display or offer
to others, any description or depiction, of any person, people, or characters
as in cartoons and animation, by any medium, including, without limitation,
film, motion picture machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video
disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc, jump drive, photograph,
slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, which are: (Ord.
2197, 2-22-2005)
         a.   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
         b.   Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical
areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" and the use
of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX". (Ord.
1853, 6-19-2000)
      7.   Display Or Offer Of Novelties, And Other Paraphernalia Prohibited:
No bodyworks practitioner, bodyworks establishment or employee of any bodyworks
establishment may display or offer to others any novelties, instruments,
devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any
of the specified anatomical areas.
      8.   Health Of Patron's Skin: No bodyworks practitioner, bodyworks
establishment, or agent or employee of a bodyworks establishment shall
administer to others a bodyworks service to any part of the patron's body which
exhibits any skin fungus, infection, inflammation, or eruption, unless a
physician duly licensed by the state of Illinois certifies in writing that such
person may safely receive a bodyworks service, and prescribing the conditions
thereof, if any.
      9.   Clean And Uncontaminated Preparations Required: All oils, lotions
and other preparations used in the practice of bodyworks service shall be
uncontaminated and kept in clean, closed containers.
      10.   Display Of Licenses: A bodyworks establishment license and the
bodyworks practitioner license of any bodyworks practitioner performing a
bodyworks service on the premises of a bodyworks establishment, shall be
prominently displayed in a conspicuous location near the entrance of the
bodyworks establishment where patrons are permitted to enter.
      11.   Photo ID Badge Of Bodyworks Practitioner To Be Worn At All Times: A
bodyworks practitioner shall wear his or her photo ID badge in a manner that
may be conspicuously viewed by a patron, at all times during the performance of
a bodyworks service.
      12.   Employees Under Eighteen Prohibited: No employee of a bodyworks
establishment or bodyworks practitioner shall be under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
      13.   Clean And Sanitary Conditions Of Facilities And Equipment: Every
portion of each bodyworks establishment, and all appliances, fixtures,
equipment, instruments and other facilities and materials found in a bodyworks
establishment or used by a bodyworks practitioner, shall be maintained in good
repair and in clean and sanitary condition at all times. Each bodyworks
establishment and each bodyworks practitioner shall provide an adequate supply
of clean, laundered towels and sheets. All appliances, fixtures, facilities and
nondisposable equipment, instruments and materials shall be disinfected and/or
laundered after each use. Used nondisposable equipment, instruments and
materials shall be kept in receptacles segregated from all clean equipment,
instruments and materials, until the same has been disinfected and/or
laundered.
      14.   License To Sell Alcoholic Liquor Prohibited: No bodyworks
establishment shall be located in any premises for which a license to sell
alcoholic liquor has been issued. No bodyworks practitioner shall engage in the
practice of bodyworks in any premises for which a license to sell alcoholic
liquor has been issued.
   B.   Suspension: Any bodyworks establishment license and any bodyworks
practitioner license, may be suspended by the enforcement officer, subject to
the appeal rights granted herein, for violation of any portion of this chapter
which does not constitute grounds for revocation. No suspension for any
violation shall exceed six (6) months.
   C.   Revocation: Any bodyworks establishment license and any bodyworks
practitioner license shall be revoked by the enforcement officer, subject to
the appeal rights granted herein, for the following reasons: (Ord. 2197, 2-22-
2005)
      1.   Violation of any portion of this chapter, if at the time of said
violation, the licensee had received two (2) or more prior suspensions of said
license, and some portion of each of the two (2) most recent suspension periods
was within three hundred sixty five (365) days of said violation.
      2.   Violation of subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Violation of subsection A2 of this section.
      4.   Violation of subsection A3 of this section.
      5.   Violation of subsection A6 of this section.
      6.   Violation of subsection A7 of this section.
      7.   Violation of subsection A8 of this section.
      8.   Violation of subsection A13 of this section.
      9.   Violation of subsection A14 of this section. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
   D.   False Statements Made Or Refusal To Allow Inspection: It shall further
be a cause for suspension or revocation if the bodyworks establishment business
licensee has made a false statement on any application or registry under this
chapter, or in the event that the licensee refuses to permit any legally
authorized entry by a police officer or authorized member of the police
department, building department, or fire department of the city to inspect the
premises or the operation thereof.
   E.   Written Notice: The enforcement officer shall give the licensee seven
(7) days' written notice of any suspension or revocation, setting forth the
grounds for suspension or revocation, and shall serve it upon the licensee by
placing it in a United States postal service box, certified mail, postage
prepaid, directed to the home address, if the licensee is a bodyworks
practitioner, and at the business address if the licensee is a bodyworks
establishment, as set forth in the licensee's application, on or before seven
(7) days prior to the effective date of the suspension or revocation. (Ord.
2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-5: HEARING RIGHTS:
   A.   Licensee may request in writing a hearing reviewing the decision of the
enforcement officer to deny, suspend or revoke a license authorized in this
chapter.
   B.   A written request for hearing shall be filed by the licensee or
applicant with the enforcement officer. The decision of the enforcement officer
to suspend or revoke a license, but not the decision to deny a license
application, shall be stayed upon the filing of the written request for
hearing, until the time the mayor renders a decision. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
   C.   The enforcement officer shall schedule a hearing before the enforcement
officer or his or her designee, said hearing to take place no more than
fourteen (14) days after the date on which the written request for hearing is
filed with the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall give the
licensee or applicant at least ten (10) days' written notice of the hearing on
the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license, said notice setting forth
the date, time and location of the hearing, and shall serve it upon the
licensee or applicant, as the case may be, by placing it in a United States
postal service box, certified mail, postage prepaid, directed to the home
address, if the licensee or applicant is a bodyworks practitioner, and at the
business address if the licensee or applicant is a bodyworks establishment, as
set forth in the applicant's or licensee's application, on or before ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date.
   D.   The enforcement officer or his or her designee shall preside at the
hearing to deny, suspend or revoke a bodyworks practitioner license or
bodyworks establishment license. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
   E.   The enforcement officer, or his or her designee, and applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, may present any relevant evidence, and may call
and cross examine any witnesses in support of or in opposition to the decision
of the enforcement officer. The purpose of the hearing shall be to offer the
applicant or licensee an opportunity to show cause why the application should
not be denied, or why the license should not be suspended or revoked. A record
shall be made of the hearing and documents may be submitted. The record may be
made by electronic recording or by court reporter. The enforcement officer
shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time
to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. If the
enforcement officer designates another person to conduct the hearing, said
person shall have the same powers as the enforcement officer. The enforcement
officer or his or her designee shall submit proposed findings of fact and
recommendations to the mayor within twenty one (21) days of the close of the
hearing.
   F.   The mayor shall decide if the preponderance of the evidence supports
the decision of the enforcement officer; if it does, then the decision of the
enforcement officer shall be affirmed, if it does not, then the decision of the
enforcement officer shall be reversed. The decision of the mayor to deny,
suspend or revoke a license shall be final.
   G.   Judicial review of the decision of the mayor to deny, suspend or revoke
a license shall be pursuant to and in accordance with the administrative review
law of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
3-14-6: FEES:
   A.   The initial processing fee for a bodyworks establishment license shall
be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   The initial processing fee for a bodyworks practitioner license shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00).
   C.   The renewal fee for a bodyworks establishment license shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   D.   The renewal fee for a bodyworks practitioner license shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-7: RENEWAL AND LICENSE TERM:
   A.   Each bodyworks establishment and each bodyworks practitioner license
shall expire on the next succeeding December 31 subsequent to its date of
issuance.
   B.   Each bodyworks establishment and bodyworks practitioner shall file a
written application for license renewal not more than forty (40) nor less than
twenty five (25) days before the expiration of their license. Said renewal
applications shall be in substantially the same form, and request substantially
the same information, and shall be determined in the same manner as an original
application. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-8: PENALTY:
   A.   In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license granted
hereunder, any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits
the violation of any section of this chapter may be fined a maximum of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and may additionally be sentenced to a term of
incarceration not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 1853, 6-19-2000)
   B.   Each day that a bodyworks establishment or bodyworks practitioner
operates in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense or
violation. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-9: INJUNCTION:
Any person who operates a bodyworks establishment or performs bodyworks service
in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in section
3-14-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2197, 2-22-2005)
3-14-10: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, clauses and phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. 1853,
6-19-2000)
CHAPTER 15
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2617, 11-15-2010)
CHAPTER 16
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAXES
SECTION:
3-16-1: Title
3-16-2: Scope
3-16-3: Definitions
3-16-4: Notices
3-16-5: Late Payment
3-16-6: Payment
3-16-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
3-16-8: Audit Procedure
3-16-9: Appeal
3-16-10: Hearing
3-16-11: Interest And Penalties
3-16-12: Abatement
3-16-13: Installment Contracts
3-16-14: Statute Of Limitations
3-16-15: Voluntary Disclosure
3-16-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
3-16-17: Internal Review Procedure
3-16-18: Application
3-16-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in
connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
   CITY: The city of Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city's mayor and city council.
   HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council to conduct hearings and to issue
final determinations regarding the collection of all locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The finance director of the city of Warrenville,
who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed
and administered taxes, including staff, employees of agents to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The
exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city and not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person or entity upon whom the legal incidence
of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business
or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax
to the city. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be served not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed
for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax
administrator. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be assumed that
service is given three (3) calendar days after notice is sent as prescribed
below. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on
or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage
prepaid. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance for a tax period shall be applied in the following
order: a) first to the interest due for the applicable period; b) second to the
tax due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the
applicable period. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment or
remittance in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who
has not paid the amounts directly to the city.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administrated taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim, and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation accompanied by an amended or revised
tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid.
      2.   Within ten (10) business days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax;
      2.   The time of the taxing period of the audit;
      3.   A brief description of the minimum books and records to be made
available for the auditor; and
      4.   The time and date of the audit, as selected by the local tax
administrator.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, the taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time.
   C.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   D.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local
tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
   E.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of locally imposed
and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the local
tax administrator's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   F.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-9: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice by certified or
registered mail to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a
protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim
reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following
information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligation of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-10: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
3-16-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal. The local tax administrator may choose to have the
hearing held before a hearing officer who shall then carry out the duties of
the local tax administrator. Likewise, the taxpayer may request that a hearing
officer conduct the hearing rather than the local tax administrator.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment, and each party shall be granted an
opportunity to cross examine any adverse witnesses. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
   D.   After the conclusion of the hearing, but in no case later than seven
(7) days, the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The
taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written
decision. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of any tax, or any
installment payment due on an installment contract as provided for in section
3-16-13 of this chapter, to be the underpayment rate established under section
6621 of the internal revenue code, or any successor or amendatory law thereto.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or late payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to
file penalty is imposed by the local tax administrator. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing or payment. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in
a timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing as promptly
as possible.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed for the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
city, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever occurs
later.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published in one of the manners
provided by law. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy
the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made
available to the public upon request at the city clerk's office. (Ord. 1896, 2-
20-2001)
3-16-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If lien is determined to be improper,
the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
1896, 2-20-2001)
3-16-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the city tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 1896, 2-20-2001)
CHAPTER 17
CARNIVALS
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Permit Required
3-17-3: Application For Carnival Permit/Fees
3-17-4: Granting Of Permit
3-17-5: Personnel Identification
3-17-6: Issuance Of Permit In Duplicate
3-17-7: Penalty
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   CARNIVAL: An aggregation of attractions, whether shows, acts, games, vending
devices or amusement devices, whether conducted under one or more managements
or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted in a public place
or upon any private premises accessible to the public, with or without
admission fee, and which, from the nature of the aggregation, attracts
attendance and causes intermingling of persons in the spirit of merrymaking and
revelry.
   CHILD ORIENTED RIDE OR SHOW: A carnival ride or show which is directed
exclusively toward persons under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 2092, 10-20-
2003)
3-17-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No carnival shall be set up, run, operated or conducted within the limits of
the city unless a written permit from the corporate authorities has been
issued, setting forth the conditions under which such carnival shall be
operated. The permit shall be granted upon the condition that there shall not
be set up or operated any gambling device, lottery, number or paddle wheel,
number board, punch board, or other game of chance, or any lewd, lascivious or
indecent show or attraction making an indecent exposure of the person or
suggesting lewdness or immorality.
In addition, each permit shall have attached thereto a copy of this chapter,
and a copy of the city's amusement tax ordinance (chapter 12 of this title),
and no permit shall be issued until the applicant has affirmatively
demonstrated that the carnival and its personnel will comply with the
provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permit shall be required for an inflatable
bounce house or similar air supported, inflatable amusement device. (Ord. 2755,
11-19-2012)
3-17-3: APPLICATION FOR CARNIVAL PERMIT/FEES:
The city administrator shall cause a carnival application form to be
promulgated pursuant to the terms of this chapter. An application fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall accompany each application. Upon the
submission of the completed application, the city administrator shall forward
the application for review and approval by the corporate authorities. The
application shall be signed by the person to whom the permit will be issued and
shall be verified by oath or affidavit.
The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
   A.   The name, age and address of the person to whom the license is to be
issued.
   B.   If the application is on behalf of a corporation then it must be
executed by an officer of the corporation or other person duly authorized by
corporate resolution to execute the application.
   C.   The location of the premises or place of business which is to be
operated under such permit.
   D.   A statement that the applicant and his employees will not violate any
of the laws of the state of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinance
of this city in the conduct of the carnival. (Ord. 2092, 10-20-2003)
   E.   Affirmative documentation which demonstrates the carnival operator's
compliance with the carnival and amusement rides safety act 1 , as now existing
or hereafter amended, including, without limitation, required background checks
and the prohibition against employment of individuals convicted of certain sex
offenses as set forth in the act. (Ord. 2689, 1-16-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 430 ILCS 85/2-1 et seq.
3-17-4: GRANTING OF PERMIT:
No such permit shall be granted by the corporate authorities until they shall
have investigated the carnival and are satisfied that, if permitted, it will be
operated in accordance with the permit and the provisions of this chapter. The
corporate authorities may issue the permit and collect permit fees necessary to
pay the expenses of the investigation and to aid in policing the grounds and
otherwise to compensate the city in such amount as the corporate authorities
may determine. Such amount shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance
of the permit. Any overpayment with respect to police services actually
provided at the carnival will be refunded. Each permit shall contain the
proviso that police officers shall have free access to the grounds and all
booths, shows and concessions on such grounds at all times, and it shall be the
duty of all officers present at such carnival to enforce all the provisions of
this chapter. In addition, to the extent that the city police services will be
provided or the carnival will be located wholly or partly on city property, the
corporate authorities may require certificates of liability insurance naming
the city as an additional, noncontributory primary insured, a reasonable
cleanup bond and a hold harmless agreement approved by the city. The
certificate of liability insurance shall be in such form and amount as is
normally and customarily required by the city's insurance carrier, but not less
than general liability coverage in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
aggregate. (Ord. 2092, 10-20-2003)
3-17-5: PERSONNEL IDENTIFICATION:
All personnel associated with the carnival shall, at all times, wear photo IDs
and such other forms of identification as may be determined by the corporate
authorities of the city. Any personnel who will attend or operate child
oriented rides or shows shall be separately listed on the permit and shall
further be required to wear special forms of identification at all times. No
other personnel shall attend or operate child oriented rides or shows. (Ord.
2092, 10-20-2003)
3-17-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT IN DUPLICATE:
The permit as provided for in this chapter shall be made in duplicate, one copy
thereof being retained by the corporate authorities. The other copy shall be
kept in the possession of the manager of the carnival and shall be produced and
shown to any police officer or citizen upon request. (Ord. 2092, 10-20-2003)
3-17-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day upon which the violation
exists shall be treated as a separate offense. (Ord. 2092, 10-20-2003)
CHAPTER 18
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-18-3: Applicable Principles
3-18-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-18-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-18-6: Late Fees; Payments
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section.
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
   COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
   GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to the following
subsection.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2407, 11-5-2007)
3-18-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city by notice provided to the city clerk and the city
administrator.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance codified herein by the holder. The ordinance codified herein
shall be sent by the city clerk via regular or certified mail, postage prepaid,
to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2407, 11-5-2007)
3-18-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2407, 11-5-2007)
3-18-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2407, 11-5-2007)
3-18-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city in ordinance 1896 pursuant to
the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should he construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 2407, 11-5-2007)
3-18-6: LATE FEES; PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinance
1896 adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government taxpayers'
bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2407, 11-
5-2007)
CHAPTER 19
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-19-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-19-2: Enforcement
3-19-3: Penalties
3-19-4: Customer Credits
3-19-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 2405, 11-5-2007)
3-19-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city. (Ord. 2405, 11-5-2007)
3-19-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 2405, 11-5-2007)
3-19-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those
credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for
the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of
the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits, and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord.
2405, 11-5-2007)
CHAPTER 20
TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
SECTION:
3-20-1: Definitions
3-20-2: License Required
3-20-3: Application For License For Sale Of Tobacco Products
3-20-4: Restriction On Licenses Granted
3-20-5: Prohibited Sales, Delivery; Signs
3-20-6: Warning Signs
3-20-7: Minimum Age To Sell
3-20-8: Purchase By Underage Persons Prohibited
3-20-9: Possession By Minors Prohibited
3-20-10: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
3-20-11: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
3-20-12: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-20-13: Tobacco Commissioner
3-20-14: Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines, Costs
3-20-15: Effect Of Revocation
3-20-16: Penalties
3-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section.
 
                              A product or device, not consisting of or
                              containing tobacco, that provides for the
                              ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by
                              chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving,
                              inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by other means.
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: This does not include tobacco products as that
                              term is defined in this section or any product
                              approved by the United States Food and Drug
                              Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale
                              as a tobacco cessation product, a tobacco
                              dependence product, or for other medicinal
                              purposes.
                              (1) Any device that employs a battery or other
                              mechanism to heat a solution or substance to
                              produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
                              inhalation;
                              (2) Any cartridge or container of a solution or
                              substance intended to be used with or in the
                              device or to refill the device; or
                              (3) Any solution or substance, whether or not it
                              contains nicotine intended for use in the device.
                              "Electronic cigarette" includes, but is not
                              limited to, any electronic nicotine delivery
                              system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
                              electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or
                              similar product or device, and any components or
                              parts that can be used to build the product or
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE:         device. "Electronic cigarette" does not include:
                              cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the
                              Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined
                              in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act
                              of 1995; tobacco products and alternative
                              nicotine products as defined in this section; any
                              product approved by the United States Food and
                              Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
                              cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
                              product, or for other medical purposes, and is
                              being marketed and sold solely for that approved
                              purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a
                              physician for that condition and is being
                              marketed and sold solely for that approved
                              purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for
                              use under the Compassionate Use of Medical
                              Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
                              Any substance containing or made from tobacco
                              that is intended for human consumption, whether
                              smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS:             inhaled, snorted sniffed, or ingested by any
                              other means, including, but not limited to,
                              cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, loose tobacco,
                              snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
UNDERAGE PERSON:              A person under twenty one (21) years of age.
                              Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-
                              service device which, upon insertion of money,
VENDING MACHINE:              tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
                              tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
                              or electronic cigarettes.
 
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail, to
give away, to deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail,
giving away or delivering tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
electronic cigarettes within the City without having first obtained a tobacco
dealer's license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The fee
for such license shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) for the first year and
ten dollars ($10.00) for each succeeding year. Each such license shall expire
on December 31.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE FOR SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
Any person requiring a license under this chapter shall make written
application for a tobacco dealer's license and shall file said application with
the City Clerk, who shall provide a blank form for that purpose, signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent if a club or
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information:
   A.   The name, age, date of birth, address, and telephone number of the
manager or agent who conducts the business and the applicant in the case of an
individual; and in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or of a
club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized and the
names and addresses of the officers and directors and any stockholder owning in
the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock (if said stockholder
should be a corporation, then disclosure of the stockholders of that
corporation as specified herein should be made) and any and all information
which may be reasonably requested in order to determine whether the applicant,
manager and other individuals, persons, officers, directors or shareholders
named herein properly qualify under the terms of this chapter.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant and his place of birth; and if a
naturalized citizen, the name and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character; and in the case of a corporation the date on which its charter was
issued.
   E.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license.
   F.   The amount and nature of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the
time application is made.
   G.   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for
another similar license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application.
   H.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or the ordinances of this City or the laws of this
State.
   I.   A statement as to whether a previous license issued by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government, has been revoked, and the
reason therefor.
   J.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois, nor of the United States, nor any ordinance of the City in
the conduct of his place of business.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-
2019)
3-20-4: RESTRICTION ON LICENSES GRANTED:
No tobacco dealer's license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community.
   B.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State
of Illinois.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   E.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   F.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   G.   A copartnership unless all the members of such copartnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license.
   H.   A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of said corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the City.
   I.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation
Act to transact business in Illinois.
   J.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   K.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or who does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license
is to be issued.
   L.   Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor, Alderman, member of a
City Council or commission, any President of a Village Board of Trustees, or
any President or member of a County Board; and no such official shall be
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly in the manufacture or
distribution of tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic
cigarettes.
   M.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   N.   Any premises which are in violation of any of the applicable codes of
the City, including, but not limited to, the Building and Fire Prevention
Codes.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-
2019)
3-20-5: PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY; SIGNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or electronic cigarettes to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years.
   B.   If any person contemplating the sale or furnishing of tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or electronic cigarettes is prohibited because of the nonage of the
prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand
presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age,
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, give
away or deliver tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic
cigarettes to any person in any manner which violates Federal or State laws
governing tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic
cigarettes. The violation of such Federal or State laws by the licensee shall
also be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-6: WARNING SIGNS:
Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes shall at all times display signs
informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein. The sign
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes and on or upon every
vending machine which offers tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or electronic cigarettes for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and
shall state:
   THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, OR ELECTRONIC
CIGARETTES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-7: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit
any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes in any licensed
premises.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-8: PURCHASE BY UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
purchase or to attempt to purchase tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or electronic cigarettes, or to misrepresent their identity or age,
or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes. No
person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-9: POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
possess any tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic
cigarettes.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-10: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes, or any employee or
agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or
person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or electronic cigarettes, free of charge to any
person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the
City, any school district, any park district or any public library.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-11: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or electronic
cigarettes by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped
with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee
so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
   B.   Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-
2019)
3-20-12: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-13: TOBACCO COMMISSIONER:
The Mayor or his designee is hereby authorized and designated to be the Tobacco
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the applicable
provisions of this chapter, as well as such ordinances and resolutions relating
to tobacco as may be enacted. The Tobacco Commissioner may establish rules and
regulations to aid in the administration of the applicable provisions of this
chapter and to effectuate the purposes established herein.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-14: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
   A.   The Tobacco Commissioner may suspend or revoke any and all licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter if he determines that the licensee
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the Tobacco
Commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall be
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. However, no such license shall
be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public
hearing by the Tobacco Commissioner with a seven (7) day written notice to the
licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the
charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall
begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
   C.   The Tobacco Commissioner shall, within seven (7) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such
determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the period
of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such
order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
   D.   Any licensee determined by the Tobacco Commissioner to have violated
any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City the costs of the
hearing before the Tobacco Commissioner on such violation. The Tobacco
Commissioner shall determine the costs incurred by the City for said hearing,
including, but not limited to: court reporter's fees, the cost of preparing the
mailing notices, the costs of transcripts or records and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the City.
   E.   The licensee shall pay said costs to the City within thirty (30) days
of notification of the costs by the Tobacco Commissioner. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2620, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-15: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or electronic cigarettes in the premises described in the revoked
license.
(Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
3-20-16: PENALTIES:
   A.   For violations of any section of this chapter except as provided in
subsection B of this section, the penalty shall be a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   B.   For persons who are tobacco licensees the penalty provisions of section
3-20-14 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord.
O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
CHAPTER 21
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX 1
SECTION:
3-21-1: Definitions
3-21-2: Tax Imposed Upon The Consumption Of Electricity
3-21-3: Other Taxes
3-21-4: Limitation
3-21-5: Tax In Addition To Other Payments
3-21-6: Collection Of Tax
3-21-7: Exemption From Tax
3-21-8: Tax Remittance And Return
3-21-9: Books And Records
3-21-10: Severability
3-21-11: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. The tax provided for herein shall be based on electricity use or
  consumption billed on or after May 1, 2013.
3-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of the tax authorized by this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, limited
liability partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any
of its political subdivisions, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, conservator,
or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative operating within this state
permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other
affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105 of
the public utilities act 1  and shall include alternative retail electric
suppliers as defined in section 16-102 of that act.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code 2 , directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser. (Ord.
2672, 10-3-2011)
 
Notes
1 2. 220 ILCS 5/3-105.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-21-2: TAX IMPOSED UPON THE CONSUMPTION OF ELECTRICITY:
Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 1  and any and all
other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed
within the corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a
monthly basis for each purchaser:
   A.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.087
cents per kilowatt hour;
   B.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.057
cents per kilowatt hour;
   C.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.051
cents per kilowatt hour;
   D.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.050
cents per kilowatt hour;
   E.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.049
cents per kilowatt hour;
   F.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
00.046 cents per kilowatt hour;
   G.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
00.045 cents per kilowatt hour;
   H.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
00.044 cents per kilowatt hour; (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
   I.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
00.043 cents per kilowatt hour; and
   J.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt
hours in a month: 00.042 cents per kilowatt hour. (Ord. 2769, 2-19-2013)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-21-3: OTHER TAXES:
The taxes imposed by this chapter are in addition to all taxes, fees and other
revenue measures imposed by the city, the state of Illinois, or any other
political subdivision of the state. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-4: LIMITATION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not be
imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
or statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-5: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER PAYMENTS:
The tax authorized by this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of money
or value of products or services furnished to this city by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
(Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-6: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser
by the person maintaining a place of business in the state who delivers
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and, if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.
   B.   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter and any such tax which
is collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to
the city by the person delivering the electricity; provided, that the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity, the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible; and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
   C.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering the electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge
an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the city upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the city on a monthly basis and the persons delivering electricity
shall not be authorized to add the gross charge of up to three percent (3%) of
the tax otherwise permitted in this chapter to that purchaser's invoice.
   D.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer or tax collector
who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid shall
be so credited or refunded unless a claim is filed within the time period set
forth in ordinance 1896 as now existing or hereafter amended.
   E.   No action by the city to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this chapter shall be commenced unless filed within the time
period set forth in ordinance 1896 as now existing or hereafter amended. (Ord.
2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-7: EXEMPTION FROM TAX:
The following shall be exempt from the tax imposed on the consumption of
electricity under this chapter:
   A.   All units of local government and school districts whose territory, or
a part thereof, is included within the corporate limits of the city shall be
exempt from the aforesaid city tax.
   B.   Electricity that is delivered to a person who has an active resale
number issued by the city administrator (or his or her designee) and furnishes
that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that
person under oath that the sale is entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale
for resale shall be exempt from the aforesaid city tax, subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Application For Resale Number; Issuance: If a person who receives
electricity in the city claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity,
such person shall apply to the city administrator (or his or her designee) for
a resale number. Such applicant shall state, under oath, all facts which will
show the city why such applicant is not liable for the tax imposed by this
chapter on any such purchases of electricity and shall furnish additional
information as the city may reasonably require. Upon approval of the
application, the city administrator (or his or her designee) shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
      2.   Cancellation Of Resale Number: The city administrator (or his or her
designee) may cancel any resale number that is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to obtain electricity used or consumed by
such person tax free when such actions are, in fact, not for resale, or that no
longer applies because such person has discontinued making resales.
      3.   Partial Resale: Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a reseller has
acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the
reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter directly to the city on the
amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the
tax and remit the tax on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to
a purchaser. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this chapter shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller; provided, that such person reports to the city
administrator (or his or her designee) the total amount of electricity
delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the city
administrator (or his or her designee) may reasonably require. (Ord. 2739, 8-
20-2012)
3-21-8: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis make and file a tax return
with the city finance director. The return shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
      1.   The tax collector's name and principal place of business;
      2.   The total kilowatt hour usage for the prior month upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      3.   The amount of electricity delivered to a person within the city who
has an active resale number issued by the city and the name of all such
resellers; and
      4.   The amount of the tax for the prior month.
   B.   Every tax collector filing returns pursuant to this section shall, at
the time of filing such return, pay the city finance director the amount of the
tax imposed by this chapter.
   C.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser because the purchaser is partially exempt from the tax pursuant to
this chapter, then the partially exempt purchaser shall file a monthly tax
return with the city that identifies the partially exempt purchaser's name and
principal place of business, the amount of electricity used or consumed, and
the tax owed. The partially exempt purchaser shall pay the tax directly to the
city on or before the last day of the month following the month during which
the electricity is used or consumed.
   D.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from a
purchaser, then the purchaser shall file a monthly tax return with the city
that identifies the purchaser's name and principal place of business, the
amount of electricity used or consumed, and the tax owed. The purchaser shall
pay the tax directly to the city on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. The tax
collector shall also remain liable for the tax as provided in section
 3-21-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-9: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this
chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of the business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that give
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this chapter. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city
at all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions hereof. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
3-21-11: PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer or tax collector who fails to make a return, makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for
the amount of the tax due. (Ord. 2672, 10-3-2011)
CHAPTER 22
MOTOR FUEL TAX 1
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: Tax Imposed
3-22-3: Liability For Payment
3-22-4: Collection Of Tax And Filing Of Return
3-22-5: Registration And Maintenance Of Records
3-22-6: Rules And Regulations
3-22-7: Failure To Pay Tax
3-22-8: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Hearing
3-22-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. This chapter shall be effective May 1, 2013.
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the following meanings:
   DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of selling motor fuel,
including any person who has an established place of business for such purposes
ascribed to them in this chapter.
   MOTOR FUEL: All volatile and inflammable liquids or gases produced, blended
or compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for,
operating motor vehicles.
   PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, partnership,
limited liability partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, club,
company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association,
syndicate, society, sole proprietorship, or any group of individuals acting as
a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise.
   RETAIL: The sale for any good and valuable consideration to a person for use
as a consumer. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed as of May 1, 2013, which tax shall be collected by each
dealer upon the privilege of purchasing motor fuel at retail in the city of
Warrenville at the rate of six cents ($0.06) per U.S. gallon or fraction
thereof. In the event that motor fuel is dispensed by a unit of measure other
than the U.S. gallon, then the tax shall be imposed at the same ratio of six
cents ($0.06) as the unit measure is to the U.S. gallon. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011,
eff. 5-1-2013; amd. Ord. O2022-15, 4-18-2022)
3-22-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne
by the purchaser. The tax levied herein shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose the tax upon
the occupation of selling motor fuel. It shall be the duty of every dealer to
secure said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the city
administrator, or his or her designee, and as otherwise provided by this
chapter. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-4: COLLECTION OF TAX AND FILING OF RETURN:
Every dealer required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall secure
said tax from the purchaser at the time he collects payment for the motor fuel.
Every dealer shall cause a sworn tax return to be filed with the city finance
director, or his or her designee, on or before the last day of every month
showing the volume of motor fuel sold during the preceding calendar month,
which return shall be made upon forms prescribed by the city finance director
or his or her designee and shall include the state of Illinois ST-1 form
showing gallons of motor fuel sold. At the time of filing said tax return,
every dealer shall pay or cause to be paid to the city all taxes due for the
period for which the tax return applies. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-5: REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
Every dealer required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall register
with the city on forms provided by the city administrator or his or her
designee. Each such dealer shall have the duty to maintain complete and
accurate books, records, and accounts, showing the gross receipts from the sale
of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchasers. The city shall at
all reasonable times have full access to said books, records, and accounts, and
each dealer shall have a duty to produce said books, records, and accounts to
the city upon the city's request. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city administrator may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter concerning the enforcement and collection
of the motor fuel tax. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-7: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest and penalties shall
immediately accrue as provided in section
3-16-11 of this code, as now existing or hereafter amended. Whenever any person
shall fail to pay any tax as provided in this chapter, upon the request of the
city administrator and at the direction of the city council, the city shall
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in
any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013; amd.
Ord. O2022-15, 4-18-2022)
3-22-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, if the city
administrator, after a hearing before him, shall find that any person has
wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, he or she may
suspend or revoke all city licenses held by such person. The person will have
an opportunity to be heard at such hearing not less than ten (10) days after
notice of the time and place of the hearing addressed to the dealer at his last
known place of business has been deposited in the United States mail with
postage prepaid. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release
or discharge any person from civil liability for the payment of the tax or from
prosecution for such offense. (Ord. 2673, 10-3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
3-22-9: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2673, 10-
3-2011, eff. 5-1-2013)
CHAPTER 23
MUNICIPAL GAS UTILITY TAX 1
SECTION:
3-23-1: Tax Imposed
3-23-2: Limitations
3-23-3: Other Fees And Payments
3-23-4: Definitions
3-23-5: Taxpayer Return
3-23-6: Overpayment Of Tax; Credit
3-23-7: Recovery Of Tax
3-23-8: Reserved
3-23-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. The tax provided for in this chapter shall be based on the gross receipts
  actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after May 1, 2013.
3-23-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city of Warrenville, and not for resale, at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
3-23-2: LIMITATIONS:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for such transactions
as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal
retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois
municipal code 1 . (Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
3-23-3: OTHER FEES AND PAYMENTS:
The tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to the city by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of
its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
3-23-4: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings and be construed as hereinafter defined:
   CITY: The city of Warrenville.
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
"gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the
definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal
code as now existing or hereafter amended and provided further that, pursuant
to section 8-11-2(f) of the Illinois municipal code, "gross receipts" shall not
include that portion of the consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas to school districts or units of local government
within the corporate limits of the city.
   PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 2779,
5-6-2013)
3-23-5: TAXPAYER RETURN:
On or before June 30, 2013, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city
finance director for the month of May 2013 stating:
   A.   His name;
   B.   His principal place of business;
   C.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
   D.   Amount of tax; and
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a
like return to the city finance director for a corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the city finance director, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
3-23-6: OVERPAYMENT OF TAX; CREDIT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid shall be so credited unless
a claim is filed within the time period set forth in ordinance 1896 as now
existing or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
3-23-7: RECOVERY OF TAX:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced unless filed within the time period set forth in ordinance
1896 as now existing or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011)
3-23-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2779, 5-6-2013)
3-23-9: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 2674, 10-3-2011; amd. Ord. 2739, 8-20-2012)
CHAPTER 24
MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS USE TAX 1
SECTION:
3-24-1: Short Title
3-24-2: Definitions
3-24-3: Tax
3-24-4: Collection Of Tax By Public Utility
3-24-5: Books And Records
3-24-6: Penalty
3-24-7: Exemption
3-24-8: Severability
 
Notes
1 1. The tax provided for in this chapter shall be based on gas use for which
  delivery is billed on or after May 1, 2013.
3-24-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and
is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the city of Warrenville,
the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2675, 10-3-2011)
3-24-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act as amended 1 .
PUBLIC UTILITY: As defined in section 3-105 of the public utilities act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas. (Ord. 2675, 10-3-2011)
 
Notes
1 2. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
3-24-3: TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the city that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of 2.36 cents per therm.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   C.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to section
3-24-4 of this chapter on or before the payment due date of the public
utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the city finance
director on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month
in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has
been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section
 3-24-4 of this chapter or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a
public utility so designated.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
city.
   E.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this chapter with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the city finance director on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   F.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after May 1, 2013.
   G.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be: 1) credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or 2) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become
due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid shall be so credited or refunded
unless a claim is filed within the time period set forth in ordinance 1896 as
now existing or hereafter amended.
   H.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
chapter shall be commenced unless filed within the time period set forth in
ordinance 1896 as now existing or hereafter amended.
   I.   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the city by a retail
purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
city's gas distribution tax, as amended from time to time (chapter 23 of this
title) authorized pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
(Ord. 2675, 10-3-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-24-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
The Mayor, City Administrator And/or City Finance Director are authorized to
enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this chapter with
any public utility providing gas service in the city. The contract shall
include and substantially conform with the following provisions:
   A.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   B.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the city finance
director no more often than once each month;
   C.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the city finance director;
   D.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the city for any tax not
actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
   E.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 2675, 10-3-
2011; amd. Ord. O2021-18, 5-17-2021)
3-24-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this
chapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the city. (Ord. 2675, 10-3-2011)
3-24-6: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2675, 10-
3-2011)
3-24-7: EXEMPTION:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any school district or unit
of local government lying in whole or in part within the corporate limits of
the city. (Ord. 2779, 5-6-2013)
3-24-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this chapter, or the application of any
provision or section of this chapter, is found to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions or
sections of this chapter, or their application. Each unconstitutional or
invalid provision, section or application is, and shall be, severable from the
remaining provisions or sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2779, 5-6-2013)
CHAPTER 25
RETAIL SALE OF DOGS, CATS AND RABBITS
SECTION:
3-25-1: Definitions
3-25-2: Restrictions On The Retail Sale Of Animals
3-25-3: Exemptions
3-25-4: Disclosures Required
3-25-5: Penalty
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   OFFER(S) FOR SALE: To display, sell, deliver, offer for sale or adoption,
advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a
dog, cat or rabbit.
   RESCUE ORGANIZATION: Any not for profit organization that has tax exempt
status under section 501(c)(3) of the United States internal revenue code,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and
placement of dogs, cats or rabbits.
   RETAILER: Any person licensed or required to be licensed under this title
who offers for sale any dog, cat or rabbit in the city. (Ord. 2978, 2-1-2016)
3-25-2: RESTRICTIONS ON THE RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS:
A retailer may offer for sale only those dogs, cats or rabbits that the
retailer has obtained from:
   A.   An animal control center, animal care facility, kennel, pound or
training facility operated by any subdivision of local, state or federal
government; or
   B.   A humane society or rescue organization. (Ord. 2978, 2-1-2016)
3-25-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restrictions on retailers set forth in section
3-25-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any entity listed in subsection
3-25-2A or B of this chapter, or to any veterinary hospital or clinic licensed
pursuant to the veterinary medicine and surgery practice act of 2004, codified
at 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115. (Ord. 2978, 2-1-2016)
3-25-4: DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:
Any retailer who offers for sale a dog, cat or rabbit shall make the following
disclosures to the customer about such animal:
   A.   For each dog or cat: A written disclosure meeting all of the
requirements set forth in sections 3.5 or 3.15, as applicable, of the animal
welfare act, codified at 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 605; and
   B.   For each rabbit: 1) the breed, approximate age, sex and color of the
animal; 2) the date and description of any inoculation or medical treatment
that the animal received while under the possession of the retailer, 3) the
name and address of the location where the rabbit was born, rescued,
relinquished or impounded; and 4) if the rabbit was returned by a customer, the
date of and reason for the return.
The disclosure required under this section shall be provided by the retailer to
the customer in written form and shall be signed by both the retailer and
customer at the time of sale. The retailer shall retain the original copy of
such disclosure and acknowledgment for a period of two (2) years from the date
of sale. Upon request by an authorized city official, the original copy of such
disclosure and acknowledgment shall be made immediately available for
inspection by such authorized city official.
The retailer shall post, in writing, in a conspicuous place on or near the cage
of any dog, cat or rabbit offered for sale all of the information about a dog,
cat or rabbit required under this section and other applicable law. (Ord. 2978,
2-1-2016)
3-25-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of any section of this chapter shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2978, 2-1-2016)
CHAPTER 26
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-26-1: Definitions
3-26-2: Massage Establishment Business Licenses
3-26-3: Massage Therapist License Required
3-26-4: Exemptions
3-26-5: Building Code Compliance
3-26-6: Sanitation And Safety Requirements
3-26-7: Display Of Licenses
3-26-8: Register And Regulation Of Employees
3-26-9: Conditions And Restrictions Of Licenses
3-26-10: Administration
3-26-11: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-26-12: Penalty
3-26-13: Injunction
3-26-14: Effect Of Partial Invalidity
3-26-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   EMPLOYEE: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, other than a massage
therapist, who renders any service in connection with operation of a massage
establishment and receives compensation from the owner or operator of the
establishment or from its patrons.
   LICENSEE: The owner and/or operator of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in, or carries on,
or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the acts of massage as
defined herein.
   MASSAGE OR PRACTICE OF MASSAGE: Any method of applying pressure on or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating,
touching or stimulating, the external parts of the body, by another individual,
with the hands, any body part, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or
similar preparations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the use of breasts or
genitals for massage or the practice of massage shall be prohibited.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration, engages in the
practice of massage as defined herein and provides evidence of a professional
license issued by the State of Illinois authorizing the practice of massage
therapy under the Massage Licensing Act 1 .
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE: Any business, the function of which is to engage in
or carry on massages for compensation at a location designated by the customer
or client rather than at a massage establishment.
   PATRON: Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it
is reasonably expected that he or she would pay money or give any other form of
consideration therefor.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, limited liability
company, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of
whatever form or character.
   PREMISES: The area depicted in the business license for operation of the
massage business.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated, conducted in a manner which would violate State law:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female
breasts, regardless of whether the massage therapist or patron is clothed, in a
state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual,
including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anilingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism,
and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
   C.   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or
with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
   TABLE SHOWERS (Also Known As VICHY SHOWERS): The washing of the body by
another person while laying on a table. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.
3-26-2: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, the business of massage, or
otherwise provide a massage in return for compensation, in the City, without
first having obtained a massage establishment business license issued by the
City pursuant to the provisions of chapter 10 of this title for each and every
premises used for the business of conducting a massage business or otherwise
providing massages for compensation by such person. The applicant for such
massage establishment business license must be at least 18 years of age.
   B.   Number Of Licenses: The number of massage establishment business
licenses is specifically limited to five. In the event any one of the licenses
provided for shall expire, be revoked or terminated in any manner, the license
will be deemed to no longer exist and will not be available for issuance to any
other applicant. Within a reasonable amount of time, city staff will submit an
ordinance amending this code to reflect the number of licenses. Failure to
amend the City Code to reflect the then-current number of licenses does not and
will not affect the actual number of licenses.
   C.   Fees and Duration:
      1.   Initial Fee: The initial fee for a massage establishment business
license is set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
      2.   Renewal Fee: The fee for the renewal of a massage establishment
business license is set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The renewal fee
includes the processing of renewal applications that require two or fewer
background checks. An additional fee, as set forth in the annual fee ordinance,
will be charged for each additional background check required for a renewal
application.
      The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to any massage
establishment business license issued pursuant to chapter 10 of this title.
   D.   Non-Transferable: No licensee may assign, sell, loan, convey, or
transfer a massage establishment license to any other person, even if such
other person intends to conduct the same business as the licensee at the
location used by the licensee. (Ord. O2018-02, 2-5-2018; amd. Ord. O2019-01, 1-
7-2019; amd. Ord. O2020-28, 8-3-2020; amd. Ord. O2021-11, 4-19-2021; amd. Ord.
2023-31, 8-7-2023; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. O2024-28, 6-17-2024;
Ord. O2025-44, 9-2-2025; Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025)
3-26-3: MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall provide a massage to another person as a massage therapist,
employee or otherwise, on the premises for which a massage establishment
business license has been issued unless he or she possesses a valid massage
therapist license from the State of Illinois. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-26-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions, and to the following businesses and entities:
      1.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, or
physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the State.
      2.   Athletic trainers for any athletic program of a private or public
school, college or university or for any athletic team regularly organized and
engaging in competition.
      3.   State-licensed practical nurses and registered nurses while
administering massages in the normal course of their medical duties.
      4.   Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of
this State, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of
the neck, back, face, scalp, hair, hands and feet of the customer or client for
cosmetic or beautifying purposes.
      5.   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, home health agencies, hospice
programs and other such programs as defined and licensed by the State under 210
Illinois Compiled Statutes 3/1 et seq.
      6.   Massage therapists who administer massages only to the back and/or
shoulder region of fully clothed patrons when such patrons sit in upright
massage chairs.
      7.   Massages provided in the course of not-for-profit special events,
such as corporate health and wellness days, fundraisers, and athletic events.
      8.   Massages provided by massage therapy students enrolled in a
recognized school during the course of clinical externships, practicums or
community services, provided that such massage services are part of the
curricular requirements of the recognized school and are where massage services
are actually performed at the patron's premises, including the patron's place
of business or residence, a massage establishment license shall not be required
for such patron's premises.
      9.   Where massage services are actually performed at the patron's
premises, including the patron's place of business or residence, a massage
establishment business license shall not be required for such patron's
premises.
   B.   No provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to
any person, business, or conduct regulated by the provisions of the State
Physical Therapy Registration Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 90/1 et seq.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-26-5: BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE:
All licensed premises shall be periodically inspected by the Director of
Community and Economic Development or his or her duly authorized representative
for safety of the structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating,
illumination and fire protection. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10,
3-19-2018)
3-26-6: SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold- resistant
paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
   B.   Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse.
   C.   All equipment used in the massage establishment shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition.
   D.   Soaps, towels, linens and laundered sheets must be provided. All such
towels, linens and items for the personal use of operators and patrons shall be
clean and freshly laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
   E.   Towels, linens and sheets shall be stored in a locked cabinet and shall
not be used for more than one patron. However, heavy white paper may be
substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is changed for every patron.
   F.   All massage services or practices are prohibited in any cubicle, room,
booth, or other area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door
capable of being locked. Closed curtains are allowed.
   G.   Toilets, dressing room facilities, lockers, steam baths, tubs or
showers, if provided, shall not be utilized by more than one patron and/or
staff member at any one time.
   H.   Massage oils and lotions shall be stored in closed containers.
   I.   Shower areas shall always remain clean and disinfected. (Ord. O2017-48,
8-7-2017)
3-26-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSES:
Every person licensed as a massage therapist shall display his/her license in a
prominent place in the public reception area of the massage establishment
together with the City's authorized massage establishment business license.
(Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-26-8: REGISTER AND REGULATION OF EMPLOYEES:
   A.   The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a licensed massage
establishment shall maintain a register of the names, addresses, and state
massage therapy license numbers of all persons employed at the time as massage
therapists and all other employees. The initial register must be submitted with
the license application and include at least one licensed massage therapist and
updated and accurate register shall be available at the massage establishment
for inspection by representatives of the City during regular business hours.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for such a business to allow a massage therapist
to practice other than as permitted by this chapter and Illinois Statute.
   C.   Massage business personnel must have government-issued identification
on the premises at all times to verify their identity. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-
2017; amd. Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025)
3-26-9: CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF LICENSES:
   A.   Supervision: A licensee of a licensed massage establishment shall have
the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business
rendering massage services shall have at least one person who is a licensed
massage therapist on the premises at all times while the establishment is open.
The licensee shall personally supervise the business, or shall delegate such
supervisory responsibility to a manager who shall not violate, or permit others
to violate, any applicable provisions of this chapter. The violation of any
provision of this chapter by any agent or employee of the licensee shall
constitute a violation by the licensee and, if different than the manager, the
manager. The name of the person who will supervise the establishment must be
listed on the license application and will be displayed on the massage
establishment license itself.
   B.   Price Rates: Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted
on a framed placard no smaller than 8" x 10" in the reception area in a
location visible and available to all prospective customers. This placard must
also state the following:
No services other than those listed shall be provided for any compensation
whatsoever. There shall be no bargaining or solicitation for services between
patrons, massage therapists, or employees.
   C.   Employee Dress Code: All employees, including massage therapists, shall
be clean, and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering at least the
entire torso and the sexual and genital areas.
   D.   Separate License For Each Premises: The license shall apply only to the
premises described in the application, and the license issued thereon, and only
one location shall be so described in each license.
   E.   Minors Prohibited: No establishment licensed under the provisions of
this chapter shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to come or
remain on the premises of any massage establishment, including massage
therapists, employees and patrons. Provided, however, persons under age of
eighteen (18) may patronize the establishment with the presence of their parent
or legal guardian.
   F.   Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited: No person shall sell, give, dispense,
provide, keep or consume, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, kept
or consumed, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage
establishment.
   G.   Solicitations Prohibited: No massage establishment shall place, publish
or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any
advertisement, picture, or statement which is known to be false, deceptive or
misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any massage
services.
   H.   Hours Of Operation: No portion of any business premises used in any way
for or by a massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the
following day.
   I.   Residence: No person shall reside in any portion of the licensed
premises. Bedroom furnishings shall be prohibited on the licensed premises.
   J.   Public Access: Every massage establishment that operates on the first
floor of a building with direct access from outside the building shall separate
the area of the premises in which massages are performed from a public
reception and/or waiting room area, and the public entrance to the
establishment shall be open and unlocked during all of the hours that massage
services are offered, open or advertised to be open to the public. The public
entrance to the establishment shall be on the street where the premises are
located (street address).
No massage establishment may have a waiting/seating area that is separate from
the lobby area (i.e., the entrance to the massage establishment must lead
directly into the waiting/seating area). There shall only be one waiting/
seating area and such waiting/seating area must be open and visible from the
exterior of the business at all times.
   K.   Window Coverings: No massage establishment shall be equipped with
tinted or one-way glass in any room or office. Any windows or doors into the
lobby shall not be covered. The lobby must be clearly visible from the exterior
of the business at all times.
   L.   Correct Name And Conduct: No person having a license under this chapter
shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not
specified in that license or permit.
   M.   False Advertising: No person shall advertise, promote, or refer to
himself or herself as a massage therapist as herein defined without being a
massage therapist as provided in this chapter or Illinois Statute.
   N.   Garments Required: A patron's sexual and genital areas, as defined
herein, must be covered by towels, cloths or similar nontransparent garments,
including undergarments, when in the presence of a massage therapist or
employee.
   O.   Exposing Prohibited: No person, knowingly, in a massage establishment,
shall expose or fail to conceal his or her sexual and genital parts, or any
portion thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person,
knowingly, in a massage establishment, to expose the sexual or genital parts,
or any portion thereof, of any other person.
   P.   Sexual Activity Prohibited: No person, knowingly, in a massage
establishment, shall engage in any specified sexual activity, as defined in
this chapter.
   Q.   Acts Prohibited: No person, owning, operating or managing a massage
establishment, shall knowingly cause, allow or permit in or about such massage
establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person under his or her
control or supervision to perform any acts prohibited by this chapter.
   R.   Outcall Massage Service: No person shall operate or conduct an outcall
massage service as defined in this chapter.
   S.   Table Showers: Table showers shall be prohibited.
   T.   Register of Employees: No person, owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, shall allow any massage services to be provided without
having an accurate and up-to-date employee register as required by Section
3-26-8 of this Code.
   U.   Inspection: The City may inspect the premises prior to issuing the
license upon reasonable notice to the applicant and after issuing the license
anytime and without notice during operating hours as necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter, and upon arrival of the inspector, the license
must allow and make the premises available for such inspection. (Ord. O2017-48,
8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025)
3-26-10: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of this
chapter. The City Administrator may delegate or refer to the appropriate City
official, staff, department or division, such as, but not limited to, the
Community Development Department, the Director of Community and Economic
Development, the Chief Code Official, and/or the Police Department, the
enforcement of any provisions of this Code, the investigation of any applicant
or the inspection of any premises.
The Mayor shall be responsible for the approval or denial of a massage
establishment business license application after reviewing the application, the
investigatory material and the applicant, as appropriate, per section 3-10-10
of this title. If the Mayor determines that the approval of an application is
appropriate and in the best interest of the City, the Mayor may direct city
staff to prepare an ordinance, for the consideration and approval of the City
Council, increasing the number of licenses. The City may not issue a new
license until a license is available for issuance. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017;
amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018; Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025)
3-26-11: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
In addition to the penalties provided in section
3-26-12 of this chapter, the massage establishment business license may be
revoked or suspended after notice and a hearing pursuant to chapter 10 of this
title. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-26-12: PENALTY:
   A.   In addition to the suspension or revocation of any business license
granted, any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits the
violation of any section of this chapter may be fined as set forth in the
Annual Fee Ordinance.
   B.   Each day that a massage establishment or any massage establishment
personnel operates in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense or violation. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017; amd. Ord. O2025-47, 10-20-2025)
3-26-13: INJUNCTION:
Any person who operates a massage establishment in violation of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for ordinance
violations as provided in section
 3-26-12 of this chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
above or in this chapter, the City shall have the right to pursue violation(s)
of this chapter through any other legally available remedies including, but not
limited to, license or permit revocation or suspension proceedings as well as
the administrative adjudication hearing process contained in title 9 of this
Code. (Ord. O2017-48, 8-7-2017)
3-26-14: EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, subsections, clauses and phrases shall not be affected. (Ord. O2017-
48, 8-7-2017)
CHAPTER 27
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-27-1: Definitions
3-27-2: Tax Imposed
3-27-3: Collection Of Tax
3-27-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words or terms shall have the following
meanings:
 
                   Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified
                   as including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa and
                   including derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all
                   strains of cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds
                   thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
                   any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
                   preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including
                   tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced
                   cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
CANNABIS:          indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include
                   the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the
                   stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
                   other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
                   preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted
                   from it), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the
                   plant that is incapable of germination. CANNABIS does not
                   include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the
                   Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means concentrate and
                   cannabis-infused products.
CANNABIS RETAILER: All persons or businesses engaged in selling cannabis at
                   retail. (Ord. O2019-63, 12-2-2019)
 
3-27-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22,
a tax is hereby imposed upon all cannabis retailers that sell cannabis in the
City at the rate of three percent (3.0%) of the gross receipts from sales made
in the course of business other than those sales made under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act. Such tax shall be in addition to any
and all other surcharges or taxes which may be legally imposed by the City or
any other taxing authority, including federal, state, county, and regional
public bodies. (Ord. O2019-63, 12-2-2019)
3-27-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Any cannabis retailer within the City subject to the municipal cannabis
retailers' tax imposed by this Chapter shall have the duty to collect such tax
and remit it to the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any remittance by a
cannabis retailer required by this Chapter shall be done in accordance with the
rules and forms promulgated by the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax
required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Chapter shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois. (Ord. O2019-
63, 12-2-2019)
CHAPTER 28
PAVEMENT SEALANTS
SECTION:
3-28-1: Definitions
3-28-2: Sale Of Coal Tar Products Prohibited
3-28-3: Use Of Coal Tar Products Prohibited
3-28-4: Pavement Sealant Professional License Required
3-28-5: Application For Pavement Sealant Professional License
3-28-6: Issuance, Denial, Suspension, Renewal, And Revocation Of Pavement
Sealant Professional’s License
3-28-7: Display Of Pavement Sealant Professional’s License And Product Data
3-28-8: Penalty
3-28-9: Effective Date
3-28-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
 
                               Pavement sealant or sealcoat products that
                               contain coal tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar
COAL TAR PRODUCTS:             derivatives, coal tar pitch volatiles, coal tar
                               mixtures or any variation assigned the Chemical
                               Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 65996-93-2,
                               65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2.
                               A holder of a pavement sealant professional's
LICENSEE:                      license issued by the City of Warrenville, as
                               well as the agents, employees and independent
                               contractors of the licensee.
                               Any person that employs one or more individuals
                               for the purpose of providing pavement sealing
                               for clients including, but not limited to,
PAVEMENT SEALANT PROFESSIONAL: pavement sealing of any driveway, driveway
                               approach, on or off-street parking area,
                               playground, sidewalk, bike trail, patio, sports
                               facility, loading area or facility, or roadway.
                               The application of sealant or sealcoat product
                               to maintain any surface, including but not
PAVEMENT SEALING:              limited to, a driveway, driveway approach, on or
                               off-street parking area, playground, sidewalk,
                               bike trail, patio, sports facility, loading area
                               or facility, street, highway, or roadway.
PERSON:                        Any individual, association, partnership, firm,
                               trust, corporation or limited liability company.
                               Any motor-driven vehicle used by the licensee to
VEHICLE:                       transport employees or agents who work on
                               pavement sealing, equipment, and/or debris.
                               (Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
 
3-28-2: SALE OF COAL TAR PRODUCTS PROHIBITED:
No person may sell, offer or display for sale within the City, at wholesale or
retail, coal tar products of any kind. (Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-3: USE OF COAL TAR PRODUCTS PROHIBITED:
On public and private property, no coal tar products of any kind shall be
applied or used on the surface of any driveway, driveway approach, on or off-
street parking area, playground, sidewalk, bike trail, patio, sports facility,
loading area or facility, street, highway, roadway, or paved surface within the
City. (Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-4: PAVEMENT SEALANT PROFESSIONAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No pavement sealant professional shall perform any pavement sealing
without first securing an annual license therefor from the City. The failure to
comply with this license requirement shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
   B.   The annual pavement sealant professional license fee is set forth in
the annual fee ordinance. All applicable license fees and any other required
fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license.
   C.   The license term shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for
which it is issued unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter.
   D.   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, effective for a period
not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as provided in this
Chapter, and shall not constitute property. No license is transferable,
separate or divisible, and such authority as a license confers shall be
conferred only on the licensee named therein.
(Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
3-28-5: APPLICATION FOR PAVEMENT SEALANT PROFESSIONAL LICENSE:
   A.   An application for a pavement sealant professional license shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department. The application shall be
completed in full and signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly
authorized agent thereof, if not an individual, verified by oath or affidavit,
and shall set forth the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant; if the
applicant is a partnership, the application shall show for each partner their
name, address, contact information, and interest, and all information required
by subsections A2 through A5 of this section, and if the applicant is a
corporation, the application shall state the name, address, and contact
information of the registered agent, and with respect to each director, and
each shareholder owning ten percent (10%) or more of the corporation's shares,
a) their name and address, together with b) the information required by
subsections A2 through A5 of this section.
      2.   Whether applicant ever made an application for a license under this
chapter, or a pavement sealant professional business license or similar license
to a state or county, city, City or other unit of local government, and if so,
where and when, and if such application was granted or denied, and if such
application was denied, the reasons for the denial.
      3.   Whether a license was ever issued to the applicant under this
chapter or a pavement sealant professional license or similar license was ever
issued by any state or county, city, City or other unit of local government,
and if so, where and when, and if such license has ever been suspended or
revoked and the reasons for the suspension or revocation.
      4.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality which regulates pavement sealant professionals, or any Illinois
Statute regulating pavement sealant professionals.
      5.   A statement that the applicant has reviewed and understands the
applicable ordinances of the City including, but not limited to, the
prohibition on the use and sale of coal tar products in the City, and will
promulgate same and educate its employees thereof.
      6.   The location of the applicant's office and garage.
      7.   A complete description of each vehicle, including the year, make,
model and license plate directly involved in the pavement sealing activities
and owned and controlled by the applicant.
      8.   Payment of the annual license fee.
      9.   Product data or MSDS sheets for all products the applicant will use
within the City of Warrenville.
   B.   The applicant shall submit a written authorization for the City, its
agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the
truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of
the applicant for a license.
   C.   The applicant shall submit such other information, documentation, and
identification as the Community Development Department may deem necessary to
determine the identity of the applicant or to process the application. (Ord.
O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-6: ISSUANCE, DENIAL, SUSPENSION, RENEWAL, AND REVOCATION OF PAVEMENT
SEALANT PROFESSIONAL’S LICENSE:
   A.   In addition to the provisions under section
3-10-12, "Revocation or Suspension of Licenses", of this Code, the City
Administrator, or their designee, may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue
or renew, a pavement sealant professional's license for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The use or sale of coal tar products by the licensee within the
City;
      2.   The applicant or licensee is found in violation of this chapter;
      3.   The applicant or licensee, if an individual; or any of the officers,
directors, any person owning directly or beneficially more than ten percent
(10%) of the stock of the corporation, if the applicant or licensee is a
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant, or licensee is a partnership; and the manager, assistant manager or
any other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, has
been:
         a.   Convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or any
applicable provision of this Code; or
         b.   Convicted of a violation of an ordinance of any other unit of
local government regulating pavement sealant professionals; or
         c.   Denied, suspended or revoked of a pavement sealant professional
license or similar license by the City or any other jurisdiction; or
         d.   Subject to pending proceedings to suspend or revoke a pavement
sealant professional license or similar license issued by the City or any other
jurisdiction; or
         e.   Overdue on payment to the City of fees, fines, or penalties
assessed against the licensee or imposed upon the licensee in relation to the
sale or use of pavement sealants; or
         f.   Providing false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in
the license application or in any document required by the City in conjunction
with the license application; or
         g.   Failing to provide information required by the City in
conjunction with the license application.
   B.   In the event that the application is denied for failure to comply with
the requirements of this chapter, the City Administrator, or their designee,
shall immediately notify the applicant or licensee in writing of the reasons
for the denial. If the failure is not cured within ten (10) days after the date
on which the City Administrator, or their designee, denies the issuance of said
license, the application shall be null and void.
   C.   No person whose license has been revoked may apply for a license for a
period of one year following the date of such revocation.
   D.   The renewal of a license shall follow the same provisions required for
the issuance of a license under this chapter.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, the provisions of chapter
3-10 of this Code shall govern the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation
of this license.
   F.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section. (Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-7: DISPLAY OF PAVEMENT SEALANT PROFESSIONAL’S LICENSE AND PRODUCT DATA:
   A.   The pavement sealant professional must at all time when performing
pavement sealing within the City have in their possession, and present, upon
request from City staff, a current pavement sealant professional's license, an
MSDS sheet of the sealant being applied, and an invoice stating brand/type of
sealant being applied.
   B.   The failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Every day that such violation is permitted to exist, or is
maintained by the owner or occupant, shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any owner or occupant of property who permits a violation of section
3-28-3 of this chapter to exist or continue upon the property shall be subject
to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Every day that such violation is permitted to exist, or is
maintained by the owner or occupant, shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. O2022-05, 4-4-2022)
3-28-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of this chapter shall be January 1, 2023. (Ord. O2022-05, 4-
4-2022)
CHAPTER 29
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-29-1: Definitions
3-29-2: Contractor Registration Required
3-29-3: Application For Contractor Professional Registration
3-29-4: Issuance, Denial, Suspension, Renewal, And Revocation Of Contractor’s
Registration
3-29-5: Display Of Contractor’s Registration
3-29-6: Penalty
3-29-1: DEFINITIONS:
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
 
            Any person or company engaged in the business of constructing, altering,
CONTRACTOR: repairing or razing buildings or other structures within the City, including
            electrical, plumbing, roofing, mechanical and building activities for which a
            building permit is required.
REGISTERED  A holder of a contractor’s registration issued by the City of Warrenville, as
CONTRACTOR: well as the agents, employees and independent contractors of the registration.
 
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
3-29-2: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   No contractor may perform any work on any building without first
completing an annual registration with the City.
   B.   The annual contractor registration fee is set forth in the annual fee
ordinance. The registration fees and any other required fees must be paid prior
to the issuance of any registration.
   C.   The registration expires on December 31 of the calendar year for which
it is issued unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter.
   D.   A registration shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not
constitute property. The registration is not transferable, separate or
divisible. The registration is applicable only for the contractor listed on the
registration.
   E.   Compliance with applicable ordinances. It shall be the duty of the
contractor to comply with all laws, ordinances and regulations relating to any
contractor’s work performed in the city.
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
3-29-3: APPLICATION FOR CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
   A.   An application for a contractor registration must be submitted to the
Community Development Department. The application must be completed in full and
signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent of the
contractor, if not an individual, verified by oath or affidavit, and must
include the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application must list for each partner their
name, address, contact information, and interest, and all information required
by subsection A.2 of this section, and if the applicant is a corporation, the
application must list the name, address, and contact information of the
registered agent, and with respect to each director, and each shareholder
owning 10 percent or more of the corporation’s shares, a) their name and
address, together with b) the information required by subsection A.2.
      2.   Whether a registration was ever issued to the applicant pursuant to
this chapter or a contractor registration or similar registration has been
previously issued by any state or county, municipality or other unit of local
government, and if so, where and when, and if such registration has ever been
suspended or revoked and, if so, the reasons for the suspension or revocation.
      3.   If applicable, the location of the applicant’s office and garage or
storage yard.
      4.   Payment of the annual registration fee.
      5.   Contractor’s surety bond. Every person and entity engaged in
contractors work shall submit to the city a surety bond to guarantee the
contractor’s compliance with the City Code and other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the City of Warrenville, cosigned by a surety authorized by the
Illinois Department of Insurance to sell and issue sureties in the State of
Illinois, in the amounts listed on the annual fee ordinance. ; provided,
however, that no such surety bond shall be required in the event said applicant
has obtained a unified license and permit bond from DuPage County, in
accordance with the requirements of the Contractor Unified License and Permit
Bond Act, and has filed a certified copy of the unified bond with the city.
      6.   Certificates of insurance. Every contractor, except plumbers,
engaged in contractors work shall submit to the city a current certificate or
certificates of insurance issued by a company having at least a “B+/VII” rating
in “The Best Insurance Guide”, evidencing the following coverage in not less
than the following amounts:
         a.   Commercial general liability insurance: One million dollars
($1,000,000.00) each occurrence covering liability arising from premises,
operations, independent contractors, products completed operations, and
personal injury.
         b.   Workers’ compensation insurance: In the amounts and coverage
required by law.
         c.   The insurance requirement of this section shall not be applicable
to the plumbers who present a current State of Illinois plumbing contractor’s
license issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to the
Illinois Plumbing Licensing Law (PA 92-0338).
      7.   Plumbing requirements. Every contractor performing plumbing work
must submit to the city a copy of its State of Illinois Plumbing License
showing an expiration date not earlier than the expiration date of the
registration for which it is applying. Plumbers shall not be required to post a
surety bond or certificate of insurance unless state statute is amended to
permit the imposition of a surety bond and/or certificate of insurance.
      8.   Electrical requirements. Every electrical contractor must submit to
the city a copy of its electrical license certified from an established
commission or a certifying municipality showing an expiration date not earlier
than the expiration date of the registration for which it is applying.
      9.   Roofing requirements. Every roofing contractor must submit to the
city a certified copy of its State of Illinois roofing certificate showing an
expiration date not earlier than the expiration date of the registration for
which it is applying.
      10.   Contractor’s requirements for permit. Every person and entity
engaged in the contractor’s work shall be registered, bonded and insured in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter before a building permit will
be processed and approved by the City unless complying with these requirements
before commencing the work constitutes an imminent threat to public health and
safety, in which case the registration must be completed as soon as
practicable. In the event that a building permit is issued in error or a
contractor’s registration is suspended, revoked, expires or the contractor
fails to maintain at least the minimum insurance requirements under this title,
the City may issue a stop work order and suspend a building permit until such
time as there is compliance.
      11.   Homeowner’s license requirements. The provisions of this ordinance
do not require a homeowner to be registered as a contractor to, rehabilitate,
alter or repair the homeowner’s own home, but any non-homeowner who assists the
homeowner must register; provided, however, that any homeowner applying for new
home construction permit is considered to be a contractor for purposes of this
chapter and must comply with its provisions.
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
3-29-4: ISSUANCE, DENIAL, SUSPENSION, RENEWAL, AND REVOCATION OF CONTRACTOR’S
REGISTRATION:
   A.   In addition to the provisions under section 3-10-12, “Revocation or
Suspension of Licenses”, of this Code, the City Administrator, or their
designee, may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue or renew, a
contractor’s registration for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The contractor is found in violation of this chapter;
      2.   The contractor, if an individual; or any of the officers, directors,
any person owning directly or beneficially more than ten percent (10%) of the
stock of the corporation, if the contractor is a corporation; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the contractor is a partnership; and
the manager, assistant manager or any other person principally in charge of the
operation of the contractor’s business, has been:
         a.   Convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code relating
to their work as or for the contractor; or
         b.   Convicted of a violation of an ordinance of any other unit of
local government regulating contractors relating to their work as or for the
contractor; or
         c.   Denied, suspended or revoked of a contractor registration or
similar registration by the City or any other jurisdiction; or
         d.   Subjected to pending proceedings to suspend or revoke a
contractor registration or similar registration, including a license required
by the State, issued by the City or any other jurisdiction; or
         e.   Delinquent on making payment(s) to the City of fees, fines, or
penalties or other costs assessed against the contractor that are due and
owing; or
         f.   Provided false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in
the registration application or in any document required by the City in
conjunction with the registration application; or
         g.   Failed to provide information required by the City in conjunction
with the registration application.
   B.   In the event that the application is denied, revoked, or suspended for
failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or the other
requirements of Title 3, the City Administrator, or their designee, shall
notify the contractor in writing of the reasons for the denial, revocation, or
suspension. If the failure is not cured within ten (10) days after the date on
the notice, the application or registration shall be null and void or deemed
suspended for the duration listed on the notice.
   C.   No person whose registration has been revoked may apply for a
registration for a period of one year following the date of such revocation.
   D.   The renewal of a registration shall follow the same provisions required
for the issuance of a registration under this chapter.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, the provisions of
chapter 3-10 of this Code shall govern the issuance, renewal, denial,
suspension or revocation of this registration.
   F.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within Subsection A of this
section.
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
3-29-5: DISPLAY OF CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION AND PRODUCT DATA:
   The contractor must at all times when performing work for which a permit is
required within the City have in their possession, and present, upon request
from City staff a current contractor’s registration.
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
3-29-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Every day that such violation is permitted to exist, or is
maintained by the owner or occupant, shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any owner or occupant of property who permits a violation of section
3-28-3 of this chapter to exist or continue upon the property shall be subject
to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Every day that such violation is permitted to exist, or is
maintained by the owner or occupant, shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. O2024-04, 2-5-2024)
CHAPTER 30
DROP-OFF BINS
SECTION:
3-30-1: Definitions
3-30-2: Drop-Off Bin License Required
3-30-3: Application For Drop-Off Bin License
3-30-4: Operational Standards
3-30-5: Location Restrictions
3-30-6: Information And Label Requirements
3-30-7: Reporting Of Collected Goods
3-30-8: Issuance, Denial, Suspension, Renewal, And Revocation Of Drop-Off Bin
License
3-30-9: Penalty
3-30-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them below:
DROP-OFF BIN: A receptacle used to accept and temporarily store donations of
clothing, shoes, textiles, books and other personal property; provided,
however, trailers with personnel to accept donations are not drop-off bins.
LICENSEE: A holder of a Drop-off Bin License issued by the City of Warrenville.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, trust, firm, entity,
corporation, or limited liability company.
SITE HOST: The owner or lawful occupant of the property on which a drop-off bin
is located.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-2: DROP-OFF BIN LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required. No person may erect, place, maintain, or operate a
Drop-Off Bin outside and not entirely enclosed within an existing building in
the City without first obtaining a license issued by the City.
   B.   Fee. The fee for the drop-off bin license is set forth in the annual
fee ordinance. All applicable license fees and any other required fees must be
paid before the City will issue the license.
   C.   Term. The license expires on December 31 of the calendar year for which
it is issued unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter. Licenses must
be renewed annually.
   D.   Non-Transferable. A license is a purely personal privilege and may not
constitute or be deemed to be property. The license is not transferable,
separate or divisible, and the authority conferred by the license is conferred
only on the named licensee. Drop-off bins owned or operated by an entity for
the benefit of another entity require both entities to apply for and disclose
their relationship on the license application.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-3: APPLICATION FOR DROP-OFF BIN LICENSE:
   A.   Eligibility. Only the following persons are eligible to apply for and
obtain a drop-off bin license:
      1.   Public, tax-exempt charities under Section 501(c)(3) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code and in good standing with the State of Illinois,
and
      2.   Businesses in good standing with the State of Illinois.
   B.   Application Requirements. The applicant must supply the following
information as part of the application for a Drop-Off Bin license:
      1.   The name of the applicant and the beneficiary of the dropped-off
personal property. For example, for a drop-off bin that will be owned or
operated by one entity for the benefit of another entity, the application must
list both entities' names and a description of their relationship.
      2.   Evidence of eligibility as follows:
         a.   If the applicant claims to be a qualified nonprofit entity, (1) a
copy of the determination letter issued by the Internal Revenue Service stating
that the applicant is a public charity exempt under Internal Revenue Code
Section 501(c)(3), and (2) a certificate of good standing issued by the Office
of the Secretary of State of Illinois.
         b.   If the applicant is a business, a certificate of good standing
issued by the Office of the Secretary of State of Illinois. A certificate of
good standing must not be older than three (3) months at the time of
application for a license.
      3.   Name, address, email, and telephone number of contact person of the
applicant.
      4.   If the Site-Host is not the applicant, written consent from the Site
Host to place the Drop-Off Bin on the property, including name, address and
telephone number of the Site Host.
      5.   A drawing depicting the proposed location of the Drop-Off Bin on the
Site Host property, depicting the entire Site-Host property, drawn to scale,
with setback dimension(s) from the Drop-Off Bin to the nearest property line(s)
labeled.
      6.   A detail exhibit showing the appearance of each Drop-Off Bin
proposed including dimensions, height, material, color, and details of all
messaging and images on each face of the Drop-Off Bin.
      7.   A description of the applicant and any other entity involved in
operating the Drop-Off Bin.
      8.   A maintenance plan for regular inspection, emptying, and cleaning of
the Drop-Off Bin.
      9.   A certificate of insurance demonstrating that the Licensee has
general liability insurance coverage of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) covering licensee's Drop-off Bins within the City.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-4: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Drop-Off Bins must be constructed out of metal or other durable
material and fitted with a secure door, slot, or other opening suitable for
receiving the intended personal property items.
   B.   No more than one Drop-Off Bin may be placed on a Zoning Lot at any
time.
   C.   Drop-off Bins must be unmanned.
   D.   Drop-Off Bins may not exceed six and a half feet (6.5') in height and
one hundred (100) cubic feet in volume.
   E.   Drop-off Bins must be clearly labeled with the information required
pursuant to Section
3-30-5 of this Code.
   F.   Drop-Off Bins must be maintained in good condition, free from graffiti
and advertising, with no structural damage, holes, or visible rush. Regular
maintenance must include fresh paint, readable signage, and general upkeep.
Licensee must remove graffiti within seventy-two (72) hours after notice from
the City. If a Drop-Off Bin becomes damaged or vandalized, Licensee must
repair, replace, or remove the Drop-Off Bin within five days after notice of
such condition.
   G.   Drop-Off Bins must be emptied and serviced regularly. When served, all
items, whether inside the Drop-Off Bin or surrounding the Drop-Off-Bin, must be
removed and properly disposed. The area around the Drop-Off Bin must be kept
free from overflow collections, junk, debris, or other accumulation of items.
Licensee must empty and service the Drop-Off Bin within twenty-four (24) hours
after notice from the City that the Drop-Off Bin is overflowing.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Drop-Off Bins may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow.
   B.   Drop-Off Bins must be located on private property and must comply with
accessory structure set back standards set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance
for the Site-Host property.
   C.   Drop-Off Bins shall not be placed in a required accessible parking
space or in a location that reduces the number of parking spaces below the
minimum number required by the Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Drop-Off Bins shall not be placed within the sight triangle of any
intersection or access point.
   E.   Drop-Off Bins shall not impact required landscaping approved or
otherwise required by the City.
   F.   Drop-Off Bins shall not be located on property located in a residential
zoning district or used for a residential use.
   G.   Drop-Off Bins shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another Drop-Off Bin.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-6: INFORMATION AND LABEL REQUIREMENTS:
The front of every Drop-off Bin shall conspicuously display the following:
   A.   The name, address, telephone number and the Internet Web address of the
Owner and Operator the Bin.
   B.   A statement, in at least two-inch typeface, that either reads "This
collection bin is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization" or "This
collection bin is owned and operated by a for-profit organization.”
   C.   If the Drop-Off Bin is owned by a non-profit organization, the front of
the collection bin shall also conspicuously display a statement describing the
charitable causes that will bene?t from the donations or a QR code to access
such information.
   D.   If the Drop-Off Bin is owned by a for-profit company, the front of the
collection bin shall conspicuously display a statement that reads "[name of
company] is a for-profit company, deposits are not tax deductible".
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-7: REPORTING OF COLLECTED GOODS:
   The Licensee must report the total number of tons of goods diverted from the
municipal waste stream in the City. Such reporting should be done annually by
letter or e-mail to the Community and Economic Development Director.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-8: ISSUANCE, DENIAL, SUSPENSION, RENEWAL, AND REVOCATION OF DROP-OFF BIN
LICENSE:
   All Drop-Off Bin Licenses are subject to the provisions set forth in section
3-10-12, "Revocation or Suspension of Licenses", of this Code and the
additional provisions set forth in this section. If there is a conflict between
the provisions of this section and section
3-10-12, the provisions of this section control.
   A.   The City Administrator, or their designee, may deny, suspend, revoke,
or refuse to issue or renew, a Drop-Off Bin License for any of the following
reasons, in addition to the reasons set forth in Section
3-10-10 of this Code:
      1.   The applicant or licensee is or has been found in violation of this
chapter;
      2.   The applicant or licensee is overdue on payment to the City of fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against the licensee or imposed upon the licensee
in relation to the location and operation of a Drop-Off Bin;
      3.   The applicant or licensee provides false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of fact in the license application or in any document required by
the City in conjunction with the license application; or
      4.   The applicant fails to provide information required by the City in
conjunction with the license application.
   B.   In the event that the application is denied, revoked, suspended, or a
renewal is refused in accordance with this Section, the City Administrator, or
their designee, shall, within a reasonable timeframe, notify the applicant or
licensee, as applicable, in writing of the reasons for the denial, revocation,
suspension, or refusal to renew. If the reason is not cured within ten (10)
days after the date on which the City Administrator issued the notice, the
application or license, as applicable, shall be null and void.
   C.   No person whose license has been revoked may apply for another drop-off
bin license for any location within the City for a period of one year following
the date of such revocation.
   D.   The renewal of a license shall follow the same provisions required for
the issuance of a license under this chapter.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, the provisions of Article
3, Chapter 10 of this Code shall govern the issuance, renewal, denial,
suspension or revocation of Drop-Off Bin licenses.
   F.   The owner or operator of the Drop-Off Bin must remove the Drop-Off Bin
from the Site Host property with ten (10) days after notice that the license
for that bin has been revoked or not renewed.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
3-30-9: PENALTY:
   A.   In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by law, any
Licensee that violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a
penalty for each violation.
   B.   If a Licensee is found to have violated the one or more provisions of
this Chapter, on more than three separate occasions in a single calendar year,
the Licensee shall, in addition to any other penalties set forth in this
Section or otherwise available to the City, be deemed ineligible to obtain a
Drop-Off Bin license for a period of five (5) years.
   C.   The City may remove and discard of Drop-Off Bins and any personal
property contained within or piled around the bin upon thirty (30) days'
advance notice to the owner or operator when:
      1.   The license for the bin has expired, been revoked, or refused to be
renewed and the owner or operator has not removed the bin in accordance with
this Chapter;
      2.   The Drop-Off Bin has found to be operated or maintained in violation
of this Chapter and the owner or operator has not corrected the violation
within thirty (30) days after notice of such violation; or
      3.   The Drop-Off Bin was installed without a license issued by the City.
(Ord. O2025-33, 8-4-2025)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Department Created
4-1-2: Chief Of Police
4-1-3: Duties Of Members
4-1-4: Serving Processes
4-1-5: Witness Fees
4-1-6: Auxiliary Policemen
4-1-7: Part Time Police
4-1-8: Table Of Organization By Rank
4-1-9: Reserved
4-1-10: Procedure Manual, Adoption
4-1-11: Accidental Injury To Or Death Of A Policeman (Rep. by Ord. 2594, 7-6-
2010)
4-1-12: Deputy Chief Of Police
4-1-13: Commanders (Rep. by Ord. 2557, 12-21-2009)
4-1-14: Fingerprint Fee
4-1-15: Booking Fee
4-1-16: Sex Offender And Sexual Predator Registration Fee
4-1-17: Violent Offenders Against Youth Registration Fee
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department for the city and the office of
chief of police. The department shall consist of the chief of police, who shall
be in charge of the department, and such other members and officers as may be
provided for from time to time by the city council. The chief of police shall
be appointed by the mayor and city council acting jointly and shall report to
the city administrator. The compensation paid to the chief of police and other
members of the department shall be fixed by the city council.
Appointments of sworn officers of the department shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the Board of Fire and Police Commission regulations set
forth in Chapter 1 of Title 2 of this Code, except the exempt positions of
chief of police and deputy chief of police.
Changes in rank of sworn officers of the department shall be made by the Board
of Fire and Police Commission upon the recommendation of the chief of police.
Appointments and changes in position or title of non-sworn staff shall be made
upon the recommendation of the chief of police and the approval of the city
administrator.
The appointment of deputy chief(s) of police shall be made in accordance with
Section
4-1-12 of this Code.
The appointment of the chief of police shall be made in accordance with Section
4-1-2 of this Code. (Ord. 2337, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. O2023-08, 4-3-2023)
4-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Duties: The chief of police shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of the department as may be required by
statute or ordinance and shall submit the reports to the city administrator.
The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance and functions of
the department. All sworn members of the department shall serve subject to the
orders of the chief of police. The chief of police shall be the keeper of the
city jail, shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein, and shall
perform such other duties as may be directed by the city administrator or by
the city council.
   B.   Employment Outside Of Department: Any outside employment or business
interests that do not interfere or conflict with the efficiency of the chief of
police is permitted. Written approval for such outside employment or business
interest must be first secured from the mayor and city administrator.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The chief of police may make or prescribe rules,
regulations and policies for the guidance of the members of the department.
Such policies, rules and regulations shall be binding on all members of the
department. (Ord. 2969, 12-21-2015)
4-1-3: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of all ordinances of the city, and all statutes effective in the
city, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest
violators thereof 1 . Every member of the police department is hereby declared
to be a conservator of the peace.
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner, on and off duty, and to avoid the
use of unnecessary force. (Ord. 29, 4-29-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-9-4.
4-1-4: SERVING PROCESSES:
The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summons and other
processes, but no other member of the force shall serve any such summons or
process except on the order of the chief of police. (Ord. 29, 4-29-1968)
4-1-5: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a city ordinance or of a state
or federal law, but no such member shall receive any witness fee for such
services in any action or suit to which the city is a party; all fees due for
such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the city finance director. A
member of the police department appearing as a witness on behalf of the city
shall be considered to be on duty during the time involved. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-
2003)
4-1-6: AUXILIARY POLICEMEN:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities, may
appoint auxiliary policemen in such manner as the corporate authorities shall
from time to time deem necessary.
Such auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular police department
of the city and shall have those powers set forth in and shall be subject to
provisions of the Illinois municipal code 1 . (Ord. 444, 7-16-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-20.
4-1-7: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint not more than ten
(10) part time police officers. The chief of police shall have full authority
to discipline or discharge part time police officers. Part time police officers
shall be at will employees and may be discharged with or without cause by the
chief of police at any time. Part time police officers shall be subject to the
direction and control of the chief of police at all times during the
performance of their duties. Part time police officers shall further abide by
all rules, regulations, policies and general orders of the Warrenville police
department, as promulgated from time to time. (Ord. 1487, 5-20-1996)
   B.   Hiring standards for part time police officers shall be as follows:
      1.   An applicant for the position of part time police officer must have
reached twenty one (21) years of age and possess a high school diploma or its
equivalent and pass a physical exam, a psychological exam, and other exams as
directed by the chief of police to determine fitness for duty. The applicant
must also submit to a preemployment background check, which includes a
fingerprint check through the Illinois state police and the federal bureau of
investigation.
      2.   A person hired to serve as a part time police officer must obtain
from the Illinois law enforcement training standards board a certificate: a)
attesting to his or her successful completion of the part time police training
course; b) attesting to his or her satisfactory completion of a training
program of similar content and number of hours that has been found acceptable
by the board; or c) attesting to the board's determination that the part time
police training course is unnecessary because of the person's extensive prior
law enforcement experience. A person hired on or after January 1, 1996, must
obtain this certificate within eighteen (18) months after the date of hire.
      3.   A person hired to serve as a part time police officer shall have a
valid Illinois driver's license. (Ord. 2710, 4-16-2012)
   C.   Part time police officers shall be members of the regular police
department, except for pension purposes. Part time police officers shall not be
assigned under any circumstances to supervise or direct full time police
officers of the police department. Part time police officers shall not be used
as permanent replacements for permanent full time police officers.
   D.   Part time police officers shall be trained under the intergovernmental
law enforcement officer's in-service training act 1 , in accordance with the
procedures for part time police officers established by the Illinois law
enforcement training standards board. A part time police officer hired after
January 1, 1996, who has not yet received certification under section 8.2 of
the Illinois police training act shall be directly supervised. (Ord. 1487, 5-
20-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 720/1 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended.
4-1-8: TABLE OF ORGANIZATION BY RANK:
   A.   Position, Chief Of Police: One. (Ord. 2216, 6-6-2005)
   B.   Position, Deputy Chief Of Police: Two (2). (Ord. 2557, 12-21-2009)
   C.   Position, Sergeant: Maximum number of sergeants within the city police
department shall be nine (9). Three (3) sergeant positions shall be held by the
following appointed positions: chief of police, two (2) deputy chiefs. (Ord.
2591, 6-21-2010)
   D.   Position, Patrol/Investigative Officer: Maximum number of patrol/
investigative officers within the city police department shall be twenty one
(21). (Ord. 2248, 11-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2557, 12-21-2009)
   E.   Position, Auxiliary Officer: Maximum number of auxiliary officers
within the city police department may be twelve (12), with one of those
officers acting as auxiliary sergeant.
   F.   Position, Part Time Police Officer: Maximum number of part time police
officers within the city police department shall be ten (10). (Ord. 2216, 6-6-
2005; amd. Ord. 2557, 12-21-2009)
   G.   Position, Temporary Patrol Officer: Maximum number of temporary patrol
officers within the city police department shall be zero. (Ord. 2893, 10-20-
2014)
4-1-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
4-1-10: PROCEDURE MANUAL, ADOPTION:
The "Rules And Procedure Manual" for the police department, submitted by the
chief of police, dated December 21, 1981, consisting of twenty four (24) pages,
is hereby adopted by the city council, and the same is hereby binding upon the
personnel of the said police department. (Ord. 602, 3-1-1982; amd. Ord. 1487,
5-20-1996)
4-1-11: ACCIDENTAL INJURY TO OR DEATH OF A POLICEMAN:
(Rep. by Ord. 2594, 7-6-2010)
4-1-12: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   There is hereby established an appointed position of deputy chief
within the police department of the city. The position shall be an exempt rank
immediately below that of chief and shall not be subject to promotional
processes used only for ranking positions. (Ord. 2591, 6-21-2010)
   B.   To be eligible for appointment to the position of deputy chief, an
individual must be a sworn, full time officer in the city of Warrenville police
department with at least five (5) years of full time service as a police
officer for the city.
   C.   The deputy chief shall be appointed by the chief of police and shall
serve at the discretion of the chief with no set term, and if removed from the
position by the chief of police, shall revert to the rank held immediately
prior to appointment to the deputy chief position.
   D.   The deputy chief shall report directly to the chief of police and shall
take orders from the chief of police as directed. The nature of the duties,
work assignments, projects and other responsibilities for the deputy chief
shall be determined by the chief of police.
   E.   The deputy chief shall be eligible to receive benefits in accordance
with the regular and usual benefits provided by the city to other personnel.
   F.   The appointive position of deputy chief shall be an exempt position
under both the fair labor standards act and the Illinois public labor relations
act. (Ord. 1978, 5-6-2002)
4-1-13: COMMANDERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2557, 12-21-2009)
4-1-14: FINGERPRINT FEE:
Whenever the police department is requested or required to fingerprint an
individual, the fee for such service shall be as follows:
 
Residents Nonresidents
$15.00    $25.00
 
(Ord. 2325, 9-5-2006)
4-1-15: BOOKING FEE:
   A.   The police department shall charge a booking fee for all legal process,
arrests, civil and criminal offenses. The amount of the booking fee shall be
thirty dollars ($30.00).
   B.   In the event the arrestee is acquitted or the case is dismissed, the
fee shall be refunded within thirty (30) days of the arrestee's written request
to the police department for such refund. The chief of police shall develop a
procedure for persons not convicted to request a refund of the fee which
procedure shall be in writing and provided to all persons arrested. (Ord. 2876,
8-18-2014)
4-1-16: SEX OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR REGISTRATION FEE:
   A.   Every sex offender or sexual predator, as those terms are defined in
730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/2 et seq., who either: 1) resides in or 2)
is employed in or 3) attends an institution of higher learning in the city of
Warrenville shall register with the Warrenville chief of police as required by
law. The sex offender or sexual predator shall pay a one hundred dollar
($100.00) initial registration fee and a one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual
registration renewal fee to the Warrenville chief of police. The chief of
police may waive the registration fee if the chief of police determines that
the person is indigent and unable to pay the registration fee.
   B.   Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be distributed in the
manner provided by law. The chief of police shall establish procedures to
document the receipt and remittance of the one hundred dollar ($100.00) initial
registration fee and one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual renewal fee. (Ord.
2860, 7-7-2014)
4-1-17: VIOLENT OFFENDERS AGAINST YOUTH REGISTRATION FEE:
   A.   Every violent offender against youth, as that term is defined in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 154/5 et seq., who either: 1) resides in or 2) is
employed in or 3) attends an institution of higher learning in the city of
Warrenville shall register with the Warrenville chief of police as required by
law. The violent offender against youth shall pay a twenty dollar ($20.00)
initial registration fee and a ten dollar ($10.00) annual registration renewal
fee to the Warrenville chief of police. The chief of police may waive the
registration fee if the chief of police determines that the person is indigent
and unable to pay the registration fee.
   B.   Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the
murderer and violent offender against youth registration fund. The fees shall
be used by the chief of police for official police department purposes. The
chief of police shall establish procedures to document receipt and use of the
funds. (Ord. 2860, 7-7-2014)
CHAPTER 2
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Declaration Of Civil Emergency
4-2-3: Orders By The Mayor
4-2-4: Notice
4-2-5: Duration; Extension; Termination
4-2-6: Violations; Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, the definitions set forth in the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act, as amended [20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.], shall be applicable unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
 
                 A "Disaster" as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management
                 Agency Act, as amended. Specifically, and without limitation
CIVIL EMERGENCY: of the foregoing, a "civil emergency" includes the appearance
                 of a novel or previously controlled or eradicated infectious
                 agent or biological toxin. (Ord. O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
 
4-2-2: DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY:
Pursuant to the authority granted by State law including, without limitation,
Section
11-1-6  of the Illinois Municipal Code, and the City's home rule authority,
whenever the Mayor determines that a civil emergency exists in the City, the
Mayor shall have the extraordinary power and authority to exercise by executive
order all such powers of the corporate authorities and other officers of the
City as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to eliminate or minimize the
dangers arising from such civil emergency and for the protection of the health,
safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however, that prior to
exercising any such extraordinary power and authority, the Mayor shall have
executed under oath a written declaration of civil emergency containing the
following:
   A.   An express declaration that a civil emergency exists; and
   B.   A statement of facts known to the Mayor, either directly or upon
information and belief, which describes the nature of the civil emergency and
substantiates the finding that a civil emergency exists.
Unless expressly stated otherwise, a declaration issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall be considered a local disaster declaration made pursuant to
Section 11 of the Emergency Management Agency Act. (Ord. O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
4-2-3: ORDERS BY THE MAYOR:
The Mayor may, upon the issuance of a declaration of civil emergency in
accordance with Section
4-2-2 , issue orders to implement any or all of the following:
   A.   The imposition of a curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the
City or to the City as a whole, as deemed advisable by the Mayor, and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed necessary by the
Mayor in the interest of the public safety and welfare;
   B.   The discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away of gasoline
or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   C.   The closure of any business establishment anywhere within the City for
the period of civil emergency, including, without limitation, businesses
selling intoxicating liquors, gasoline, or firearms;
   D.   The closure any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas to
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic;
   E.   The calling upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations without or within the City to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the City;
   F.   The authorization of the Mayor, the City Administrator, or the
Emergency Management Coordinator to enter into contracts for the procurement of
supplies and services necessary to address the civil emergency that would
normally require the approval of the full City Council;
   G.   The incurrence of obligations, the appropriation of funds, and the
provision of emergency assistance reasonably necessary to respond to or
mitigate the civil emergency;
   H.   The prohibition of increases in the prices of goods and services sold
within the City; and
   I.   Any other actions reasonably necessary to address the civil emergency
and protect life and property. (Ord. O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
4-2-4: NOTICE:
A declaration of civil emergency shall be: (i) filed with the City Clerk as
soon as practicable; (ii) promptly disseminated to the news media; and (iii)
promptly posted at the City Hall, the post office, and on the City's social
media pages and website. (Ord. O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
4-2-5: TERM; EXTENSION; TERMINATION:
   A.   Term: A declaration of civil emergency shall expire and automatically
terminate, if not extended pursuant to subsection B of this section, not later
than: (i) the adjournment of the first regular or special meeting of the City
Council; or (ii) seven days after the declaration is issued, whichever occurs
first.
   B.   Extension: The City Council may by motion extend the initial duration
of a declaration of civil emergency and any orders issued by the Mayor in
connection therewith. The extension shall be for the duration necessary and in
the best interest of the City and the public to address the continuing civil
emergency as determined by the City Council.
   C.   Termination by the Mayor: A declaration of civil emergency may be
otherwise terminated at any time in writing and executed by the Mayor. (Ord.
O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
4-2-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any executive order
issued pursuant this Chapter, shall be guilty of an offense against the City
and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in the general penalty provisions
of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this code. (Ord. O2020-15, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Disorderly Conduct And Loitering
4-3-2: Offenses Concerning Liquor
4-3-3: Vandalism, Parental Responsibility
4-3-4: Damage And Trespass To Property
4-3-5: Reserved
4-3-6: Sale Or Display Of Harmful Materials To Minors
4-3-7: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited In City Parks
4-3-8: Hunting Prohibited Within City Limits
4-3-9: Curfew
4-3-10: Graffiti Prohibited
4-3-11: Littering Prohibited
4-3-12: Fuel Combustion In Garages Prohibited
4-3-13: Offenses Related To Drugs
4-3-14: School Curfew
4-3-15: Theft
4-3-16: Retail Theft
4-3-17: Drug Paraphernalia Control
4-3-18: Video Gaming And Sweepstakes Machines Prohibited
4-3-19: Synthetic Alternative Drugs
4-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND LOITERING:
   A.   Disorderly Conduct: No person shall commit disorderly conduct in the
City. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
      1.   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or
aid in making a breach of the peace;
      2.   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture
or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger
of a breach of the peace or imminent threat of violence;
      3.   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent
threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to
protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that
said conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be
time;
      4.   Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him
to be a police officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
      5.   Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace;
      6.   Goes about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways, except as
provided for by ordinance or upon lawful authority of the City 1 ;
      7.   Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of
law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapon, or conceals said weapon on or about the person or
vehicle;
      8.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any primary or secondary school building while school is in
session, or one-half (1/2) hour before the school is in session or one-half (1/
2) hour after the school session has been concluded, provided that this
subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a
labor dispute;
      9.   Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while
services are being conducted, or one- half (1/2) hour before services are to be
conducted, or one- half (1/2) hour after services have been concluded, provided
that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church,
temple, synagogue or other place of worship involved in a labor dispute;
      10.   Defaces or destroys or threatens to deface or destroy property,
either public or private;
      11.   By voice or by other means makes noise at such place, at such
times, and under such circumstances, to a degree offensive to those nearby;
(Ord. 172, 5-20-1974)
      12.   Knowingly resists or obstructs a police officer from performing any
authorized act within his official capacity; (Ord. 1279, 10-4-1993)
      13.   Engages in fighting in a public place;
      14.   Discharges a firearm within the corporate boundaries of the city;
      15.   Commits an assault upon another person by engaging in conduct,
without lawful authority, which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery;
      16.   Commits a battery upon another person, by intentionally or
knowingly, without legal justification and by any means: a) causing bodily harm
to another individual, or b) making physical contact of an insulting or
provoking nature with another individual; (Ord. 1380, 3-20-1995)
      17.   Brandishes, carries or transports any toy firearm, toy cannon, air
rifle, air gun, or air pistol or any object or instrument that is
indistinguishable from a real firearm that expels projectiles, whether by air,
spring, explosive substance, or other force, or any gun of like character made,
constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable person, the object would appear
to be a real firearm, except upon premises used by a designated shooting
gallery, gun club or rifle club. (Ord. 2561, 1-4-2010)
   B.   Loitering: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander,
stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place
in such manner as to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
or
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon, facing or fronting on any
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and
regress, therein, thereon and thereto. (Ord. 172, 5-20-1974)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
4-3-2: OFFENSES CONCERNING LIQUOR:
   A.   Intoxication: No person shall appear in any street, highway or public
place in the city manifestly under the influence of alcoholic beverages to the
degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property. (Ord. 1047,
8-7-1989)
   B.   Public Drinking Of Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be unlawful for any
person to drink any alcoholic beverage on any street, highway or public place
or in or about any motor vehicle upon any street, highway or public place in
the city.
   C.   Transportation Of Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be unlawful for any
person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic beverage in the
passenger area of any motor vehicle upon any street, highway or public place in
the city except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 171,
5-20-1974)
4-3-3: VANDALISM, PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Definitions:
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by
a circuit court of this state or a court of foreign jurisdiction, but does not
include a person appointed, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois
juvenile act 1 , or person given custody for school purposes only known as a
"school guardian".
   MINOR: A person who is eleven (11) years of age, but not nineteen (19) years
of age.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, municipality,
school district or library district.
   PROPERTY OF ANOTHER: Any and all real estate, including improvements
thereon, and any and all personalty, tangible or intangible, in which the
offender has no interest therein.
   B.   Offenses: No person, including a minor, shall, within the corporate
limits of the city:
      1.   Knowingly damage any property of another person without his consent;
or
      2.   Knowingly and wilfully, by means of fire or explosive, damage any
property of another person; or
      3.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another person without his
consent;
      4.   Knowingly place graffiti on public or private property in violation
of section
4-3-10 of this chapter; or
      5.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in a building of another person
without his consent any stink bomb or other offensive smelling compound and
thereby intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
(Ord. 1553, 12-16-1996)
   C.   Penalty: Whoever commits any of the heretofore stated acts shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1553, 12-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1894, 1-15-2001)
   D.   Restitution By Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Children: The parent
or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides with such
parent or legal guardian shall be liable for actual damages for the wilful or
malicious acts of such a minor which cause injury to a person or property.
However, no recovery under this section may exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each person injured or for each occurrence of such wilful or
malicious acts by the minor causing injury in addition to court costs.
   E.   Court Proceedings In All Court Proceedings Under Subsection D: The
Illinois civil practice act shall apply, and all actions shall be brought on
behalf of the city and through the attorney for the city, and all damages shall
be payable to the person or persons who have suffered actual damages. (Ord.
1553, 12-16-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
4-3-4: DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Damage To Property:
      1.   Damage To Property Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
         a.   Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
         b.   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damage property of
another;
         c.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his
consent; or
         d.   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his
consent; or
         e.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another
without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or buildings;
or
         f.   Damage any property, with intent to defraud an insurer; or
         g.   Knowingly damage the property of another without his consent by
defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or
any other similar substance.
      2.   Damage Of Firefighting Apparatus, Hydrants Or Equipment Prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously cut, injure,
damage, tamper with or destroy or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose or
any fire engine or other public or private firefighting equipment, or any
apparatus appertaining to such equipment, or intentionally open any fire
hydrant without proper authorization.
   B.   Trespass To Property:
      1.   Trespassing Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit a trespass within the corporate limits of the city.
      2.   Trespass Defined: Without constituting any limitation upon the
provisions of this subsection, any of the following acts by any person shall be
deemed included among those that constitute trespass:
         a.   Entry Into Vehicles Without Consent: Any person who knowingly and
without authority enters any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part
thereof, of another without the owner's consent shall be guilty of trespassing.
         b.   Entry Into Buildings Or On Land; Remaining On Land After Notice
To Leave: Any person who knowingly enters upon the building or land or any part
thereof of another after receiving notice from the owner, occupant or person in
charge of such building or land, or a peace officer that the entry is
forbidden, or who remains upon the land of another after receiving notice to
depart, shall be guilty of trespassing.
   C.   Penalty: A person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 536, 9-15-1980; amd. Ord. 1894, 1-15-2001)
4-3-5: RESERVED:  
(Ord. O2019-42, 8-5-2019)
4-3-6: SALE OR DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATERIALS TO MINORS:
   A.   Elements Of The Offense: A person who, with knowledge that a person is
a child, that is, a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or who fails to
exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly
distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to, or offers to
distribute or exhibit any harmful material to a child, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   Definitions:
   DISTRIBUTE: Means to transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
   HARMFUL: Material is "harmful" if, to the average person, applying
contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is material the redeeming
social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
   KNOWINGLY: As used in this section, means having knowledge of the contents
of the subject matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection
which would have disclosed the contents thereof.
   MATERIAL: As used in this section, means any writing, picture, record or
other representation or embodiment.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence: The predominant appeal to prurient interest
of the material shall be judged with reference to average children of the same
general age of the child to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent
or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is
designed for specially susceptible groups, in which case the predominant appeal
of the material shall be judged with reference to its intended or probable
recipient group.
In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production,
presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate the
material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal,
such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the material and can
justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is
in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal. (Ord. 1897, 3-5-2001)
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
   E.   Affirmative Defenses:
      1.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any
library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under eighteen (18) years of age,
provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational
purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a
violation of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of
legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his child any harmful material.
      3.   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted in reliance
upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a child, shall be a
defense to any prosecution under this section: A document issued by the Federal
government or any state, county or municipal government or subdivision or
agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's
license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service
Act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
      4.   In the event an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminates in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child, under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his employees or agents, as where the order or request
for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, or similar means
of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the child was by
mail, freight, or similar means of transport, it shall be a defense in any
prosecution for a violation of this section that the advertisement contained
the following statement, or a statement substantially similar thereto, and that
the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he was not under eighteen
(18) years of age and that the purchaser falsely stated that he was not under
eighteen (18) years of age:
NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase the
matter herein advertised.
   F.   Child Falsifying Age: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who
falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of
eighteen (18) years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of
age and identity which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of
ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure
or view any harmful material, is guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord.
1897, 3-5-2001)
4-3-7: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS:
Possession and/or use of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all City parks
and shall be a violation of this chapter, except that the City, pursuant to 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-15, reserves the right to allow the delivery and
sale of beer or wine at City sponsored functions. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
4-3-8: HUNTING PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to: 1) discharge a firearm within
the City limits for the purpose of taking any animal, or 2) hunt with a gun or
dog or bow and arrow within the City limits, or 3) allow a dog to hunt within
the City limits. (Ord. 1174, 10-21-1991; amd. Ord. 1897, 3-5-2001)
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1174, 10-21-1991; amd. Ord. 1897, 3-5-2001)
4-3-9: CURFEW:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age
to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway at the following times:
      1.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday.
      2.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday.
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   B.   It is a defense to a violation under this section that the minor
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      1.   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age approved
by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
      3.   Participating or returning from:
         a.   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than eighteen (18) years of age to perform;
         b.   A school recreational activity;
         c.   A religious event;
         d.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         e.   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article 1, sections 3, 4, and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois,
or both;
         f.   An activity conducted by a not for profit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training or other care under the
supervision of one or more adults.
   C.   Before issuing a citation or making an arrest for violating the curfew
ordinance, a police officer shall inquire into a minor's reasons for being in a
public place during curfew hours, and the officer may issue a citation or make
an arrest only if the officer reasonably believes that the person has violated
this section and that no defenses apply.
   D.   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection A of
this section. (Ord. 2132, 4-19-2004)
4-3-10: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "graffiti" shall be defined
as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial work diagram, sketch,
picture or letter placed, without the express, written permission of the owner,
upon the real or personal property of said owner.
   B.   Property Owner's Responsibility: Graffiti in public view is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the
existence of graffiti in public view on any property under his control. The
property owner shall cause any graffiti located on his property to be removed
within seventy two (72) hours after notice from the city to remove such
graffiti. In addition to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, the chief of police, or such other person as may be
authorized, shall be empowered to cause the abatement of any such nuisance
existing in the city, and the cost of such abatement shall be borne by the
property owner.
   C.   Graffiti On Property Of Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place graffiti upon the real or personal, public or private property of
another.
   D.   Sign Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or
occupant of fixed real or personal property which is in public view to place or
give permission for the placement of any graffiti on such property without
having first obtained a properly issued sign permit.
   E.   Possession Of Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person to
possess, while in any public building or public facility or while on private
property, a spray paint container, paint, ink, marking pen which contains a
nonwater soluble fluid, brush, applicator, or any other material for marking,
scratching, or etching with the intent to use such material in violation of
subsection C or D of this section. (Ord. 1553, 12-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1897, 3-5-
2001)
4-3-11: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Littering: No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any street,
alley, park or other public property any litter, unless the litter is placed
into a receptacle intended for the deposit of litter. As used in this section,
"litter" means any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. "Litter"
may include, but is not limited to, any placard, handbill, circular, garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other
packaging, construction material, abandoned vehicle (as defined in the Illinois
vehicle code), motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal,
any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of
improperly.
   B.   Depositing Materials: No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited
refuse, garbage, junk or compostable materials on the property of another
without their permission, including deposit inside containers, dumpsters, trash
cans or barrels intended for the deposit of those items by occupants of the
property. (Ord. 2008, 8-19-2002)
4-3-12: FUEL COMBUSTION IN GARAGES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Combustion Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
continuously combust any fuel within the confines of an attached garage or
other unventilated structure attached to a two-family or multi-family dwelling
unit, including the operation of cooking grills therein. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, with respect to combustible fuel powered vehicles or machinery, it
shall be unlawful for any person to run such vehicles or machinery within the
confines of an attached garage or other unventilated structure attached to a
two-family or multi-family dwelling unit for more than one minute.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2102, 12-1-2003)
4-3-13: OFFENSES RELATED TO DRUGS:
   A.   Inhaling, Drinking Or Possessing Certain Substances: No person shall
inhale, breathe, drink, or possess with the intent to inhale, any compound,
liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone,
toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, trichloroethane, isopropanol,
methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone or any other
substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation,
dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to change, distort
or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this
section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated
condition. In addition, for the purpose of this section, the possession of any
item altered so as to facilitate the inhalation of such substance, or the
possession of any other item or device designed to enable the inhalation of
such substance shall create a rebuttable presumption of intent to inhale said
substance. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
      1.   Any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or
substances pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician,
surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
      2.   Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise in any manner
uses any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or substance or
combination thereof, which material is defined by and the use of which is
prohibited or regulated by any law of this state.
   B.   Inhaling, Drinking Or Possessing Alcoholic Substances By Minors: Except
as otherwise provided by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years old to drink, inhale, use or possess any
alcoholic substance. For the purposes of this subsection B the term "alcoholic
substance" shall mean alcoholic liquor, "palcohol" or smoking alcohol, as
defined in
title 3, chapter 2 of this code.
   C.   Sale Of Certain Substances: No person shall knowingly sell or offer for
sale, deliver or give away to any person any substance containing any of the
following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or
has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose of
inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or
mental processes: toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl
acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone or any other substance which
will induce symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or
mental processes.
   D.   Possession Of Cannabis:
      1.   Cannabis Defined: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other
substances that are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa and including derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains
of cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of the plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced cannabinol
derivatives, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction; however,
cannabis does not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from
the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted from it), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” does not
include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp
Act. “Cannabis” also means concentrate and cannabis-infused products.
      2.   Possession Unlawful:
         a.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person
knowingly to possess, consume, use, purchase, obtain, transport, or sell any
quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except in compliance with the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq. or the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq, as each may be
amended.
         b.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly
to use or consume, or allow someone else to use or consume, cannabis on the
premises of any privately owned commercial facility that is open to members of
the general public, including, without limitation, retail stores, restaurants,
taverns, theatres, and other recreational facilities, except as otherwise
specifically permitted pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act and the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
         c.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to smoke
cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the Smoke Free
Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
   E.   Responsibility Of Parents And Owners Of Residences: It shall be
unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any person
under nineteen (19) years of age, of whom he or she may be the parent or
guardian to violate any provision of this section.
   F.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day on
which the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
satisfaction of the penalty, records relating to the violation shall be
expunged in the manner provided by law. (Ord. O2017-24, 5-1-2017; amd. Ord.
O2017-75, 12-4-2017; Ord. O2019-65, 12-16-2019)
4-3-14: SCHOOL CURFEW:
   A.   School Curfew Established: It shall be unlawful for any person between
the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16) years, or any person who is under the
age of seven (7) or who is seventeen (17) years old and who is enrolled in any
public, private or parochial school, to be present at, in or upon, within the
corporate limits of the City, any place other than school, during any time when
school is in session during the regular school term, unless that person is:
      1.   Engaged in school related activities with prior approval of school
authorities or as otherwise authorized by written school policy; or
      2.   Engaged in personal business, including, but not limited to,
employment, medical care or religious activities, with prior notice thereof
from a parent or legal guardian to school authorities.
   B.   Investigatory Detention: Any police officer may stop and detain a
person whom the police officer reasonably suspects to be violating this section
for the purposes of verifying the detained person's identity, age, school
enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall
immediately inform the detained person of the reason for the detention and that
the detained person will be released on verification of authorization to be
absent from school. If the detained person refuses to provide the police
officer with the necessary information, or if authorization to be absent from
school cannot be verified within fifteen (15) minutes after the detention, then
the detained person shall be taken to school authorities, if practicable, or to
a parent, legal guardian or other responsible person having lawful custody or
supervision of such person.
   C.   First And Subsequent Violations: Any person who violates this section
shall be warned by the police officer to comply forthwith with the provisions
of this section. Such police officer shall cause written notice to be served on
the parent, legal guardian or other adult having lawful custody or supervision
of such person, setting forth the manner in which this section has been
violated. If any person, after receiving such a warning, shall again violate
any of the provisions of this section, then that person shall be subject to the
penalty provided in this Code.
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion to knowingly permit a person in his or
her custody or control to violate subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2192, 2-
7-2005)
   E.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
4-3-15: THEFT:
   A.   Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit theft.
   B.   Theft Defined: A person commits theft when he knowingly:
      1.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
or
      2.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
      3.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
      4.   Obtains control of stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen; and
         a.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
         b.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         c.   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (Ord. 2192, 2-7-2005)
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A citation for theft of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
or less may be enforced through administrative adjudication. (Ord. O2017-75,
12-4-2017)
4-3-16: RETAIL THEFT:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this
section, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them below:
   CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some
notice of its presence, the merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
   FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
   MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
   MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such
retail mercantile establishment.
   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
   SHOPPING CARTS: Pushcarts of the type or types that are commonly provided by
grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile establishments for the
use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and,
incidentally, from the store to a place outside the store.
   UNDERRING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to
reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   B.   Retail Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit retail theft. A person
commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be
carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining
such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
      2.   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      4.   Underrings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
      5.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
      6.   Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange
for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
      7.   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in the retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. (Ord.
2192, 2-7-2005)
   C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A citation for retail theft of one hundred dollars
($100.00) or less may be enforced through administrative adjudication. (Ord.
O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
4-3-17: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CONTROL:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this
section, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them below unless the context
otherwise requires:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in subsection
4-3-13D1 of this chapter.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/
102.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to or marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., or the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/102. It
includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits peculiar to or marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices peculiar to or marketed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      3.   Testing equipment peculiar to or marketed for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to or marketed for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects peculiar to or marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
         a.   Water pipes;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         e.   Carburetor pipes;
         f.   Electric pipes;
         g.   Air driven pipes;
         h.   Chillums;
         i.   Bongs; or ice pipes or chillers; or
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section.
   B.   Sale Or Delivery; Public Nuisance:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person who keeps for sale, offers for
sale, sells, or delivers for any commercial consideration any item of drug
paraphernalia.
      2.   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of
drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for
any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance subject to the
abatement procedures contained in section
6-6-2 of this Code.
   C.   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body,
or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
      2.   In determining intent under this subsection C, the proximity of the
cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of
cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia, may be
considered.
   D.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to:
      1.   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
      2.   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden
hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
      3.   Items defined in subsection A of this section which are marketed for
decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable
or incapable of being used for any purpose prohibited by this section.
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
         a.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the
item involved has been put;
         b.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning;
         c.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
         d.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
         e.   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose
or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
         f.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was
displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or
otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
         g.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and
         h.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
Intent: It is the intent of this Code that the provisions of this section shall
be substantially in accordance with the requirements of the State Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/1 et seq.
      4.   Items used solely for the authorized consumption of cannabis
pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 or the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
   E.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as a
civil penalty for each offense. Each day on which the violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. Upon satisfaction of the penalty, records
relating to the violation shall be expunged in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 2192, 2-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2820, 12-16-2013; Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017;
Ord. 2019-65, 12-16-2019)
4-3-18: VIDEO GAMING AND SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Video gaming: Video gaming and video gaming terminals, as each are
defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as amended,
are hereby prohibited within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Warrenville, Illinois except in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act,
as amended, and pursuant to a video gaming terminal license, pursuant to and in
accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 3 of this Code, and a Class V liquor
license, pursuant to and in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 3 of this Code.
   B.   Sweepstakes machines:
      1.   For purposes of this section, “sweepstakes machines” are defined as
any standalone, tabletop, or similar mechanically, electrically or
electronically operated device or machine in which a participant is
automatically entered into a sweepstakes or similar promotion for cash or
merchandise as a prize wherein the participant has the option to reveal the
results of entry into said sweepstakes or promotion via an entertaining display
mimicking or simulating slot machines, poker, keno, bingo, any other game the
outcome of which is not in whole or in part dependent on the skill or dexterity
of the participant, or any form of a printed ticket or otherwise. Any such
device or machine shall be considered a sweepstakes machine regardless of
whether consideration is paid to obtain entry into the sweepstakes or whether a
coupon for a product or service is provided in exchange for consideration.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, place into
operation, or allow the operation of a sweepstakes machine within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Warrenville, Illinois unless the operation of the
sweepstakes machine satisfies the requirements for the legal operation of a
video gaming terminal as set forth in Subsection A of this Section. Nothing in
this Subsection B shall be construed as prohibiting video gaming as otherwise
authorized in accordance with Subsection A of this Section.
   C.   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 2548, 11-2-2009;
amd. Ord. O2021-34, 9-7-2021; amd. Ord. O2022-22, 7-5-2022)
4-3-19: SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
   PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms
are defined herein such as, but not limited to, the examples of brand names
listed hereinbelow.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions
similarly to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers,
esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor
agonist, including, but not limited to:
   JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole)
   JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenylmethanone)
   JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
   JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
   JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3- yl)methanone)
   JWH-081(4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
   JWH-098(4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2- methylindol-3-yl)methanone)
   JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1- naphthoyl)indole)
   JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
   JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)- naphthalen-1-yl)methanone)
   JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3- yl)ethanone
   JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone)
   JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methylphenylacetyl)indole)
   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1- naphthoyl)indole)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-308([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4- bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1- methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-
5-pentyl-2,5- cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3- hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-
methyloctan- 2-yl)phenol)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and
its homologues
   WIN 55,212-2((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3- (4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4- benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
   RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3- yl)methanone)
   RCS-8(1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)- 2-(2-methoxyphenyl)ethanone)
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of
any federally controlled schedule I substance, including, but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, including,
but not limited to:
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C- E);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C- D);
2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C- C);
2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C- I);
2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5- dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C- N);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and
MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including
salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a
stimulant effect on the central nervous system, including, but not limited to:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name:   MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names; naphyrone, NRG-1)
N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:   MOPPP)
3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:   MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6- amine) (other name:   MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1 propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
      1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy,
haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the
phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
      2.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
      3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkybenzyl, or methoxybenzyl
groups;
      4.   Or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
   B.   Brand Names: Products containing a synthetic alternative drug include,
but are not limited to, products commercially referred to as:
8-Ball
Aztec Gold
Back Draft
Bad 2 the Bone
Banana Cream Nuke
Bayou Blaster
Black Diamond
Black Magic Salvia
Black Mamba
Blueberry Hayze
Bombay Blue
Buzz
C3
C4
C4 Herbal Incense
Caneff
Cherry Bomb
Chill Out
Chill X
Chronic Spice
Citrus
Colorado Chronic
D-Rail
Da Block
Dark Night II
Demon
Diamond Spirit
Dragon Spice
Dream
Earthquake
Eruption Spice
Euphoria
exSES
Ex-SES Platinum
Ex-SES Platinum Blueberry
Ex-SES Platinum Cherry
Ex-SES Platinum Strawberry
Ex-SES Platinum Vanilla
Fire Bird Ultimate Strength
Forest Humus
Freedom
Fully Loaded
Funky Monkey
Funky Monkey XXXX
G Four
G Greenies Caramel Crunch
Gold Spirit Spice
Green Monkey Chronic Salvia Texcatlipoca
Greenies Strawberry
Heaven Improved
Heavenscent Suave
Humboldt Gold
Jamaican Gold
K Royal
K1 Gravity
K1 Orbit
K2
K2 Amazonian Shelter
K2 Blonde
K2 Blue
K2 Blueberry
K2 Citron
K2 Cloud 9
K2 Kryptonite
K2 Latte
K2 Mellon
K2 Mint
K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
K2 Orisha Max
K2 Orisha Regular
K2 Orisha Super
K2 Orisha White Magic Super
K2 Peach
K2 Pina Colada
K2 Pineapple
K2 Pineapple Express
K2 Pink
K2 Pink Panties
K2 Sex
K2 Silver
K2 Solid Sex on the Aztec Mountain
K2 Standard
K2 Strawberry
K2 Summit
K2 Summit Coffee Wonk
K2 Thai Dream
K2 Ultra
K2 (unknown variety)
K2 Watermelon
K3
K3 Blueberry
K3 Cosmic Blend
K3 Dusk
K3 Grape
K3 Heaven Improved
K3 Heaven Legal
K3 Kryptonite
K3 Legal
K3 Legal - Earth (Silver)
K3 Legal - Original (Black)
K3 Legal - Sea (Silver)
K3 Legal - Sun (Black)
K3 Mango
K3 Original
K3 Original Improved
K3 Strawberry
K3 Sun
K3 Sun Improved
K3 Sun Legal
K3 XXX
K4 Bubble Bubble
K4 Gold
K4 Purple Haze
K4 Silver
K4 Summit Remix
Kind Spice
Legal Eagle
Legal Eagle Apple Pie
Love Potion 69
Love Strawberry
Magic Dragon Platinum
Magic Gold
Magic Silver
Magic Spice
Mega Bomb
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (K2 Summit)
Midnight Chill
Midnight Wind
   MNGB Almond/Vanilla
   MNGB Peppermint
   MNGB Spear Mint
   MNGB Tropical Thunder
   MNGP Pina Colada
Moe Joe Fire
Mojo
Mr. Smiley's
   MTN-787
Mystery
Naughty Nights
New Improved K3 Cosmic Blend
New Improved K3 Dynamite
New Improved K3 Krytonite
New K3 Earth
New K3 Heaven
New K3 Improved
New K3 Sea Improved
New-Kron Bomb
Nitro
Ocean Blue
Paradise
p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry
p.e.p. pourri Original Spearmint
p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla
p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry
Pink Tiger
Potpourri
Potpourri Gold
   POW
Rasta Citrus Spice Pulse
Rebel Spice
Red Bird
S1.S Werve
Samurai Spirit
Sativah
Scope Vanilla
Scope Wildberry
Sence
Shanti Spice
Shanti Spice Blueberry
Silent Black
Skunk
Smoke
Smoke Plus
Space
Space Arctic Synergy
Spice Diamond
Spice Gold
Spice Silver
Spice Tropical Synergy
Spicey XXX
Spicey Regular XXX Blueberry
Spicey Regular XXX Strawberry
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Strawberry
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla
Spiceylicious
Spike 99
Spike 99 Ultra
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
Spike Diamond
Spike Gold
Spike Maxx
Spike Silver
Stinger
Summer Skyy
Super Kush
Super Summit
Swagger Grape
   SYN Chill
   SYN Incense LemonLime
   SYN Incense Smooth
   SYN Incense Spearmint
   SYN Lemon Lime
   SYN Lemon Lime #2
   SYN Smooth
   SYN Spearmint
   SYN Spearmint #2
   SYN Suave
   SYN Swagg
   SYN Vanilla
   SYN Vanilla #2
Texas Gold
Time Warp
Tribal Warrior
Ultra Cloud 10
Unknown cigarette
Utopia
Utopia- Blue Berry
Voo Doo Remix (black package)
Voo Doo Remix (orange package)
Voodoo Child
Voodoo Magic
Voodoo Remix
Who Dat
Who Dat Herbal Incense
Wicked X
Winter Boost
Wood Stock
   XTREME Spice
Yucatan Fire
Zombie World
   C.   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant
or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   D.   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/
hallucinogen.
   E.   Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (Ord. 2698, 2-21-
2012)
   F.   Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating
any provision of this section shall upon conviction be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. O2017-75,
12-4-2017)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: License Required; Application; Exception
4-4-3: License Fees; Issuance Of Tags
4-4-4: Transfer Of License
4-4-5: Kennel License Requirements And Fees
4-4-6: Time Of Payment
4-4-7: Rabies Inoculation Required
4-4-8: Restrictions And Prohibitions; Reports Of Incidents
4-4-9: Impounding; Animal Control Officer
4-4-10: Redemption
4-4-11: Dog Bites
4-4-12: Animal Nuisance Prohibited
4-4-13: Cat Regulation
4-4-14: Penalty
4-4-15: Wild Animals
4-4-16: Costs To Be Paid By Responsible Persons Or Entities
4-4-17: Commercial Sales Of Animals At Temporary Sales Events Prohibited
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, except as otherwise indicated, the following
definitions shall apply:
   ATTACK: Any aggressive, menacing or vicious physical contact between any dog
and either a person or another animal, including, but not limited to, contact
of the mouth or teeth of the dog with the victim of the attack and any striking
or scratching of the victim of the attack by the paws of any dog.
   BITE: Seizing with the teeth or jaws so that the person or other animal
seized has been nipped, gripped, cut, wounded or pierced, and further includes
the contact of saliva with a break or abrasion of the skin.
   CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel or other structure
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards herein.
Such pen, kennel or other structure must have secure sides and a secure top
attached to the sides and must be locked with a key or combination lock when
animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or
floor attached to the sides, or the sides of the structure must be embedded in
the ground no less than two feet (2'). All such structures must comply with all
zoning and building regulations of the City and be adequately lighted,
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   DOG: Whenever used in this chapter, shall include all animals of the canine
species upward of the age of four (4) months.
   DOG, DANGEROUS: Any dog which, unmuzzled, in a vicious or terrorizing
manner, approaches any person or other animal in an apparent attitude of attack
upon any street, sidewalk, or any public grounds or place, or any premises
other than those of its owner; provided, that such approach is unprovoked.
   DOG, VICIOUS: Any dog which has, when unprovoked, bitten or attacked any
person or other animal on public or private property; has a known tendency,
propensity or disposition to attack persons or animals without provocation; or
has been found to be a dangerous dog upon three (3) separate occasions.
   GUIDE DOG: A dog trained and used to aid the blind or hearing impaired;
provided, that the owner of such dog complies with the provisions contained in
510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8.
K-9 DOG: A dog trained and used in the performance of official police duties
authorized by the Chief of Police; provided, that any such dog shall be
currently inoculated against rabies as provided for in 510 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8.
   LEASH: A strap or chain, manufactured for use as a leash, securely fastened
to the collar or harness of a dog, which shall be of sufficient strength to
keep such dog under control.
   MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal which will
prevent a dog from biting any person or animal; provided, that such muzzle must
be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with
its vision or respiration.
   OWNER OR KEEPER: Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who
keeps or harbors a dog, or who has it in his care, or who acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises
occupied by such person.
   PREMISES: Any enclosed area, including building or fences that can properly
contain an animal. (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. 1954, 1-7-2002)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; EXCEPTION:
It shall be illegal for any owner or keeper of any dog within the city limits
to keep said dog unless, within five (5) days after acquisition of such dog, he
makes application for a license for such dog as hereinafter provided. Said
license when issued will run from date of issuance to January 1 next. A new
application shall be made and the license fee paid on or before the first day
of each succeeding year.
Each such application shall be in writing and shall contain, among other
matters, a statement of name, breed, color, size and sex of such dog and the
name and address of the owner.
The provisions of this chapter relating to the licensing of dogs shall not
apply to dogs of nonresidents remaining temporarily in, or passing through the
city; provided, that such dogs are properly licensed in the community from
which they come. (Ord. 631, 8-2-1982)
4-4-3: LICENSE FEES; ISSUANCE OF TAGS:
   A.   Fees And Tags: Upon signing and delivering said application, the owner
or keeper shall pay to the city clerk a license fee for each dog, as follows:
 
1. Neutered dog    $4.00
2. Nonneutered dog 8.00
 
Upon payment of the appropriate fee, the city clerk shall then issue to such
owner or keeper a metal tag with the year for which such license was issued
inscribed thereon and shall register such dog in a book kept for that purpose.
The city clerk shall also issue to the owner or keeper a receipt showing that
the appropriate fee has been paid. The owner or keeper of such dog shall cause
the aforementioned metal tag to be securely attached to a collar on the neck of
the dog and shall not permit such dog to appear in public without wearing such
collar with such tag affixed. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
   B.   Senior Citizen Fees: If the owner or keeper of the dog is over the age
of sixty five (65) years old, there shall be no fee charged for a city license
issued for a neutered dog, and the fee for a nonneutered dog shall be four
dollars ($4.00). The aforesaid senior citizens' fee reduction shall be limited
to one dog per person.
   C.   Seeing Eye Dogs/Dogs Assisting Hearing Impaired: There shall be no fee
charged for a city license issued for a seeing eye dog or for a dog assisting a
hearing impaired person if the owner or keeper of such dog requires the use
thereof. (Ord. 1346, 9-6-1994)
4-4-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The owner or keeper of any licensed dog may, upon the death, sale or removal of
such dog from the city, have the license issued therefor, transferred to
another dog owned by him upon making application for such transfer in
substantially the same form herein provided for, and the payment to the city
clerk of a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
4-4-5: KENNEL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND FEES:
   The owner or operator of any kennel or any place where four (4) or more
dogs, of an age of four (4) months or older, are kept as household pets, for
breeding, grooming, boarding, sheltered, trained, or sold for commercial or
humane purposes, or which offers provisions for minor medical treatment,
including animal shelters, must first obtain a special use permit. A minimum of
one undivided acre is required to house four (4) or more dogs for a private
kennel. Two (2) undivided acres are required for a commercial license for up to
nineteen (19) dogs, and a minimum of two (2) additional undivided acres are
required for each additional ten (10) dogs or fraction thereof.
   Upon obtaining a special use permit to operate a kennel (private or
commercial), the owner or operator of any kennel or place where four (4) or
more dogs are kept, shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the annual
fee ordinance but need pay no other license fees for dogs therein.
(Ord. 1791, 11-1-1999; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
4-4-6: TIME OF PAYMENT:
Such license fee or tax for dogs and kennels shall be due and payable annually
in advance on January 1 of each year, and the license shall be valid through
December 31 of the same year. (Ord. 631, 8-2-1982)
4-4-7: RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in custody of any dog kept in the
city to have the dog inoculated against rabies at least once each year. No
license for a dog shall be issued unless the applicant exhibits a certificate
by a veterinarian showing compliance with this section within one year prior to
the issuance of the license. A current rabies vaccination tag shall be attached
to a collar or harness and worn at all times by the dog for which the
certificate and tag have been issued, except when such dog is confined. (Ord.
1301, 3-7-1994)
4-4-8: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS; REPORTS OF INCIDENTS:
   A.   Dogs At Large: It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at large. For
the purposes of this section, any dog which is not on a leash and under the
control of a person physically able to control it, shall be deemed to be
running at large. All dogs found to be running at large shall be promptly
impounded by the chief of police or any person authorized by him for this
purpose.
Any person owning, having custody, possession or control over any dog which
violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an unlawful act.
Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the contrary, K-
9 and guide dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord.
1856, 7-5-2000)
   B.   Dangerous Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any dangerous dog to leave the
premises of the owner, unless such dog is securely muzzled, restrained on a
leash and under the direct care and supervision of the owner; provided that in
no event shall such dog be under the direct control and supervision of any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
It shall be unlawful for any dangerous dog to annoy, attack or approach in an
apparent attitude of attack, any person or animal.
   C.   Vicious Dogs:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain, own or in any way
possess within the corporate limits of the city any vicious dog unless such dog
is at all times kept in a confinement structure.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C1 of this section, a
vicious dog may be allowed out of a confinement structure if it is necessary in
order to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog or to comply with the order
of a court of competent jurisdiction. Any time that a vicious dog is outside a
confinement structure, such dog shall be securely muzzled, restrained on a
leash and under the direct control and supervision of the owner; provided that
in no event shall such dog be under the direct control and supervision of any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      3.   No owner of a vicious dog shall sell, or otherwise transfer, set
free, abandon or give any vicious dog to any person who resides in the city.
      4.   Any vicious dog kept, harbored, maintained, owned, or in any way
possessed in the city shall be spayed or neutered.
      5.   The owner of a vicious dog shall post a warning sign, which is
readable from not less than one hundred feet (100'), in a prominent place in
front of the owner's premises, to inform the public of the presence of the
vicious dog. Such sign shall be of metal, with black letters at least two
inches (2") in height on a white background. Such sign shall state:
   WARNING:   VICIOUS DOG ON PREMISES.
   D.   Report Of Incident; Investigation:
      1.   Any person or persons who witness an incident involving a bite,
attack or menacing behavior by any dog occurring in the city shall file a sworn
affidavit of complaint with the police department, setting out the nature and
date of the incident, the owner of the dog, the address of the owner, and a
description of the dog.
      2.   The police department, upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint,
shall investigate the complaint to determine whether the dog is dangerous or
vicious. If the police department finds that the dog is dangerous or vicious,
the owner shall be notified by certified mail of such finding. No dog shall be
found dangerous or vicious if the attack or menacing behavior was directed at a
person who was, at the time in question, committing a wilful trespass or other
tort upon the premises of the owner; or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog; or who has in the past teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
      3.   The owner of a dog found to be dangerous or vicious may, within
seven (7) days of the mailing of notice by the police department, make a
written request to the police department for a review of such finding. Such
review shall be made by the chief of police within seven (7) days of such
request and shall be based upon the sworn affidavit of complainant and any
statements or evidence presented by the owner, witnesses to the incident,
police department personnel or any other person possessing information relevant
to such finding. The chief of police shall issue the written findings within
five (5) days after the review, sustaining or overruling the finding made by
the police department. (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994)
4-4-9: IMPOUNDING; ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   City Pound: It shall be the duty of the city to provide a pound where
shall be impounded all animals that are captured pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Dangerous Animals: If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal cannot be
safely taken up and impounded, such animal may be destroyed only by a police
officer.
   C.   Animal Control Officer:
      1.   The city shall designate an animal control officer who shall
thereupon be that city employee charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter
and maintaining and operating the city pound. (Ord. 631, 8-2-1982)
      2.   When a city vehicle is not provided, the animal control officer
shall be reimbursed for vehicular costs at the rate officially recognized by
the city. Purchase of a vehicle suitable for duties required hereunder,
maintenance thereof and purchase of insurance in amount, type and companies
acceptable to the corporate authorities shall be the officer's responsibility.
(Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994)
      3.   The animal control officer shall keep an accurate account of animals
impounded, released and/or destroyed. Incident reports are to be written for
cases requiring same, and an annual report for license renewal to department of
agriculture and department of natural resources shall be completed. (Ord. 2108,
12-15-2003)
4-4-10: REDEMPTION:
   A.   For every animal taken up and impounded as provided herein, there shall
be paid to the poundmaster for the use of the city by any person desiring to
redeem such animal, the following fees: a redemption fee of five dollars
($5.00) and the amount of license fee due for the current year, if any. Said
fee shall be paid in addition to the cost of keeping such animal while in the
pound at the rate of and not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) per day. The
redemption fee for second offenders shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and, for
third and subsequent offenders, fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 2108, 12-15-
2003)
   B.   Whenever a dog has been impounded in accordance with this chapter, the
chief of police or his authorized agent shall give notice to redeem of not less
than seven (7) days to the owner of such dog, if known. Such notice shall be
mailed to the last known address of the owner. An affidavit or testimony of the
chief of police or his authorized agent who mailed such notice shall be prima
facie evidence of receipt of such notice by the owner of such dog. In case the
owner of any impounded dog desires to make redemption thereof within the time
prescribed, he may do so on the following conditions:
      1.   He/she must present proof of current rabies inoculation or he/she
must pay for the rabies inoculation; and
      2.   He/she must pay for the board of the dog for the period it has been
impounded. (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994)
4-4-11: DOG BITES:
   A.   Reports of dog bites shall be maintained by the Police Department and
the offending animal shall be maintained or impounded as required or directed
by the DuPage County rabies control regulations until the animal is deemed to
be free of disease.
   B.   A person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by a dog, cat
or other animal shall notify the Police Department promptly. Failure to notify
in a prompt fashion is unlawful. (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994)
4-4-12: ANIMAL NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be illegal for any person having control, custody or ownership of an
animal to allow an animal nuisance. The term "animal nuisance" shall include:
   A.   An animal which, because of noise, odor, disease or other unwholesome
factors, is offensive, harmful or injurious to the public health, comfort or
welfare;
   B.   The accumulation of animal feces or other animal waste in any yard, pen
or premises in or upon which an animal shall be confined; (Ord. 1169, 7-15-
1991)
   C.   The failure of any person having custody, control or ownership of an
animal to remove feces deposited by said animal, except guide dogs, upon the
public ways or within the public places of the City, or upon the premises of
any person other than the owner without the person's consent;
   D.   A vicious or dangerous dog that is not kept, harbored, maintained,
owned or possessed within the corporate limits of the City in strict
conformance with the provisions of this chapter; or (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994)
   E.   A domestic animal that is off the property of its owner unless it is
under the direct control of a person physically capable of controlling the
animal. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
   F.   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the
contrary, K-9 and guide dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 1301, 3-7-1994; amd. Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
4-4-13: CAT REGULATION:
No cat shall be permitted on streets or other places within the City, except
upon the premises of the owner, without a valid, current license or tag, issued
by proper governmental authorities, indicating that the cat has been inoculated
against rabies. The animal control officer is authorized to capture, impound
and destroy any such cats in the manner provided in section
4-4-9 of this chapter. An owner may redeem a cat which has been impounded upon
the payment of the redemption fee as set forth in section
4-4-10 of this chapter and upon proof that the animal has been or will
immediately be inoculated against rabies. (Ord. 920, 10-19-1987)
4-4-14: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
4-4-15: WILD ANIMALS:
   A.   Definitions:
   BAT HOUSE: A multichamber, wooden structure created and installed
specifically for the year round use and habitation of bats and their pups.
   WILD ANIMAL: Any species of mammal, reptile, amphibian, arachnid or
predatory animal which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature
or disposition, and which because it is carnivorous in its wild state, or is
poisonous, or because of its size, physical makeup, vicious nature or other
characteristics would constitute a danger to human life, domestic animals or
property, including lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay,
mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi and other wild cats of the family
felidae, hyena, bear, wolverine, badger, wolf, coyote, boar, alligator,
crocodile, and poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian,
arachnid, or reptile or any life threatening reptile. While this definition may
encompass certain animals which may also be defined as "dangerous" under this
chapter, any animal which is of a species listed specifically shall be
considered a wild animal and any poisonous, venomous biting or injecting
species of amphibian, arachnid or reptile or life threatening reptile shall be
considered a wild animal, and the provisions of this section regarding such
wild animals shall apply. (Ord. 1533, 10-7-1996; amd. Ord. 2629, 2-7-2011)
   B.   Prohibition Against Keeping Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful for any
person or entity to harbor or keep any wild animal in the City, except the
provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Keeping of such animals in a bona fide licensed veterinary hospital
for treatment;
      2.   Keeping of such animals in a bona fide educational institution;
      3.   Keeping of such animals in a museum, circus, carnival, zoo or other
event for entertainment, which is authorized by the proper and responsible
official or officers of the City in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, and provided that proper bond and/or insurance has been posted in
accordance with City ordinances, all Federal, State, County and local permits
and licenses have been procured, and the applicant thereunder is in compliance
with all Federal, State, County and local rules, regulations, laws and
ordinances; and
      4.   Maintaining a bat house on any lot less than one-half (1/2) acre in
area, no more than two (2) bat houses on lots at least one-half (1/2) acre but
less than one acre in area, and no more than three (3) bat houses on lots one
acre or greater in area.
It shall not be a defense to a violation of this section that the person or
entity violating said section has attempted to, or has in fact, domesticated
the wild animal. (Ord. 2629, 2-7-2011)
   C.   Notice Of Keeping Of Wild Animals: Upon the written complaint of any
person that a person, firm or corporation procured, owns, possesses or harbors
a wild animal on premises in the City, the Chief of Police shall forthwith
cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation the facts
indicate that such person, named in the complaint, is in fact the owner or is
keeping or harboring any such wild animal in the City, the Chief of Police
shall forthwith send written notice to such person, requiring such person to
safely remove said wild animal from the City within ten (10) days of the date
of said notice. Notice as herein provided shall not be required where such wild
animal has previously caused physical harm or death to any person, or has
escaped and is at large, in which case the Chief of Police shall cause said
wild animal to be immediately seized and impounded, according to the provisions
of subsection D of this section, or killed, if seizure and impoundment are not
possible without risk of physical harm or death to any person, domestic animal
or property.
   D.   Seizure Of And Impounding Wild Animals: The Chief of Police shall
forthwith cause to be seized and impounded any wild animal where the person
owning, keeping or harboring such animal has failed to comply with the notice
sent pursuant to subsection C of this section. Any Health Officer or any police
officer of the City shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section, including, but not limited to, taking possession of any wild animal
the officer reasonably believes is being kept, possessed or harbored in
violation of this section. If the person in possession refuses to relinquish
possession of the wild animal the Health Officer or police officer shall so
notify the Chief of Police, and the Chief of Police shall obtain an appropriate
court order, with the assistance of the City Attorney, to obtain possession.
This section shall not be interpreted to authorize or attempt to authorize
entry into places not open to the public, without either the consent of the
owner or person in possession or warrant to other court order. Upon a seizure
and impoundment, said animal may be delivered to a place of confinement for
safekeeping with a qualified zoological park, humane society, veterinary
hospital or animal refuge for safekeeping, authorized by law to accept, own,
keep or harbor such wild animals.
   E.   Forfeiture Of Animal: Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall, in addition to any fine, penalty or equitable
relief granted against it, forfeit the wild animal to the City for permanent
disposition to a zoological or animal refuge authorized by law to accept, keep
or harbor such animals, if reasonably possible, or if not, for destruction of
said wild animal.
   F.   Nuisance, Injunction: Any violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this section, the
City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction
to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this section. Such application
for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, preliminary
injunction and/or permanent injunction. (Ord. 1533, 10-7-1996)
4-4-16: COSTS TO BE PAID BY RESPONSIBLE PERSONS OR ENTITIES:
Any reasonable costs incurred by the City in seizing, impounding and/or
confining any vicious, dangerous or wild animal shall be charged against the
person or entity who or that owns, keeps or harbors such animal and shall be
collected by the City Prosecutor or City Attorney. Such charge shall be in
addition to any fine, penalty or equitable relief provided for violating this
chapter. (Ord. 1533, 10-7-1996)
4-4-17: COMMERCIAL SALES OF ANIMALS AT TEMPORARY SALES EVENTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the commercial sale or
purchase of any animal at any temporary sales event conducted within the City.
(Ord. 2874, 8-18-2014)
CHAPTER 5
ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND REGISTRATION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Alarm System Registration Required
4-5-3: License Required
4-5-4: Audible Alarm Systems
4-5-5: Automatic Telephone Alarm Prohibited
4-5-6: False Alarms
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
   ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by an alarm system business whose duties
include any of the following: selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged,
designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the City of a burglary, robbery,
or other criminal offense, fire emergency or medical emergency requiring urgent
attention, and to which police, fire, or emergency medical personnel are
expected to respond. Alarm systems include those through which public safety
personnel are notified directly of such signals through electronic signal
devices or are notified indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the
alarm systems and who report such signals to the Police Department. Alarm
systems also include those designed to register a signal, which is so audible,
visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure
or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood beyond the zoning lot
where the signal is located, who in turn may notify the Police Department of
the signal. Alarm systems do not include those affixed to automobiles;
furthermore, alarm systems do not include auxiliary devices installed by
telephone companies to protect telephone equipment or systems which might be
damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. Alarms in separate
structures are to be counted as separate systems, even though owned by the same
person or entity.
   ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS: Any business which consists of, in whole or in part,
the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing of an alarm system.
   AUDIBLE ALARM: Any security device which sounds an alarm on the premises. An
audible alarm shall include but not be limited to any security device which
sounds an alarm to alert others of an unauthorized entry on the premises, the
commission of an unlawful act, or any other emergency.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting a response by the Police Department
when a situation requiring a response by the Police Department does not in fact
exist. False alarm does not include an alarm signal caused by violent
conditions or nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. Alarms
resulting from the following conditions are not considered false alarms:
   A.   Criminal activity or unauthorized entry.
   B.   Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises.
   C.   High winds sufficient to activate motion detection system or causing
physical damage to the protected premises.
   D.   Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage.
   E.   Lightning bolt causing physical damage to the protected premises.
   F.   Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the City by at least
a first-line telephone company supervisor.
   G.   Electrical service interruption verified in writing to the Department
by local power company.
   H.   Communication to the Police Department before a unit is dispatched to
investigate, clearly indicating that the alarm is resulting from authorized
entry, authorized system test, or other noncriminal cause.
   PRIVATE CENTRAL STATION ALARM: An alarm which relays or is capable of
relaying a signal to a private company providing watchman or security service.
   PUBLIC CENTRAL STATION ALARM: An alarm which relays or is capable of
relaying a signal or message which is received at the Police station on a
special device designed for the particular purpose of receiving such signals.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity who or
which purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm system.
4-5-2: ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   The owner of an alarm system which is presently installed and operative
shall register such alarm system with the Police Department on a form provided
by the Police Department within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Chapter.
   B.   An alarm system business or alarm agent who installs an alarm after the
effective date of this Chapter shall register the alarm system installed for
its customer before it is activated with the Police Department on a form
provided by the Police Department.
   C.   Each alarm system registration shall contain the following information
and statements:
      1.   Alarm system owner's name, address and telephone number;
additionally, in the case of a partnership, the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the
case of a corporation or club, the names, address and telephone numbers of the
officers and directors.
      2.   A statement listing the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
persons responsible for the premises where the alarm system is located and who
should be contacted to deactivate the alarm system.
      3.   A statement listing the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
persons, including the alarm system business or alarm agent, authorized to
deactivate the alarm system when no person described in subsection 2 above can
be reached.
      4.   A statement setting forth the type, make and specifications of the
alarm system which is subject to the registration requirements of this Chapter.
      5.   A statement setting forth the location of the alarm system shut off
and the method to be employed in deactivating the alarm system.
      6.   A statement authorizing the police to deactivate the alarm if no
authorized person shuts off the alarm within thirty (30) minutes after it has
been activated; and saving the City and its personnel and agents harmless from
any damage resulting from any action in connection with or consequences of such
deactivation.
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, conduct
or carry on the business of installing, causing to be installed, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering or replacing in or on any building, place or
premises within the City, any alarm system without having first obtained an
electrical contractor's license in accordance with the provisions of
Title 8, Chapter 2 of this Code.
4-5-4: AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   No owner, alarm system business or alarm agent shall install or cause
to install an audible alarm which sounds in excess of thirty (30) minutes.
   B.   Any audible alarm which is presently installed and capable of sounding
in excess of thirty (30) minutes shall be and is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and shall, within ten (10) days of notice be modified so as not to be
capable of ringing in excess of thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. 1078, 1-22-1990)
4-5-5: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ALARM PROHIBITED:
Any automatic telephone alarm installed and operative on the effective date of
this chapter, shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person,
owner, alarm system business or alarm agent shall install, or cause to be
installed, or maintain an automatic telephone alarm in the city. Any such
automatic telephone alarm shall be removed by the owner thereof within sixty
(60) days following the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1078, 1-22-1990)
4-5-6: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Response To Alarms:
      1.   Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring an
emergency response to the location by the police department and the police
department does respond, the police department personnel on the scene of the
activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall
determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by
the alarm system or whether the alarm system was a false alarm.
      2.   If the police department personnel at the scene of the activated
alarm system determines the alarm to be false, said officers shall make a
report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered
to the alarm user at the address of said alarm system installation location,
advising the alarm user of the false alarm.
      3.   When an alarm has been activated at a business or private residence
and the police respond, the owner or his representative shall be present at
such location after being requested to do so. Response by the subscriber will
be as soon as possible but shall not exceed one hour from time of request.
      4.   The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to inspect
any alarm system on the premises to which a response has been made, and he may
cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time
thereafter. (Ord. 1078, 1-22-1990)
   B.   Excessive False Alarms And Fee Assessment:
      1.   If any alarm system produces three (3) false alarms in any calendar
year, the chief of the police department shall provide written notice of the
fact, which shall be given by certified mail or delivery to the subscriber to
take corrective action in regard to false alarms and informing subscriber of
the false alarm fee schedule provided herein.
      2.   Subscribers installing a new system or making substantial
modifications to an existing system shall be entitled to a grace period during
which alarms generated by such system shall be deemed nonfalse alarms. The
grace period shall cease thirty (30) days after installation of or modification
to the alarm system.
      3.   Upon any alarm system producing a fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, or tenth false alarm in a calendar year, a fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per false alarm shall be charged to the subscriber. The
following fee schedule shall be used for each additional false alarm:
         a.   Eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth false alarms in a
calendar year, a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per false alarm shall be
assessed.
         b.   Fifteen (15) or more false alarms in a calendar year, a fee of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per false alarm shall be assessed.
All fees assessed must be paid to the city, or a written appeal must be
submitted as hereinafter provided.
      4.   Any alarm user with a direct connection to the DuPage public safety
communications center (Du-Comm) who has had fifteen (15) or more false alarms
requiring response by the police department in a calendar year or who refuses
to pay the fee assessed in subsection B3 of this section may, at the order of
the chief of police, have the alarm equipment disconnected from the DuPage
public safety communications center (Du-Comm). Prior to disconnection, the
police department shall provide written notice, by certified mail, to the alarm
user. All costs or fees resulting from said disconnection of alarm equipment
shall be the sole and express responsibility of the alarm user. (Ord. 2328, 9-
5-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
   C.   Appeal Process For False Alarms:
      1.   Informal Hearing: Each alarm user shall be entitled to an informal
hearing with the chief of police or his designee for each false alarm in excess
of three (3). At the informal hearing, the alarm user may offer evidence that
the alarm activation for which he is charged was not a false alarm. The
informal hearing shall be requested in writing, by registered or certified mail
directed to the chief of police, within seven (7) days after the mailing of the
statement of charges for the false alarm. (Ord. 1928, 8-20-2001, eff. 1-1-2002;
amd. Ord. 2328, 9-5-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
      2.   Formal Hearing: In the event that the alarm user does not request an
informal hearing or in the event that the alarm user is dissatisfied with the
chief of police's recommendations, the alarm user shall be entitled to a formal
hearing before the city administrator or his designee. The formal hearing must
be requested within seven (7) days after the mailing of the statement of
charges for the false alarm or within seven (7) days of the mailing of the
notice of disconnection from Du-Comm (if no informal hearing is requested) or
within seven (7) days after the mailing of the police chief's recommendation
(if an informal hearing was requested). The alarm user shall request the formal
hearing in writing by certified or registered mail, directed to the city
administrator.
         a.   The appellant shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing,
and failure of the appellant to appear at such hearing shall, if applicable,
result in a final decision being rendered against the appellant.
         b.   The city administrator or his designee shall serve as hearing
officer, and the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the alarm signal in question was not a false
alarm.
         c.   After receipt of all relevant evidence, the hearing officer
shall, within three (3) days, render his decision. If the hearing officer
determines that the appellant has met the burden of proof, then he shall
rescind the false alarm determination. If the hearing officer determines that
the appellant has not met the burden of proof, then he shall enter such alarm
as a false alarm and order such relief as may be appropriate under this
section.
         d.   All decisions made pursuant to this subsection C2 are final.
(Ord. 1928, 8-20-2001, eff. 1-1-2002)
CHAPTER 6
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Possession Of Fireworks
4-6-3: Permit Required
4-6-4: Pyrotechnic Display Permit
4-6-5: Penalties
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CLASS C FIREWORKS: Snake or glowworm pellets, smoke devices, trick
noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick
matches", "cigarette loads", "auto burglar alarms", sparklers, toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
twenty five one-hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound are used,
providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the
cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which
contain less than twenty one-hundredths (0.20) grain of explosive mixture.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
   CONSUMER OPERATOR: An adult individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and who has completed the
training required in this chapter.
   FIREWORKS: Consumer fireworks and 1.3G fireworks, as those terms are defined
in the Illinois fireworks use act 1 , excluding "class C fireworks" as defined
in this section.
   FLAME EFFECT: Detonation, ignition or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual or audible
effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic operating
licensing act 2 .
   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
operator licensing act. (Ord. 2291, 6-5-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 425 ILCS 35/1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 227/1 et seq.
4-6-2: POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS:
Except as otherwise provided in section
4-6-3 of this chapter, no person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture,
assemble, mix, sell, handle, transport, use or explode any fireworks or flame
effects, provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply
to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by
railroads, vessels, and others requiring them or to the possession, sale or use
of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographic suppliers. (Ord.
2291, 6-5-2006)
4-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Unless a permit has been issued by the city council, it shall be unlawful for
any person to cause a display of consumer fireworks or pyrotechnic fireworks
within the city, nor shall any person, including a consumer operator, produce a
visible or audible effect from any such fireworks by the explosion, combustion,
deflagration, or detonation of same within the city. (Ord. 2291, 6-5-2006)
4-6-4: PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY PERMIT:
The city council may authorize the issuance of a pyrotechnic display permit for
city events, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Each pyrotechnic display shall be conducted by a licensed lead
pyrotechnic operator. Application for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be
made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display, unless agreed to otherwise by the city and the fire chief
of the Warrenville fire protection district. After a permit has been granted,
sales, possession, use and distribution of display fireworks for the display
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
   B.   The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit shall provide
proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) to the city.
   C.   A permit shall be issued only after the chief of the Warrenville fire
protection district or his or her designee has inspected the site and
determined that the display can be performed in full compliance with the rules
adopted by the state fire marshal and that the display shall not be hazardous
to property or endanger any person or persons. A copy of the permit signed and
issued by the chief of the Warrenville fire protection district or his or her
designee shall be provided to the city as a part of the permit application.
   D.   All indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in buildings
protected by automatic sprinkler systems and meeting the requirements of rules
adopted by the state fire marshal.
   E.   Permits shall be signed by the mayor upon approval of the city council
and must identify the lead pyrotechnic operator.
(Ord. 2291, 6-5-2006; amd. Ord. O2019-29, 6-3-2019)
4-6-5: PENALTIES:
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2291, 6-5-
2006)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC
SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Application Form, Medical Information And Affidavit
4-7-3: Administrative Composition
4-7-4: PSEBA Administrative Hearing
4-7-5: Health Insurance Benefits Pending A Final Determination
4-7-6: Reporting Requirements
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under
the public safety employee benefits act 1  through the process of an
administrative hearing. All benefits provided to public safety employees
pursuant to the public safety employee benefits act (PSEBA) will be consistent
with the act. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
4-7-2: APPLICATION FORM, MEDICAL INFORMATION AND AFFIDAVIT:
In conjunction with a request for PSEBA benefits, the public safety employee,
or his/her representative, shall file a completed application for PSEBA
benefits, relevant medical information and an affidavit for PSEBA coverage with
the city administrator within ninety (90) days of the employee or family
members of an injured public safety employee being granted a line of duty
related pension or within ninety (90) days of the public safety employee's
death. The application for PSEBA benefits shall include, but shall not be
limited to, a fully detailed statement of the nature of the employee's claim
giving full particulars thereof, i.e., date, time, place, nature of injury, and
any other factual circumstances surrounding said incident giving rise to said
claim.
Within twenty (20) days after receipt of the aforesaid PSEBA information, the
city administrator shall determine whether sufficient documentation has been
presented to warrant approval of the requested PSEBA benefit. Should the city
administrator:
   A.   Approve the PSEBA benefit, then that written decision shall be deemed a
final administrative decision; or
   B.   Need further information, then the city administrator shall send notice
of that determination to the applicant. The city administrator shall notify the
applicant of the date, time and location of a fact finding hearing for the
purpose of additional information gathering; or
   C.   Deny the PSEBA benefit, then the city administrator shall send notice
of that determination to the applicant by certified mail return receipt
requested. The applicant shall have the right to request an administrative
hearing (the "PSEBA administrative hearing"), in order to contest the denial,
which request must be filed with the city administrator within thirty (30) days
after the mailing of the denial letter. Upon receipt of such request by the
applicant, the city administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time
and location of the PSEBA administrative hearing to contest the denial. At the
conclusion of the PSEBA administrative hearing, the city administrator shall
send a copy of the hearing officer's decision, which shall be deemed a final
administrative decision, to the applicant by certified mail return receipt
requested. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
4-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The PSEBA administrative hearing pursuant to subsection
4-7-2C of this chapter or the fact finding administrative hearing pursuant to
subsection
4-7-2B of this chapter shall be comprised of a hearing officer whose power and
authority and limitations are as follows:
   A.   Power Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of the
powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over all city hearings involving PSEBA.
      2.   Administer oaths.
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA.
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives.
      5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence.
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing.
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of facts, decision and order.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The mayor with the consent of the city council is
hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of a hearing
officer. In making said selection, the mayor shall consider all pertinent
information including, at a minimum:
      1.   The candidate's ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein.
      2.   Background and performance data made available to the mayor on file
with the city or otherwise obtained by the city.
      3.   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
state of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have knowledge of and
experience in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of
evidence, and administrative practice. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
4-7-4: PSEBA ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
In the event that a PSEBA administrative hearing is initiated pursuant to
subsection
4-7-2C of this chapter, the hearing officer shall adjudicate and determine
whether the subject public safety employee is eligible for benefits under
PSEBA. If the employee is found eligible, the employee benefits shall be
consistent with the act.
   A.   Time And Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as
established by the city with appropriate notice served upon the public safety
employee.
   B.   Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
   C.   Procedures: The city and the petitioning public safety employee shall
be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may present
witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross examine opposing
witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance
of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
   D.   Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois code of
evidence shall apply.
   E.   Final Determination: The determination by the hearing officer of
whether the petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the benefits
under the public safety employee benefits act 1  shall constitute a final
determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of
certiorari. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
4-7-5: HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS PENDING A FINAL DETERMINATION:
Until a final unappealable administrative or judicial determination of PSEBA
eligibility has been made, the public safety employee shall be entitled to
maintain his/her prior health insurance as a city employee. However, until a
final, unappealable determination of PSEBA eligibility has been made, the
public safety employee, or his/her representative, shall be responsible for the
prompt payment of all health insurance premiums as though the public safety
employee was not eligible for PSEBA benefits. Should the public safety employee
be found to be eligible for PSEBA benefits by virtue of a final, unappealable
administrative or judicial determination, the public safety employee, or his/
her representative, shall be promptly reimbursed by the city for any out of
pocket health insurance premiums for the basic health insurance plan, which is
designated as the city's HMO plan, paid from the date of the employee's death
or the date of the police pension board awarded line of duty disability
pension. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
4-7-6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
The city and any recipient of PSEBA benefits shall comply with the reporting
requirements of 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/17, as now existing or
hereafter amended. The city shall provide notice of the reporting requirement
to the recipient, as provided in said PSEBA section. (Ord. 2914, 3-16-2015)
CHAPTER 8
REPOSSESSION AND RELOCATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definitions
4-8-2: Towing Performed Pursuant To A Police Order
4-8-3: Relocators - Unlawful Practices
4-8-4: Relocators - Prerequisites To Operating Within The City
4-8-5: Signage Required To Be Posted - Vehicle Relocation
4-8-6: Repossessors - Unlawful Practices
4-8-7: Notice Of Repossession
4-8-8: Permit; Permit Fee Required
4-8-9: Permit Application Requirements
4-8-10: Penalty
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms will have the meanings
set forth below:
PERSON: Includes individual persons, corporations, partnerships and all other
entities.
RELOCATOR: Any person or entity engaged in the business of removing trespassing
vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise and thereafter
relocating and storing such vehicles.
REPOSSESSOR: Any person or entity conducting business, or an employee of the
business, who, for any type of consideration, engages in the business of,
accepts employment, or agrees to provide collateral vehicle recovery.
VEHICLE: Includes automobiles, trucks, trailers, construction and excavation
equipment, campers, boats and watercraft on trailers, snowmobiles and all other
apparatus on wheels which may either be driven or towed. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-
2025)
4-8-2: TOWING PERFORMED PURSUANT TO A POLICE ORDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to regulate or otherwise
affect towing performed by any relocator pursuant to the order of a law
enforcement official or agency in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201 - 5/4-204 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code or Title 5, Chapter 5 of this Code. (Ord. O2025-34,
8-18-2025)
4-8-3: RELOCATORS - UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful for any relocator to:
   A.   Relocate a vehicle if it is parked in a space on private property where
it is authorized to be parked.
   B.   Relocate a vehicle from private property without express, written
authorization from a property owner, lessee, or agent of the owner or lessee.
   C.   Relocate a vehicle prior to obtaining a valid permit issued by the city
as required by this chapter.
   D.   Relocate a vehicle without having a valid operator’s license issued by
the Illinois Commerce Commission.
   E.   Relocate a vehicle from a location that does not include the signage
required by this chapter.
   F.   Relocate a commercial motor vehicle that requires a commercial driver’s
license to operate, as required under 625 ILCS 5/6-500 et seq., unless the
relocator driver has the appropriate driver’s license classification.
   G.   Demand, collect, or receive anything of value or compensation in
relation to its relocation business from the property owner, lessee, or their
agents or from any person, in a manner or amount not in accordance with the
terms in the contract entered into with the property owner or lessee or their
agent.
   H.   Demand, collect, or receive compensation from the vehicle owner,
lessee, or their agents greater than the amount posted on the required signage
on the private property from which the vehicle was relocated.
   I.   Refuse to release the relocated vehicle upon proper payment.
   J.   Relocate a vehicle to a location other than the location identified on
the required signage.
   K.   Not take the relocated vehicle directly to the identified storage
location or move the vehicle from one storage location to another. (Ord. O2025-
34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-4: RELOCATORS - PREREQUISITES TO OPERATING WITHIN THE CITY:
   A.   Relocators must only employ as a driver or otherwise use the services
of people who have been duly licensed by the Illinois Commerce Commission and
the Illinois Secretary of State pursuant to the applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.
   B.   Relocators must operate in conformance with applicable laws,
regulations, and rules, including, without limitation, the laws, rules and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
   C.   All vehicles operated by relocators must:
      1.   Pass a safety test as required in 625 ILCS 5/13-101;
      2.   Have the proper identification, equipment, and insurance for that
vehicle;
      3.   Carry a copy of 625 ILCS 5/18A of the Illinois Vehicle Code and a
copy of this chapter of the City Code, which documents must be made available
to any complainant at their request in the event of a dispute regarding vehicle
relocation; and
      4.   carry a copy of the Illinois Commerce Commission operator’s license,
which license must be presented to any investigator or enforcement officer of
the Illinois Commerce Commission upon request.
   D.   The relocator must accept cash and major credit cards as forms of
payment for release of the vehicle. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-5: SIGNAGE REQUIRED TO BE POSTED - VEHICLE RELOCATION:
   A.   Generally. It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person in lawful
possession or control of private property to remove, or employ a relocator to
remove, an unauthorized vehicle from the property unless written notice Is
provided pursuant to the administrative rules of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, including 92 III. Admin. Code 1710.51, as such rules may be amended
from time to time. The notice must consist of a sign posted in a conspicuous
place in the affected parking area of a size and with the content required by
the Illinois Commerce Commission. The sign must state the amount of the towing
charges to which the person parking may be subject The sign must be posted at
least 24 hours before any vehicle is relocated from the lot.
   B.   Application to residential property. No express notice is required
under this chapter for the relocation of vehicles from residential property
when a person paying due regard to the circumstances in the surrounding area
would observe that the parking area is clearly reserved or intended exclusively
for the use or occupation of residents or their vehicles.
   C.   Sign specifications:
      1.   Each sign must contain:
         a.   A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be relocated;
         b.   The full legal name of the relocator as it appears on the
relocator’s state license, the address and telephone number of the relocator,
and the address and telephone number of the location to which the vehicle will
be relocated and at which it can be reclaimed (only one location may be
listed), if different from the address of the relocator;
         c.   The maximum fee that the relocator will charge the vehicle’s
owner as a condition of reclaiming the vehicle, and any restrictions on the
form of payment which will be accepted by the relocator, provided that no sign
may indicate a restriction on the form of acceptable payment that is contrary
to section
4-8-4 (D);
         d.   The hours during which the owner can reclaim the vehicle and the
dates and times when the relocator is closed to the public due to observation
of holidays or otherwise. To the extent that a sign does not show limitation on
hours or days when the vehicle can be reclaimed, the sign will constitute a
representation that the vehicle can be reclaimed at any time or on any day.
      2.   The sign(s) must be visible and readable from all entrances and
exits to the property, both during the day and at night and be free of any
natural or man-made interference. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-6:   REPOSSESSORS - UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful for any repossessor to:
   A.   Repossess a vehicle prior to obtaining a valid permit issued by the
city as required by this chapter.
   B.   Repossess vehicle without having a valid license issued by the Illinois
Commerce Commission.
   C.   Violate any other provision of this chapter or state law, including,
without limitation, Illinois Commerce Commission regulation or order, or 22
ILCS 422/1 et seq.
   D.   Repossess a vehicle from private property where such entry or removal
constitutes a breach of the peace.
   E.   Repossess a vehicle without having provided the notice required
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-7:   NOTICE OF REPOSSESSION:
   A.   To the Person in Possession: At the time of the repossession of any
motor or nonmotor vehicle, the person repossessing the vehicle must post a
letter in a conspicuous place at the residence of the person from whom the
vehicle is being repossessed, if known, and if unknown, at the place the
vehicle is located, immediately prior to the repossession stating the
information required by subsections
4-8-9 .D.1, D.2, D.3, and D.4 of this chapter.
   B.   To the City: In addition to the advanced notice provided to the City as
part of the application for the permit pursuant to Section
4-8-9  of this Chapter, the Repossessor must, within 24 hours after
repossessing a vehicle from a location in the City, notify the City of the
repossession. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-8:   PERMIT; PERMIT FEE REQUIRED:
No person shall repossess or relocate any motor or nonmotor vehicle within the
corporate limits of the city unless they have first obtained a permit from the
City and paid the $15.00 permit fee, plus applicable third-party processing
fees. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-9:   PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following information must be provided to the City:
   A.   A copy of the valid license issued from the Illinois Commerce
Commission.
   B.   Valid driver’s license.
   C.   Entity identification.
   D.   If relocating a vehicle:
      1.   The description of the vehicle to be relocated including the make,
year and license plate number, vehicle identification number (VIN), if
available;
      2.   The location from which the vehicle will be removed and the location
to which the vehicle will be transported and stored; and
      3.   The date and time of the relocation.
   E.   If repossessing a vehicle:
      1.   The description of the vehicle to be repossessed, including the
make, year and license plate number, vehicle identification number (VIN), if
available;
      2.   The name and address of the person from whom the vehicle is to be
repossessed; the name and address of the person holding a lien on the vehicle
to be repossessed for whom such repossession is to be performed;
      3.   A copy of the letter, court order or other document executed by the
lienholder or court and authorizing the repossession;
      4.   The date of the proposed repossession.
   E.   A telephone number at which the relocator or repossessor may be
contacted at any time, 24 hours each day.
   F.   A telephone number that will be advertised for the purpose of
effectuating the release of a relocated vehicle. (Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
4-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 for each and every offense.
(Ord. O2025-34, 8-18-2025)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Purpose
5-1-2: Definitions
5-1-3: Obedience To Police And Traffic Officers
5-1-4: Signs And Signals
5-1-5: Drivers
5-1-6: Speed Restrictions
5-1-7: Reckless Driving
5-1-8: General Driving Rules
5-1-9: Heavy Vehicles Restricted On Certain Streets
5-1-10: Emergency Vehicles
5-1-11: Service Vehicles
5-1-12: Funeral Processions
5-1-13: Pedestrians
5-1-14: Bicycles
5-1-15: Condition And Equipment Of Vehicles
5-1-16: Adoption Of The Illinois Vehicle Code
5-1-17: Penalty
5-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to provide such regulations as may be required
in order that the public highways may be used safely and efficiently for their
legitimate purposes.
It is not the intent of this title that it be used to harass, or to extract
penalties from the public. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as defined herein, all words shall have their accustomed meanings unless
otherwise defined by pertinent state legislation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT: Any territory within the city contiguous to and including
a highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along such highway there are
properties in use for business or industrial purposes, or public buildings,
which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage, whether entirely
on one side or collectively on both sides of the highway. Such usage shall
include, but is not limited to, sales lots, commercial or industrial buildings,
public buildings, and parking lots in connection with such building.
   DRAG RACING: The act of two (2) or more individuals competing or racing in a
situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a
motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to
prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him, either by
acceleration or maneuver, or against time, on any street or highway in this
city.
   DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, fire department vehicles, emergency
management agency (EMA) vehicles, ambulances, vehicles carrying a United States
government, state of Illinois, county or municipal officer or employee in
response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporations on an emergency call.
   INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
   B.   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled. For the purpose of this
title motor vehicles as a class shall be divided into two (2) divisions: a)
those vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10)
persons; b) those vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight
or the carrying of more than ten (10) persons.
   PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time
greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.
   POLICE, POLICE OFFICER: All members of the regularly constituted police
department, special police, auxiliary police and marshals duly constituted and
appointed by proper authorities of the city. Also all members of the Illinois
state police, the DuPage County sheriff's office, or of any other regularly
constituted police organization when such officers are assisting in the control
of traffic or any emergency in the city.
   PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the city or by any other governmental
agency or district including, but not limited to, school districts, fire
districts, the county of DuPage, the state of Illinois, and the United States
government.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   SCHOOL BUS: A motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a
public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization
solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities;
and so painted, marked and equipped as is customary for such vehicles.
   SERVICE VEHICLES: Vehicles used for making deliveries, removing refuse,
servicing disabled vehicles or comparable activity.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That territory of the city other than the residence and
business districts.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway.
   YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign means the act of
granting and the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or
left, provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969; amd. Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2877, 8-18-
2014)
5-1-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND TRAFFIC OFFICERS:
   A.   Obedience To Police: All police officers are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title, or in
emergencies as public safety and convenience may require, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order,
signal or direction of a police officer, EMA officers, and city officials
acting in their official capacity. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003; amd. Ord. 2877, 8-
18-2014)
   B.   Scene Of Fire: The fire department officer in command or any fireman
designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has
responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on
the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-4: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the corporate
authorities or in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois, excepting
on the direction of any individual enumerated in subsection
5-1-3A of this chapter. All signs and signals established by direction of the
corporate authorities shall conform to the "Illinois State Manual Of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways".
All signs and signals shall have the meaning and significance assigned to them
by pertinent state legislation, and all such legislation is hereby, by
reference, adopted as part of this title.
The police department of the city is hereby authorized to place such temporary
signs and signals as may be required to control traffic under temporary
conditions. Such temporary signs and signals shall remain emplaced only so long
as justified by the condition to be alleviated.
Permanent signs and pavement markings to control the flow of traffic shall be
installed by the street department at the request of the police department and
as authorized by city ordinance. (Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
5-1-5: DRIVERS:
   A.   Licenses: Any driver of a motor vehicle shall have in his possession a
valid driver's license which he shall, upon request, display to any police
officer.
   B.   Liquor And Drugs: No person who is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor may drive a motor vehicle.
No person who is under the influence of any narcotic drug or other drug to a
degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor vehicle, may drive
a motor vehicle.
All pertinent legislation of the state of Illinois is hereby, by reference,
adopted as a part of this title 1 .
   C.   Accidents: The driver of a vehicle which has collided with or been in
an accident with any vehicle, person or property, in such a manner as to cause
injury or damage, shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be
possible. He shall upon request display his driver's license and give his true
name and residence to the injured person, or any other person acting in behalf
of the injured person, or to the possessor of property damages, or to any
policeman if such be present. The driver of each vehicle involved in an
accident shall report to the police authority promptly after such accident.
(Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
5-1-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street or
highway not under jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or of DuPage County and
within the residence and business districts at a speed in excess of twenty five
(25) miles per hour or within the suburban district at a speed in excess of
forty (40) miles per hour. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969; amd. Ord. 86, 11-16-1970)
With regard to streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the state of
Illinois or of DuPage County the speed limits shall be those established by the
agency having jurisdiction, and such speed limits are hereby, by reference,
adopted as part of this title. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
   B.   The following streets shall be posted with speed limits signs as
indicated:
Albert Einstein Drive                   20 mph
Batavia Road                            35 mph
Behrs Circle Drive                      20 mph
Blackthorn Lane                         20 mph
Briarwood Drive                         20 mph
Briggs Street                           20 mph
Butternut Lane                          20 mph
Calumet Avenue East                     25 mph
Cedar Court                             20 mph
Cherice Drive                           25 mph
Chestnut Court                          20 mph
Crabtree Lane                           20 mph
Curtis Avenue                           25 mph
Elizabeth Avenue                        25 mph
Emerald Green Drive                     20 mph
Enrico Fermi Court                      20 mph
Estes Avenue                            20 mph
Fairfax Court                           20 mph
Galusha Road from 100 feet west of
Herrick Road to 700 feet west of        20 mph on school days when children
Hubble Middle School's western           are present
boundary
Greenbriar Lane                         20 mph
Greenview Avenue                        25 mph
Grove Lane                              20 mph
Juniper Court                           20 mph
Lakeview Drive                          20 mph
Landon Drive                            25 mph
Laurel Court                            20 mph
Lorraine Avenue                         25 mph
Mack Road west of Route 59              25 mph
Manning Avenue                          20 mph
Mayfair Court                           20 mph
Melcher Avenue                          20 mph
Parkview Avenue                         20 mph
Patterman Road, north from Butterfield  20 mph
to end
Penny Lane                              20 mph
Plum Court                              20 mph
Prairie Avenue                          25 mph
Princeton Court                         20 mph
Ray Street                              20 mph
Redwood Court                           20 mph
River Oaks Drive                        20 mph
River Road                              30 mph
Riverside Avenue                        25 mph
Sanchez Drive                           20 mph
Shaw Drive                              25 mph
Spruce Court                            20 mph
Stafford Place                          20 mph
Sunset Avenue                           20 mph
Tanglewood Lane                         20 mph
Thornwood Lane                          20 mph
Timber Drive                            20 mph
Twin Pines Drive                        20 mph
Virginia Avenue                         25 mph
Virginia Avenue between Galusha Road    20 mph
and Greenview Avenue
Warren Avenue                           20 mph
Warrenville Road from Batavia Road to   35 mph
Elizabeth Avenue
Warrenville Road from Batavia Road to   25 mph
Route 56 (Butterfield Road)
Warrenville Road from Elizabeth Avenue  45 mph
to Mill Street
White Oak Drive                         20 mph
Wilbur Avenue                           25 mph
Willow Lane                             20 mph
Winchester Circle                       20 mph
Woodland Road                           20 mph
 
(Ord. 648, 12-6-1982; amd. Ord. 910, 8-3-1987; Ord. 950, 2-1-1988; Ord. 978, 7-
5-1988; Ord. 994, 9-19-1988; Ord. 1008, 12-5-1988; Ord. 1023, 2-21-1989; Ord.
1054, 9-5-1989; Ord. 1121, 10-1-1990; Ord. 1171, 8-5-1991; Ord. 1275, 9-20-
1993; Ord. 1450, 11-20-1995; Ord. 1597, 7-21-1997; Ord. 1757, 5-3-1999; Ord.
1932, 9-17-2001; Ord. 2057, 5-19-2003; Ord. 2409, 11-5-2007; Ord. 2540, 9-8-
2009; Ord. O2025-37, 8-18-2025)
5-1-7: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in a reckless manner.
It is specifically forbidden to start or accelerate a motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause the driving wheels to spin (commonly referred to as "burning
rubber"), or to so turn a motor vehicle as to cause the wheels to slide or
skid.
It is specifically forbidden to so start or accelerate a motorcycle as to cause
the front wheel to raise from the roadway. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-8: GENERAL DRIVING RULES:
All general driving rules established by legislation by the state shall apply
in this city and all such legislation is hereby, by reference, adopted as part
of this title 1 . (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.
5-1-9: HEAVY VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to forbid the unnecessary
operation of overweight vehicles on those streets which, by their construction,
are not suited for such use.
      2.   Context: Unless the context otherwise requires, all words and
phrases used herein have the same meaning as the same or similar words or
phrases defined and used in state law.
      3.   Restrictions: No overweight vehicle shall be operated on any
secondary street in the city except for the purpose of making delivery or pick
up and such usage shall be limited to the minimum distance practicable for the
purpose.
No overweight vehicle shall at any time be parked on any secondary street
beyond the time required for the delivery or pick up to be made.
      4.   Posting Of Signs: The city may install appropriate signs indicating
the limitations imposed by this section but the absence of such a sign at any
location shall not invalidate the provisions of this section except as provided
in subsection A5 of this section.
      5.   Enforcement: This section shall be enforced by any police officer. A
traffic violation ticket shall be issued for any violation of this section.
   B.   Definitions:
   AXLE LOAD: The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes
forty inches (40") apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, "for
hire" or "not for hire", but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
   CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE: Any vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds' actual
weight, registered gross weight or GVWR that is required to comply with 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-712 and 12-713 on identification required to be
displayed.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The value specified by the manufacturer
or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of
a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination
weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the
towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer,
GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of
the towed unit and any load on the unit.
   GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in
combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon.
   HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every vehicle designed and adopted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and
motorized wheelchairs. For this section, motor vehicles are divided into two
(2) divisions:
      1.   First Division: Those motor vehicles that are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
      2.   Second Division: Those motor vehicles that are designed for carrying
more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living
quarters, those motor vehicles that are designed for pulling or carrying
freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the
first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second
division.
   PERMIT ROUTE: The route authorized by the issuing authority with proper
jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying
an indivisible load that exceeds normal dimensions or weight or a combination
thereof.
   SECONDARY STREET: For purposes of this section, a "secondary street" is
defined as any street or public thoroughfare not claimed by the city and not
recognized by the highway department of the state of Illinois to be an arterial
thoroughfare.
   SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   TANDEM AXLES: Any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than
forty inches (40") and not more than ninety six inches (96") apart, measured to
the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 for special hauling vehicles.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   C.   Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicle:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive,
to park, or move on, upon or across, or for the owner to cause or knowingly
permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway
under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-102 (width), 5/15-103 (height), 5/15-107 (length), and 5/15-111
(weight).
      2.   Size and weight limitations while operating on city streets shall
not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations
owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry
temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or
agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating
under the terms of a valid oversize and/or overdimension permit issued by the
city under the authority of subsection D of this section.
      3.   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed
by ordinance under authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, 15-316
and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted,
it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in
excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions.
      4.   Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such
vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
   D.   Permits For Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicles:
      1.   A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within
the jurisdiction of the city that exceeds the dimensions and weights permitted
for the particular roadways to be traversed whether they be nondesignated or
designated roadways.
      2.   The city with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction may, upon application to the city police department on forms
provided by the police department, and good cause being shown therefor issue a
special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum specified in subsection C of this section. The applicant shall furnish
the following information in the special permit application:
         a.   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle;
         b.   Applicant's name;
         c.   Type of permit requested, whether it be for a single trip, round
trip, or multiple routing;
         d.   The description of registration (or the Illinois department of
transportation (IDOT) registration number or classification) of the power unit;
         e.   Description of the object or vehicle to be moved;
         f.   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles;
         g.   The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles;
         h.   The maximum gross weight of the vehicle;
         i.   The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load; and
         j.   The requested routing over city streets to and from a specific
location.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
   MULTIPLE MOVES: Are those in such close proximity to each other in distance
or in time that the police department would consider incorporating two (2) or
more permit moves within one permit application. Multiple move permits when
granted by the police department shall be for a period of time not to exceed
ninety (90) days from the date of issuance.
   ONE-WAY OR SINGLE MOVEMENT: One move from the point of origin to the point
of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point
of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for
seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed
by the police department.
   ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT: Two (2) trips over the same route in opposite
directions. Round trip permits are effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days
from the date of issuance.
      4.   The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based
on the charts contained herein for a single routing which will be valid for
seven (7) calendar days, round trip routing valid for fourteen (14) calendar
days and multiple routings valid for a base period of three (3) months. Permits
may be issued for a maximum of four (4) consecutive permit periods (365 days)
with the permit fee calculated in the appropriate multiples of the base three
(3) month multiple trip permit. Permits are valid only for the date periods
specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as
established by the chief of police or designee. No substitution of vehicle,
load or routing is permitted without express written permission by the chief of
police or his or her designee, and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to
which the permit applies at all times.
Permit Size         Fee
                    Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Weight (with load):
Permit Size           Fee
                      Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Weight (with load):
 Up to 100,000 pounds $ 50.00     $ 75.00    $150.00
 100,001 - 120,000    75.00       100.00     200.00
 120,001 - 150,000    100.00      125.00     200.00
 Over 150,000         100.001     200.001    200.00
Width (with load):
 Up to 12'            25.00       40.00      75.00
 12'1" to 13'6"       50.00       75.00      100.00
 Over 13'6" wide      50.001      75.001     100.00
Height (with load):
 13'6" to 14'6"       25.00       40.00      75.00
 Over 14'6"           50.001      75.001     75.00
Length (with load):
 Up to 100'           25.00       40.00      75.00
 Over 100'            50.001      75.001     75.00
 
   Note:
      1.    Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road
damage fees.
If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension issues,
the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or dimension
factor only.
      5.   The chief of police or his or her designee is authorized to approve
the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required
fees, the police department shall issue a permit allowing passage of the
oversize and/or overweight vehicles over city streets. The permit shall be
specific and contain:
         a.   Permit number;
         b.   The dates for which the permit is valid;
         c.   Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing;
         d.   The description of object or vehicle to be moved;
         e.   Authorized gross weight, axle weight, length and height;
         f.   The authorized routing over city streets, including the origin
and termination points within the village;
         g.   The fee paid;
         h.   The date and signature of the chief of police or his or her
designee; and
         i.   In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the
permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the
protection of the general public and city streets. A copy of all permits issued
will be provided by the city administrator for information purposes.
      6.   It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or
herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move
is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
         a.   The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
         b.   All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will
not be exceeded;
         c.   All operation, registration and license requirements have been
complied with;
         d.   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements have been met; and
         e.   The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to
persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the
object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation
or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. The permittee
agrees to hold the city harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or
proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the city from any claim it may be
required to pay arising from the movement.
      7.   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit
applies at all times while operating on streets within the city and shall be
exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or
authorized official of the city.
      8.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a
city permit, whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, then, either
or both the owner and driver of such vehicle shall be deemed in violation of
this section, and either or both the owner and the driver of such vehicle may
be prosecuted for such violation.
   E.   Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Streets: As provided under the authority
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to
operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is
prohibited by ordinance or statute and where signs of such prohibition are
posted. Vehicles operating under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111 and 15-316 while utilizing the city streets under "reasonable
access" rules will be considered in violation of this section if they are not
utilizing the most direct route to points of loading and unloading.
      1.   Roads Closed To Use: The following roads within the corporate
boundaries of the city are hereby closed to use by trucks, whether single unit
or tractor trailer combination, in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds'
gross vehicle weight except as may be required for purposes of delivery, pick
up, or work accessible only by those routes:
         a.   Batavia Road from its intersection with Warrenville Road to the
boundary of Fermi Research Laboratories.
         b.   Warrenville Road from its intersection with Batavia Road to
Warrenville Road's westerly termination.
         c.   County Ridge Drive.
         d.   Barkley Avenue north of Youghal.
         e.   Mark Road from Route 59 to the west branch of the DuPage River.
      2.   Posting Of Signs And Giving Of Notice: Signs stating this
restriction shall be installed in accordance with state established standards.
   F.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys,
neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each calendar day(s) on which a violation occurs.
      2.   In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the city
attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the city to enjoin the
violation of any provision of this section. (Ord. 2996, 4-18-2016)
5-1-10: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   In addition to all regularly required or permitted lights and
equipment, any emergency vehicle may carry such additional lights and equipment
as are required or permitted for a vehicle of its type by legislation of the
state of Illinois 1 .
   B.   When acting to take care of an emergency, the driver of such vehicle
is, to the extent permitted by state legislation and justified by the
circumstances, exempted from the restrictions imposed by this title, but he is
not exempted from the responsibility to act in accordance with safe practices
or with the directions of a police officer 2 .
   C.   All pertinent legislation of the state is hereby adopted by reference
as part of this title. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-207.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-205.
5-1-11: SERVICE VEHICLES:
The driver of a service vehicle is, only to the extent permitted by state
legislation and required by the exigencies of the work to be done, exempted
from the restrictions imposed by this title. He is not to any degree exempted
in traveling to the location involved, nor is he exempted from the
responsibility to act in accordance with safe practices or with the directions
of a police officer. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-12: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
All legislation of the State of Illinois with regard to funeral processions is
hereby adopted by reference as part of this title 1 . (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
 
Notes
1 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-1420.
5-1-13: PEDESTRIANS:
   A.   Signal And Signs: Pedestrians shall obey any traffic control signs or
signals, or the directions of any police officer directing traffic.
   B.   Pedestrians Crossing Roadway: Every pedestrian shall exercise caution
in crossing any roadway and shall not start to cross until the way is clear
from both directions.
Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care in approaching any pedestrian
and shall if necessary sound his horn, slow down or stop to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian.
   C.   Pedestrians Walking Along Roadway: Where sidewalks are not provided,
any pedestrian walking along the roadway shall, if practicable, walk upon the
left side of the roadway or upon its shoulder, facing oncoming traffic.
   D.   Blind Pedestrians: Any blind person who is carrying a white cane or who
is guided by a guide dog shall have the right-of- way under any condition.
   E.   Hitchhiking: The practice (commonly referred to as hitchhiking) of by
raised hand or otherwise soliciting a ride from the driver of a motor vehicle
is hereby forbidden.
   F.   Soliciting Passengers: The practice of soliciting riders (commonly
referred to a "picking up") is hereby forbidden. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-14: BICYCLES:
   A.   Any bicycle used on the public street shall be in a safe and operable
condition with a brake capable of stopping the rotation of the braked wheel on
smooth dry pavement.
   B.   If used during the hours of darkness, a bicycle shall carry a white
light on the front visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') and a
red reflector or light on the rear, visible in the light of an automobile
headlight for a distance of three hundred feet (300').
   C.   A person riding a bicycle shall drive on the right side of the road and
shall observe all pertinent traffic rules. (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
5-1-15: CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Condition: It is unlawful to operate on the public highways any vehicle
which is not in safe and operable condition in conformity to all the
requirements of the pertinent legislation of the State of Illinois, and all
such legislation is hereby adopted by reference as part of this title.
   B.   Equipment Of Vehicles: It is unlawful to operate on the public highways
any vehicle which does not have all equipment required by pertinent legislation
of the State of Illinois or which has equipment forbidden by such legislation.
All such legislation of the State of Illinois is hereby adopted by reference as
a part of this title 1 . (Ord. 61, 3-11-1969)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-100.
5-1-16: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
In lieu of using any section, or in addition to any section of this chapter,
the officer issuing a citation may issue it by using any of the sections of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 to 5/20-204, as
the same may be amended from time to time, which are incorporated and adopted
by reference as a part of this chapter, three (3) copies of said Code having
been on file in the Office of the Clerk of the City and available for public
use, inspection and examination for at least thirty (30) days prior to the
adoption of this section as provided in section
1-3-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code. All citations issued of these violations
shall be in the name of the City and shall refer to the numbered sections in
the Illinois Vehicle Code, but shall also be referred to as an ordinance
violation in the traffic ticket or complaint. (Ord. 1204, 4-20-1992)
5-1-17: PENALTY:
   A.   Violation Of Chapter: A violation of any provision of this chapter,
unless otherwise specified, or a violation of any offenses classified as
"petty" offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted
by the City, except those where a minimum fine is otherwise specified by the
statute, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. This fine amount shall be expressly exclusive of court
costs and fees that may be imposed in addition to the fine amount. (Ord. O2017-
75, 12-4-2017)
   B.   Moving Violations:
      1.   All violations for driving a vehicle at a speed that is twenty one
to thirty (21 - 30) miles per hour greater than the applicable statutory
maximum speed limit shall be punishable by a minimum fine amount of ninety five
dollars ($95.00) for each offense. This fine amount shall be expressly
exclusive of any court costs and fees that may be imposed in addition to the
fine amount.
      2.   All violations for driving a vehicle at a speed that is thirty one
(31) miles per hour or greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed
limit shall be punishable by a minimum fine amount of one hundred five dollars
($105.00) for each offense. This fine amount shall be expressly exclusive of
any court costs and fees that may be imposed in addition to the fine amount.
(Ord. 2313, 8-21-2006)
CHAPTER 2
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 1020, 2-21-1989)
CHAPTER 3
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION:
5-3-1: Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Exemptions
5-3-4: Parking Prohibited At All Times, General Rules
5-3-5: Parking Permitted
5-3-6: Parking Prohibited At Specific Locations Or For Illegal Purposes
5-3-6-1: Parking Of Specific Motor Vehicles And Trailers Prohibited
5-3-7: No Stopping, Standing Or Parking Areas
5-3-8: Parking Lots, Restrictions
5-3-9: Parking Limited To Specific Hours
5-3-10: Leaving A Parking Place, Signal
5-3-11: Removal Of Vehicles
5-3-12: Signs
5-3-13: Handicapped Parking
5-3-14: Penalty
5-3-15: Parking Restriction Suspension
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To forbid parking at such times and in such places as may constitute a
hazard in traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian.
   B.   To forbid parking at such times and in such places as to constitute a
nuisance and a detriment to the city.
   C.   To regulate the parking of vehicles in order that hazard to traffic may
be minimized.
   D.   To forbid parking at any time and in any place as an adjunct to illegal
activity.
   E.   It is not the intent of this chapter that it shall supersede any other
statute, law or ordinance. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ANGLE PARKING: The parking of a vehicle at an angle to the curb or to the
edge of a roadway. Space for such parking may be designated by appropriate
signs, lines, markers or bumper blocks.
   PARALLEL PARKING: The parking of a vehicle substantially parallel to the
curb or to the edge of the roadway.
   PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for any period of time.
(Ord. 695, 3-19-1984; amd. Ord. 2350, 12-18-2006)
5-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency vehicles while
engaged in taking care of an emergency. The driver of any vehicle herein listed
is not exempt from the obligation to so park as to constitute a minimum of
interference with the normal flow of traffic, nor is he exempted from the
obligation to follow the directions of a police officer:
   A.   Official vehicles of any police department, fire department or of any
other governmental agency.
   B.   Ambulances.
   C.   Physicians' automobiles.
   D.   Emergency vehicles of utility companies.
   E.   Tow trucks or other road service vehicles.
   F.   Firemen's automobiles at a fire call or at a fire department station.
   G.   Tradesmen's vehicles at a location where construction, repairs or
alterations are being done.
   H.   Delivery vehicles while making a delivery.
   I.   The prohibition of parking of section
5-3-8 of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles parked by city officials or
others engaged in business at the municipal building. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-4: PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES, GENERAL RULES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand or park in any
of the following places except as may be necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or of a
traffic control light, sign or device: (Ord. 2027, 11-4-2002)
   A.   On any bridge, on any overpass or in any underpass.
   B.   In, or within twenty feet (20') of, any intersection or crosswalk.
   C.   Within thirty feet (30') of any traffic signal or sign.
   D.   At any place blocking a driveway.
   E.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station, and on the side of the street opposite to any such station
within fifty feet (50') of such entrance.
   F.   On any parkway or sidewalk.
   G.   Along or opposite to any street excavation or obstruction when such
parking would obstruct traffic.
   H.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle would reduce the usable
width of the roadway to less than eighteen feet (18').
   I.   On private property without the consent of the owner or occupant.
   J.   At any place where official signs, permanent or temporary, prohibit
parking.
   K.   Within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
   L.   On Tracy Place. (Ord. 2970, 12-21-2015)
   M.   By making a left turn to enter an angle parking stall serving the
oncoming lane of traffic.
   N.   By backing out of an angle parking space to proceed in the opposite
lane of traffic.
   O.   On any street, other than by stopping or parking with the right hand
wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right
hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand
shoulder. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
   P.   In a posted fire lane. (Ord. 870, 12-15-1986)
   Q.   On any part of a street where the parked vehicle's location would
impair or obstruct access to a resident's mailbox by the postal service and
prevent the actual delivery of that day's mail. (Ord. 2027, 11-4-2002)
   R.   No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street,
highway, or roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration
plate or plates or registration sticker after the termination of the
registration period for which the registration plate or plates or registration
sticker was issued. (Ord. 2038, 2-18-2003)
5-3-5: PARKING PERMITTED:
   A.   Parallel parking is permitted on the graveled shoulder of any road
except as specifically forbidden by this chapter.
   B.   Angle parking is permitted at such places as are, by width of road
shoulder and/or markings, suited for such use unless by clearly visible signs
such parking is forbidden.
   C.   Parallel parking on the improved surface of any road is permitted only
if:
      1.   There is no graveled shoulder suitable for parking, and
      2.   The parking of a vehicle at such place will not reduce the usable
width of the roadway to less than eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-6: PARKING PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIC LOCATIONS OR FOR ILLEGAL PURPOSES:
No vehicle shall at any time be parked:
   A.   On River Road/Ferry Road within the City limits.
   B.   On the pavement of any road at a place where there is graveled shoulder
usable for parking. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
   C.   (Rep. by Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
   D.   (Rep. by Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
   E.   On the east and north sides of Birchwood Drive.
   F.   On the east side of Twin Pines Drive.
   G.   On the west side of Briarwood Drive.
   H.   On the south side of Butternut Lane.
   I.   On the north side of Greenbriar Lane.
   J.   On the north side of Candlewood Lane.
   K.   On the south side of Crabtree Lane.
   L.   On the north side of Thornwood Lane.
   M.   On the north side of White Oak Drive.
   N.   On the west and south sides of Blackthorn Lane.
   O.   On the north side of the north segment of Tanglewood Lane.
   P.   On the west side of the west segment of Tanglewood Lane.
   Q.   On the south side of the south segment of Tanglewood Lane.
   R.   On the north side of the north segment of Hawthorne Lane.
   S.   On the east side of the east segment of Hawthorne Lane.
   T.   On the south side of the south segment of Hawthorne Lane. (Ord. 695, 3-
19-1984)
   U.   On Winchester Circle as follows:
      1.   On the north side of Winchester Circle North from Route 59 to the
first intersection east.
      2.   On the south side of Winchester Circle North.
      3.   On both sides at the junction of Winchester Circle North and
Winchester Circle East.
      4.   On the east side of Winchester Circle East.
      5.   On both sides at the junction of Winchester Circle East and
Winchester Circle South.
      6.   On the south side of Winchester Circle South.
      7.   On both sides at the junction of Winchester Circle South and
Winchester Circle West.
      8.   On the west side of Winchester Circle West. (Ord. 1582, 5-19-1995)
   V.   On Batavia Road except in designated parking areas. (Ord. 695, 3-19-
1984)
   W.   On Steadman Avenue. (Ord. 778, 7-1-1985)
   X.   On the west side of Barkley Avenue between Calumet Avenue (west) and
Sunset Drive. (Ord. 1261, 6-7-1993)
   Y.   On Country Ridge Drive. (Ord. 886, 4-6-1987)
   Z.   On Continental Drive, from Harvard Drive to a point three hundred feet
(300') west of Shaw Drive. (Ord. 1121, 10-1-1990)
   AA.   On Ridge Drive on weekdays between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 982, 8-1-1988)
   BB.   On the west side of Twin Pines between White Oak and Route 56. (Ord.
995, 9-19-1988)
   CC.   On the south side of Meadow Avenue from Route 59 to Home Avenue and on
the south and east side of Meadow Avenue from a point one hundred ninety five
feet (195') east of Home Avenue to a point three hundred fifteen feet (315')
easterly and northerly from Home Avenue. (Ord. 1416, 8-7-1995)
   DD.   On Stafford between Warren and Rockwell. (Ord. 1030, 4-17-1989)
   EE.   On streets within the Emerald Green subdivision, including:
      1.   Emerald Green Drive (east side of drive).
      2.   Emerald Green Drive West.
      3.   Emerald Green Drive East.
      4.   John Bardeen Drive.
      5.   Marie Curie Lane.
      6.   Arthur Compton Court.
      7.   Albert Einstein Drive.
      8.   Pierre Curie Lane.
      9.   Enrico Fermi Court.
   FF.   On the east side of Blackthorne Lane from White Oak Drive to Birchwood
Drive. (Ord. 1121, 10-1-1990)
   GG.   On Lorraine Avenue, south of Warrenville Road. (Ord. 1154, 5-20-1991)
   HH.   On the south and east side of Timber Drive between Batavia Road and
Meadow Avenue. (Ord. 1256, 6-7-1993)
   II.   On the north and west side of Grove Lane. (Ord. 1257, 6-7-1993)
   JJ.   On the south side of Youghal Road. (Ord. 1438, 10-2-1995)
   KK.   On the Behrs Circle Drive West as follows:
On the west side of Behrs Circle Drive West.
On the east side of Behrs Circle Drive West - Sunday A.M. only. (Ord. 1451, 11-
20-1995)
   LL.   On the west side of Virginia Avenue between Parkview Avenue and
Greenview Avenue.
   MM.   On the north side of Parkview Avenue from Virginia Avenue to the
westerly end of Lions Park. (Ord. 1756, 5-3-1999)
   NN.   On Williams Road between Batavia Road and the DuPage River. (Ord.
1816, 3-20-2000)
   OO.   No vehicle shall at any time be parked on the east side of Rockwell
Avenue between Warrenville Road and Main Street. (Ord. 1855, 7-5-2000)
   PP.   On the following streets and areas within the Summerlakes subdivision:
      1.   Within the area of cul-de-sac bulbs at the end of all courts.
      2.   Angeline Court - east side.
      3.   Arlington Court - north side.
      4.   Arbury Court - north side.
      5.   Attleboro Court - north side.
      6.   Avondale Court - north side.
      7.   Barkley Avenue - east side.
      8.   Bayview Court - east side.
      9.   Bedford Court - east side.
      10.   Bedford Lane - outside curb.
      11.   Branch Avenue - south side.
      12.   Brighton Court - north side.
      13.   Brookside Court - east side.
      14.   Buckthorn Court - both sides.
      15.   Cherice Lane - west side.
      16.   Concord Court - south side.
      17.   Cottonwood Court - both sides.
      18.   Cynthia Court - south and east sides.
      19.   Cynthia Drive - north and east sides.
      20.   Danbury Drive - south side.
      21.   Dedham Court - south side.
      22.   Dogwood Court - both sides.
      23.   Dorchester Court - north side.
      24.   Elmwood Court - north side.
      25.   Everett Court - east side.
      26.   Foxboro Court - north side.
      27.   Galbreath Drive - south and east sides.
      28.   Glenhurst Court - north side.
      29.   Greenbrook Court - north side.
      30.   Hampton Drive - west side.
      31.   Harvard Drive - east side.
      32.   Harvest Court - east side.
      33.   Heather Court - north side.
      34.   Holyoke Court - north side.
      35.   Hurlingham Drive - north side.
      36.   Lakeview Court - east side.
      37.   Lakeview Drive - west and north sides.
      38.   Leominster Court - north side.
      39.   Lexington Court - east side.
      40.   Linden Square - both sides.
      41.   Lindenwood Court - north side.
      42.   Torch Parkway - south side.
      43.   Lynn Court - east side.
      44.   Maple Court - north side.
      45.   Maplewood Court - main entryway only - north side.
      46.   Maplewood Court - spurs off both sides of the court.
      47.   Maplewood Drive - north side.
      48.   Mulberry Court - both sides.
      49.   Oakwood Court - both sides.
      50.   Ridgewood Court - north side.
      51.   Roxbury Court - east side.
      52.   Salem Court - east side.
      53.   Sanchez Drive - east side.
      54.   Shaw Drive - west side.
      55.   Small Tree Court - north side.
      56.   Sova Lane - west side.
      57.   Stevens Court - both sides.
      58.   Sunset Drive - east side.
      58a. Sunset Court - south side.
      59.   Waltham Court - east side.
      60.   Wembly Drive - east and north sides.
      61.   Whitehall Court - north side.
      62.   Wildwood Court - both sides.
      63.   Wood Court - both sides. (Ord. 1985, 6-3-2002; amd. Ord. 2016, 9-
16-2002; Ord. 2058, 5-19-2003; Ord. 2066, 6-16-2003; Ord. 2095, 11-3-2003)
   QQ.   On the east side of Warren Avenue from Tracy Place/Curtis Avenue to
Warrenville Road.
   RR.   On the south side of Main Street from Rockwell Avenue to Curtis
Avenue.
   SS.   On the north side of Main Street from Curtis Avenue to Batavia Road.
   TT.   On Mount Street. (Ord. 2069, 7-7-2003)
   UU.   On the west side of Second Street from Warrenville Road to the first
paved perpendicular parking space adjacent to the Warren Tavern.
   VV.   On the south side of Jefferson Street. (Ord. 2110, 1-5-2004)
   WW.   On the following east side roadways:
      1.   Haylett Avenue - west side.
      2.   Tinker Avenue - west side.
      3.   Elizabeth Avenue - west side.
      4.   Virginia Avenue (south of Galusha) - west side.
      5.   Wilbur Avenue - west side.
      6.   Melcher Avenue - west side.
      7.   West Avenue - west side.
      8.   Saddle Ridge Drive - west side.
      9.   Lorraine Avenue - west side.
      10.   Central Avenue - north side.
      11.   Greenview Avenue - north side.
      12.   Parkview Avenue - south side.
      13.   Galusha Road - both sides.
      14.   Saddle Ridge Drive - cul-de-sac. (Ord. 2143, 6-17-2004)
   XX.   On the east side of Fourth Street, between Warrenville Road and Main
Street.
   YY.   On the east side of Chestnut Court. (Ord. 2327, 9-5-2006)
   ZZ.   On Cerny Road.
   AAA.   On the north side of Cerny Circle.
   BBB.   In the cul-de-sac of Cerny Circle. (Ord. 2349, 12-18-2006)
   CCC.   On the south side of Warrenville Road between Batavia Road and Curtis
Avenue.
   DDD.   On the north side of Warrenville Road between Warren Avenue and
Steadman Avenue. (Ord. 2409, 11-5-2007)
   EEE.   On the west side of Maple Terrace.
   FFF.   In the cul-de-sac of Maple Terrace. (Ord. 2427, 2-4-2008)
   GGG.   On the south side of Warrenville Road between Curtis Avenue and Burk
Avenue. (Ord. 2466, 8-4-2008)
   HHH.   On the east side of Lorraine for the first one hundred ten feet
(110') north of Warrenville Road.
   III.   On the east side of Virginia for the first one hundred twenty five
feet (125') north of Warrenville Road.
   JJJ.   On the east side of Elizabeth for the first one hundred thirty feet
(130') north of Warrenville Road. (Ord. 2581, 5-17-2010)
   KKK.   On the east side of Fourth Street between Main Street and Batavia
Road. (Ord. 2608, 9-20-2010)
   LLL.   On the east side of Gates Place from Batavia Road to Warren Avenue.
(Ord. 2662, 8-1-2011)
   MMM.   On both sides of Husky Highway Drive. (Ord. 2683, 12-19-2011)
   NNN.   On the west side of Manning Avenue from Ray Street to Warrenville
Road.
   OOO.   On the east side of Curtis Avenue from Warren Avenue to Warrenville
Road. (Ord. 2747, 10-1-2012)
   PPP.   On the north and east sides of Breme Drive East.
   QQQ.   On the south and west sides of Breme Drive West. (Ord. 2968, 12-21-
2015)
   RRR.   On the north side of Jackson Street for one hundred eighty five feet
(185') east of Fourth Street. (Ord. O2017-82, 12-18-2017)
   SSS.   On the east side of Talbot Avenue north of Calumet Avenue West. (Ord.
O2018-18, 5-21-2018)
   TTT.   On the south side of Calumet Avenue from a point one hundred eighty
five feet (185') east of the southeast corner of Calumet Avenue and Talbot
Avenue to a point three hundred thirty feet (330') east of the same corner on
weekdays between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
P.M.
   UUU.   On the north side of Mount Street from Stafford Place to Manning
Avenue.
   VVV.   On the south side of Mount Street for 130 feet west of Manning
Avenue.
   WWW.   On the south and east sides of Rockwell Street from Mount Street to a
point 175 feet north of Ray Street. (Ord. O2018-56, 12-3-2018; amd. Ord. O2020-
22, 5-4-2020)
   XXX.   On both sides of Sipla Drive between Manning Avenue and Tracy Place.
   YYY.   On the west side of Patterman Road, between Route 56 and Prairie
Avenue/Candlewood Lane.
   ZZZ.   On both sides of Patterman Road, north of Prairie Avenue/Candlewood
Lane. (Ord. O2022-09, 4-4-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-37, 9-18-2023)
   AAAA.   On the following streets within the Lexington Trace subdivision:
      1.   Lambe Lane - east and west sides, except in designated parking
areas.
      2.   Brayman Court - north and south sides, and area of cul-de-sac bulb,
except in designated parking area.
      3.   Barkley Avenue:
         a.   West side of the street from Route 56 through the southern
entrance of Wheeler Circle.
         b.   West and south sides of street beginning 20 feet west of the
intersection of Lambe Lane to Estes Street.
         c.   North and east side of street beginning 20 feet east from the
intersection of Lambe Lane and continuing until the intersection with Route 56.
   BBBB.   On the following streets within the Everton subdivision:
      1.   Camden Street - east and west sides, except in designated parking
areas.
      2.   Cambridge Street:
         a.   South side.
         b.   North side from 20 feet east of the intersection with Camden
Street to Route 59.
      3.   Everton Drive:
         a.   North and west sides.
         b.   East and south sides beginning from Route 59 to the Everton
Clubhouse entrance drive, except in designated parking areas. (Ord. O2023-44,
11-20-2023)
5-3-6-1: PARKING OF SPECIFIC MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. it shall be unlawful to park or stand on any public right of way, street,
alley, shoulder, parkway or roadway any motor vehicle except either properly
licensed motor vehicles belonging to the first division or properly licensed
motor vehicles belonging to the second division, which display a class B
license plate. The foregoing prohibition against parking shall apply to
recreational vehicles (as defined by the city of Warrenville zoning ordinance),
commercial vehicles (as defined by the city of Warrenville zoning ordinance),
or any trailer, whether or not attached to an approved vehicle. Vehicles of the
first division and vehicles of the second division shall be as defined by the
Illinois vehicle code 1 .
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any trailer on any public right of way at
any time unless the trailer is properly connected to an operational motor
vehicle that has correct motor vehicle permits and license plates. (Ord. 2482,
10-6-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
5-3-7: NO STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING AREAS:
   A.   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, along the following roadways:
      1.   Illinois Route 59 from the northern corporate limits of the city to
the southern corporate limits of the city.
      2.   Illinois Route 56 from the western corporate limits of the city to
the eastern corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
      3.   Parking shall not be permitted along Route 59 between Batavia Road
and Illinois Route 56, within the city limits.
The city council will prohibit future parking at such locations on or
immediately adjacent to Route 59, between Batavia Road and Illinois Route 56
(Butterfield Road), in the city, as may be determined and directed by the state
to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring
public. (Ord. 839, 6-2-1986)
   B.   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord.
695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-8: PARKING LOTS, RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked on the parking lot of any church, school or
club except for the purpose of attending the meetings, services or other
activities of such church, school or club except with the permission of the
responsible authority.
   B.   No vehicle shall be parked in the parking lot of any business
establishment except for the purpose of attending to business at the location
or with the permission of the owner or operator of such business.
   C.   No vehicle shall be parked on the parking lot of any park, forest
preserve, museum or comparable facility except within the hours that such
facility is legally open for use. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-9: PARKING LIMITED TO SPECIFIC HOURS:
   A.   With the exception indicated by subsection B of this section, no
vehicle shall be parked on any street, roadway or roadway shoulder: 1) for a
period of twenty four (24) hours after the accumulation of two inches (2") or
more of snow; or 2) until the street or roadway has been cleared of snow.
   No vehicle shall be parked on any street, roadway or roadway shoulder where
the posting of temporary signage indicates that streets are to be swept. (Ord.
997, 10-3-1988)
   B.   Parking is specifically allowed on the southeast side of Stafford Place
for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') southwest of Batavia Road.
(Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
   C.   Parking is prohibited on the south side of White Oak Drive, east of
Twin Pines Drive, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984; amd. Ord. 1834, 5-1-2000)
   D.   Parking is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on Winchester Circle except for vehicles displaying
resident identification in the form approved by the City and available from the
Winchester Condominium Association.
   E.   Parking is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on the first one hundred feet (100') of the west side
of 2nd Street south of its intersection with Jefferson Street.
   F.   Parking is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on the west side of Emerald Green Drive.
   G.   Parking is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on the south side of Stafford Place.
   H.   Parking is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on the east side of Barkley Avenue between Calumet
Avenue (west) and Sunset Drive.
   I.   Parking is prohibited during the hours between two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. for all of the streets of Maple Hill Subdivision.
   J.   Parking is prohibited during the hours between two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on Grove Lane in those areas where parking is not
prohibited at all times by subsection 5-3-6II of this chapter.
   K.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle to which a trailer is
connected (“motor vehicle/trailer combination”) upon a street, alley, roadway,
roadway shoulder, parkway or any portion of any public right of way between the
hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.; provided,
however, that individual property owners may secure permission for the parking
of such motor vehicle/trailer combinations during the prohibited hours by
appearing in person at the Warrenville police station and making an application
to the chief of police or his designee, in accordance with such procedures as
he may designate. In granting permission to park a motor vehicle/trailer
combination during the prohibited hours on a specific date(s), the chief of
police or his designee shall give due consideration to the nature of the
request and the frequency with which such requests have been submitted by the
applicant.
   L.   Parking is prohibited on the north side of Warrenville Road between
Batavia Road and Curtis Avenue during the hours from two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to
six o’clock (6:00) A.M. except for those portions of Warrenville Road between
Warren Avenue and Steadman Avenue, where parking is prohibited at all times.
   M.   Parking is prohibited on the north side of Warrenville Road between
Curtis Avenue and Burk Avenue during the hours from two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to
six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
   N.   Parking is prohibited in the first eight (8) most southerly parking
spaces in front of the Albright Museum between the hours of two o’clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
   O.   Parking is prohibited on the north side of Calumet Avenue beginning two
hundred ten feet (210') east of the northeast corner of Calumet Avenue and
Talbot Avenue and ending four hundred feet (400') east of the same corner
Monday through Friday between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and seven
o’clock (7:00) P.M.
(Ord. 885, 3-16-1987; amd. Ord. 1121, 10-1-1990; Ord. 1215, 7-6-1992; Ord.
1260, 6-7-1993; Ord. 1515, 9-3-1996; Ord. 1581, 5-19-1997; Ord. 1686, 5-18-
1998; Ord. 1834, 5-1-2000; Ord. 2409, 11-5-2007; Ord. 2466, 8-4-2008; Ord.
2580, 5-3-2010; Ord. 2875, 8-18-2014; Ord. O2024-32, 7-15-2024)
5-3-10: LEAVING A PARKING PLACE, SIGNAL:
In leaving a parking place and moving into the stream of traffic, it is the
responsibility of the driver to signal his intent to oncoming traffic and to
execute the maneuver safely. (Ord. 695, 3-19-1984)
5-3-11: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Illegally Parked Vehicles: The police department is hereby authorized
to have removed, either by city owned equipment or by a commercial towing
service, any vehicle which is so parked as to constitute a traffic hazard. Such
vehicles may be stored at any private or public storage lot. The owner thereof
shall be responsible for payment of any costs and penalties incurred. (Ord.
695, 3-19-1984; amd. Ord. 1834, 5-1-2000)
   B.   Properly Parked Vehicles: The police department is hereby authorized to
have removed, either by city owned equipment, or by a commercial towing
service, any vehicle which has been properly parked on public property for an
excessive period of time. No vehicle shall, under any circumstances, be allowed
to remain so parked for more than seven (7) days consecutively. Such vehicles
may be stored at any private or public storage lot. The owner thereof shall be
responsible for payment of any costs and penalties incurred. (Ord. 695, 3-19-
1984)
   C.   For Snowplowing Or Street Sweeping: The Police Department is hereby
authorized to have removed, either by City owned equipment or by a commercial
towing service, any vehicle which has been parked in violation of subsection
5-3-9A of this chapter. Such vehicles may be stored at any private or public
storage lot. The owner thereof shall be responsible for payment of any costs
and penalties incurred.
   D.   Vehicles Creating Traffic Hazard: When an abandoned, unattended,
wrecked, disabled, burned or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic
hazard because of its position in relation to the public street or right-of-way
or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, the Police
Department may authorize its immediate removal from the public street or right-
of-way or property adjacent to the public street or right-of-way by city owned
equipment, a commercial towing service, or by other reasonable means if towing
is not feasible. Such vehicles may be stored at any private or public storage
lot. Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this Section 5-3-11.D shall
be those approved by the Chief of Police for all tow companies authorized to
tow for the Police Department. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible
for payment of any costs and penalties incurred.
(Ord. 997, 10-3-1988; Ord. O2019-27, 6-3-2019)
5-3-12: SIGNS:
The Police Department, with the concurrence of the Community Development
Committee, may cause signs, lines, markers and bumper blocks to be placed,
installed or painted as may be found necessary or desirable to regulate
parking, including indication of either angle or parallel parking. However, the
absence of signs shall not invalidate any regulation herein promulgated. (Ord.
695, 3-19-1984; amd. Ord. 1039, 6-5-1989)
5-3-13: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
   A.   Spaces For Handicapped Parking: Handicapped parking spaces are hereby
established pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.1 et seq., as
follows:
Whenever the Police Chief of the City finds that a handicapped parking space or
spaces is/are required, he shall recommend to the Mayor and City Council that
they designate such space or spaces as may be required for handicapped parking.
The Police Chief shall then cause to be erected above-grade signs designating
such space or spaces as reserved for handicapped persons.
   B.   Decals For Handicapped Parking:
      1.   The City Clerk is authorized to issue a decal to any handicapped
person requesting the provision of such decal.
      2.   The fee for the issuance of such decal shall be fifty cents ($0.50).
      3.   Such decal shall be affixed to the upper left-hand corner (driver's
side) of the rear window of the vehicle in which the handicapped person is
transported.
   C.   Registration Plates: A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued
to a handicapped person or a special decal or device issued by local
authorities or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction upon which is
displayed a registration plate, special decal or device issued by other
jurisdiction designating the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person
shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and exempt from any
statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations
of one-half (1/2) hour or less, on any street or highway zone, or any parking
lot or parking place which is owned, leased or owned and leased by a
municipality or a Municipal parking utility; but such vehicle shall be subject
to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing" zones in
front of or near fire hydrants, or driveways, public building entrances and
exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the
motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such vehicle shall be moved
at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by the officer.
Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates specified in this section or such
decals issued by local authorities as evidence that the vehicle is operated by
or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran may park, in addition to any
other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved for such
vehicles, by the posting of an official sign as provided in this section.
Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person
to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued
and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the
disabled person is present.
No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to
this section or where an official sign controlling such area expressly
prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a handicapped person or to a disabled
veteran, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped
person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or
public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved by the posting of an
official sign as designated under this section for motor vehicles bearing such
registration plates.
   D.   Removal Of Vehicle: Any person or local authority owning or operating
any public or private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the
Police Department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other
place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by
the handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plates or a
special decal or device as required under this section. (Ord. 785, 8-19-1985)
5-3-14: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00) except any person violating any
provision of section
5-3-13 of this chapter shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   B.   The fact that a vehicle illegally parked is registered in the name of
any person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the vehicle at the time of such violation. (Ord. 785, 8-19-1985;
amd. Ord. 1445, 11-6- 1995; Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017; Ord. O2022-47, 12-5-2022)
5-3-15: PARKING RESTRICTION SUSPENSION:
The Chief of Police is authorized to suspend parking restrictions in any area
of the City where, in the reasonable judgment of the Chief of Police, such
suspension is warranted due to extraordinary circumstances. As used herein, the
term "extraordinary circumstances" shall mean nonrecurring events that
adversely affect vehicular parking in a particular area of the City, including
construction in the public right-of- way, special City sponsored events, public
safety emergencies or other extraordinary circumstances. Should the suspension
of parking restrictions exceed thirty (30) days, the suspension shall require
the approval of the City Administrator. (Ord. 2227, 7-5-2005)
CHAPTER 4
STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Through Streets, Highways
5-4-2: Stop Intersections
5-4-3: Yield Right Of Way Intersections
5-4-4: One-Way Streets
5-4-5: Neighborhood Events/Street Closures
5-4-6: Public Traffic Prohibited On Closed Streets
5-4-1: THROUGH STREETS, HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Through streets or highways shall be so designated by ordinance unless
so designated by the state of Illinois or DuPage County. Stop signs shall be
erected at all intersections of other streets with a through street. (Ord. 61,
3-11-1969)
   B.   Batavia Road, within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby
designated as, and made, a through highway. The driver of all vehicles shall
stop at any entrance to said through highway and shall yield the right of way
to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching
so close on said through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless
directed otherwise by a traffic officer as an applicable traffic control
signal. (Ord. 272, 6-21-1976)
5-4-2: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Stop intersections may be designated by ordinance and stop signs shall be
erected at all such intersections. The erection and maintenance of stop signs
which are located where Warrenville streets intersect state maintained highways
shall be the sole responsibility of the Illinois department of transportation.
The erection and maintenance of stop signs which are located where Warrenville
streets intersect county maintained highways shall be the sole responsibility
of the county of DuPage, Illinois.
The corporate authorities of the city have determined it advisable that certain
intersections within the city be designated as no through traffic
intersections, one-way stop intersections, two-way stop intersections, four-way
stop intersections and traffic signal controlled intersections, respectively.
All such traffic controls existent and functional at the time of the effective
date hereof are hereby ratified and inventoried as follows:
   A.   One-Way Stops:
Adam Albright Street stops for Landon Drive
Albert Einstein Drive stops for Emerald Green Drive
Albert Einstein Drive stops for Enrico Fermi Court
Angeline Court stops for Continental Drive
Arthur Compton Court stops for Enrico Fermi Court
Ascot Lane stops for Mack Road
Attleboro Court stops for Continental Drive
Aurora Way stops for Warrenville Road
Avon Drive stops for Mack Road
Barkley Avenue stops for Ferry Road - DuPage County sign
Barkley Avenue stops for Frontage Road
Barkley Avenue stops for Duke Parkway
Bayview Court stops for Lakeview Drive
Bedford Lane (north) stops for Continental Drive
Bedford Lane (south) stops for Continental Drive
Behr's Circle Drive East stops for Warrenville Road
Behr's Circle Drive West stops for Warrenville Road
Branch Avenue stops for Continental Drive
Branch Avenue stops for Route 59 - state sign
Brayman Court stops for Barkley Avenue
Breme Drive stops for Herrick Road - DuPage County sign
Breme Drive stops for Huskie Highway
Brighten Court stops for Continental Drive
Bristol Lane stops for Mack Road
Brookside Court stops for Lakeview Drive
Burk Avenue stops for Warrenville Road
Calumet Avenue stops for Barkley Avenue
Cambridge Street stops for Everton Drive
Cambridge Street stops for Route 59 - state sign
Camden Street stops for Cambridge Street
Camden Street stops for Everton Drive
Cerny Circle stops for Batavia Road
Cherice Drive stops for Batavia Road
City Hall Parking Lot stops for Stafford Place
Concord Court stops for Continental Drive
Connector Road stops for Weaver Parkway
Connector Road stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
Continental Drive stops for Mack Road
Country Ridge Drive stops for Batavia Road
Country Ridge Drive stops for Route 59 - state sign
Crabtree Lane stops for Twin Pine Drive
Curtis Avenue stops for Ferry Road - DuPage County sign
Cynthia Drive (north) stops for Continental Drive
Cynthia Drive (south) stops for Continental Drive
Dedham Court stops for Continental Drive
Deerfield Lane stops for Mack Road
Dorchester Court stops for Continental Drive
Elizabeth Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue stops for Warrenville Road - DuPage County sign
Emerald Green Drive stops for Batavia Road
Enrico Fermi Court stops for Batavia Road
Estes Street stops for Route 59 - state sign
Everton Drive stops for route 59 - state sign
Forest Lane stops for Williams Road
Forestview Avenue (south) stops for River Road - DuPage County sign
Fourth Street stops for Batavia Road
Fourth Street stops for Warrenville Road
Foxboro Court stops for Continental Drive
Galusha Avenue stops for Herrick Road - DuPage County sign
Galusha Avenue stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
Gates Place stops for Batavia Road
Gates Place stops for Warren Avenue
Glen Drive stops for Batavia Road
Glen Drive stops for Calumet Avenue
Glen Drive stops for Warrenville Road
Greenview Avenue stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
Grove Lane South intersection stops for Timber Drive
Harvard Drive stops for Continental Drive
Harvest Court stops for Lakeview Drive
Heather Court stops for Continental Drive
Herrick Hill Court stops for Herrick Road - DuPage County sign
Holyoke Court stops for Continental Drive
Home Avenue stops for Meadow Avenue
Hurlingham Drive stops for Shaw Drive
Husky Highway stops for Herrick Road - DuPage County sign
Iroquois Court North stops for Williams Road
Iroquois Court South stops for Williams Road
Ivan Albright Street stops for Route 59 - state sign
Jefferson Street stops for Second Street
Jefferson Street stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
John Bardeen Drive stops for Emerald Green Drive
Lakeview Court stops for Lakeview Drive
Lakeview Drive stops for Barkley Avenue
Lakeview Drive stops for Continental Drive
Lambe Lane stops for Barkley Avenue
Lambe Lane stops for Estes Street
Landon Drive stops for Route 56 - state sign
Leominster Court stops for Continental Drive
Lindenwood Drive stops for Shaw Drive
Lorraine Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Lorraine Avenue stops for Warrenville Road
Main Street stops for Batavia Road
Main Street stops for Mignin Drive
Main Street stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
Malvin Albright Street stops for Curtis Avenue
Manning Avenue stops for Batavia Road
Manning Avenue stops for Warrenville Road
Maple Court stops for Continental Drive
Maple Terrace stops for Batavia Road
Maplewood Drive stops for Shaw Drive
McCormick Lane stops for Winfield Road - DuPage County sign
Melcher Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Melcher Avenue stops for Warrenville Road - DuPage County sign
Morris Court stops for Williams Road
Mount Street stops for Manning Avenue
Needam Court stops for Diehl Road - DuPage County sign
Parkview Avenue stops for Haylett Avenue
Parkview Avenue stops for Virginia Avenue
Patterman Road stops for Route 56 - state sign
Penny Lane stops for Willow Lane
Pierre Curie Lane stops for Arthur Compton Court
Prairie Avenue stops for Route 59 - state sign
Ray Street stops for Curtis Avenue
Ray Street stops for Rockwell Street
Ridge Drive stops for Route 59 - state sign
Ridgewood Court stops for Continental Drive
Rigi Road stops for Ferry Road - DuPage County sign
River Road stops for Warrenville Road - county intersection
Riverside Avenue stops for Batavia Road
Riverside Avenue stops for Branch Avenue
Riverview Drive stops for Batavia Road
Rockwell Street stops for Batavia Road
Rogers Avenue stops for River Road - DuPage County sign
Saddle Ridge Court stops for Galusha Avenue
Sanchez Drive stops for Batavia Road
Sanchez Drive stops for Branch Avenue
Second Street stops for Warrenville Road - DuPage County sign
Seraph Holmes Court stops for Batavia Road
Shaw Drive stops for Batavia Road
Shaw Drive stops for Continental Drive
Sheffield Lane stops for Mack Road
Small Tree Court stops for Continental Drive
Soya Lane stops for Batavia Road
Stafford Place (westbound) stops for Warren Avenue
Steadman Avenue stops for Warrenville Road
Stevens Court stops for Continental Drive
Sunset Drive stops for Lakeview Drive
Talbot Avenue stops for Frontage Road
Thornwood Lane stops for Twin Pines Drive
Timber Drive stops for Batavia Road
Tinker Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Torch Parkway stops for Torch Parkway
Tracy Place stops for Batavia Road
Twin Pines stops for Route 56 - state sign
Virginia Avenue stops for Warrenville Road - DuPage County sign
Wagner Drive stops for Curtis Avenue
Wagner Drive stops for Mignin Drive
Waverly Avenue stops for Riverside Avenue
Waverly Avenue stops for Route 59 - state sign
Weaver Parkway stops for Diehl Road - DuPage County sign
Wembly Drive stops for Continental Drive
West Street stops for Galusha Avenue
Westbury Court stops for Batavia Road
Whitehall Court stops for Continental Drive
Wilbur Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Wilbur Avenue stops for Warrenville Road - DuPage County sign
Willow Lane stops for Route 59 - state sign
Winchester Circle stops for Route 59 - state sign
Woodland Road stops for Curtis Avenue
Woodland Road stops for River Road - DuPage County sign
Woodlawn Street stops for Curtis Avenue
Woodlawn Street stops for Warren Avenue
Youghal Road stops for Barkley Avenue
Youghal Road stops for Talbot Avenue
   B.   Two-Way Stops:
Barkley Avenue stops for Estes Street
Barkley Avenue stops for Route 56 - state sign
Birchwood Drive stops for Candlewood Lane
Briggs Avenue stops for Route 56 - state sign
Burk Avenue stops for Wagner Drive
Calumet Avenue East stops for Williams Road
Cambridge Street stops for Everton Drive
Cambridge Street stops for Route 59 - state sign
Camden Drive stops for Cambridge Street
Camden Drive stops for Everton Drive
Candlewood Lane stops for Patterman Road
Continental Drive stops for Batavia Road
Essex Lane stops for Mack Road
Forestview Avenue South stops for Curtis Avenue
Haylett Avenue stops for Galusha Avenue
Haylett Avenue stops for Greenview Avenue
Lambe Lane stops for Barkley Avenue
Lambe Lane stops for Estes Street
Main Street stops for Curtis Avenue
Main Street stops for Fourth Street
Main Street stops for Manning Avenue
Main Street stops for Rockwell Street
Main Street stops for Warren Avenue
Mignin Drive stops for Warrenville Road
Rockwell Street stops for Butterfield Road (Route 56) - state sign
Rogers Avenue stops for Curtis Avenue
Rogers Avenue stops for Warren Avenue
Townline Avenue stops for Warren Avenue
Warrenville Road stops for Route 56 - state sign
Williams Road stops for Batavia Road
Williams Road stops for Route 56 - state sign
   C.   Three-Way Stops:
Batavia Road stops for Warrenville Road
Calumet Avenue stops for Talbot Avenue
Emerald Green Drive stops for Emerald Green Drive East
Emerald Green Drive stops for Emerald Green Drive West
Mount Street stops for Rockwell Street
Rockwell Street stops for Calumet Avenue East
Rockwell Street (northbound) stops for Mount Street
Rockwell Street stops for Warrenville Road
Sanchez Drive stops for Arbury Court
Sanchez Drive stops for Elmwood Court
Stafford Place stops for Rockwell Street
Winchester Circle stops for Winchester Circle
   D.   Four-Way Stop Intersections:
Curtis Avenue and Townline Road
Curtis Avenue and Warrenville Road
Curtis Avenue/Tracy Place and Warren Avenue
Manning Avenue and Warren Avenue
Prairie Avenue and Patterman Road
Ray Street and Manning Avenue
Twin Pines Drive and Candlewood Lane
Virginia and Galusha Avenue
Warren Avenue and Forestview Avenue South
Warren Avenue and Warrenville Road
White Oak Drive r and Twin Pines Drive
   E.   Conditions Warranting Erection Of Stop Signs: In addition to the
foregoing, a stop sign may be warranted, and the council may cause its erection
where one or more of the following conditions exists within the city:
      1.   An intersection where the application of the statutory right of way
rule is unduly hazardous.
      2.   An intersection where a street enters a through highway or street.
      3.   Any other intersection where a combination of high speed, restricted
view, and previous accident record indicate a need for traffic control through
a stop sign.
      4.   An intersection where, in any twelve (12) month period, there have
been three (3) or more reported accidents of a type which could be
substantially avoided by the installation of a stop sign. Such accidents
include right and left turn collisions, as well as right angle collisions.
      5.   An intersection where the total vehicular volume entering thereon
from all approaches averages at least one hundred (100) vehicles per hour for
any four (4) hours on an average day.
      6.   An intersection where the combined vehicular and pedestrian volume
from the minor street or highway averages at least seventy five (75) units per
hour for any four (4) hours of an average day.
The public safety legislative and intergovernmental affairs committee of the
city may recommend to the city council the installation of one or more stop
signs at specified locations in the city. Any such recommendations shall be
based on an engineering study completed by the city safety director, or an
outside consultant with the aid and review of the chief of police. Any such
study shall indicate the existing conditions and wherein those conditions fall
within one or more of the stop sign warrants set forth in this subsection E.
(Ord. 2809, 10-7-2013; amd. Ord. O2019-23, 5-20-2019; Ord. O2019-56, 10-21-
2019; Ord. O2023-15, 4-17-2023; Ord. 2023-33, 8-21-2023; Ord. O2023-44, 11-20-
2023; Ord. O2024-55, 12-2-2024; Ord. O2025-37, 8-18-2025)
5-4-3: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
Yield right of way intersections may be designated by ordinance and signs so
indicating shall be erected at such intersections. Yield signs shall be
installed and maintained at the following intersections:
Candlewood Lane yield to Briarwood Lane
Central Avenue yield to Elizabeth Avenue
Central Avenue yield to Lorraine Avenue
Central Avenue yield to Melcher Avenue
Central Avenue yield to Virginia Avenue
Central Avenue yield to Wilbur Avenue
Frontage Road Route 56 yield to Barkley Avenue
Frontage Road Route 56 yield to Briggs Avenue
Grove Lane North intersection yield to Timber Drive
Hampton Drive yield to Wembly Avenue
River Oaks Drive yield to Ridge Drive
Stafford Place eastbound yield to Warren Avenue (Ord. 2703, 3-19-2012)
5-4-4: ONE-WAY STREETS:
One-way streets may be designated by ordinance and such designation may apply
only during stated hours. Appropriate signs shall be erected. (Ord. 61, 3-11-
1967)
Bank alley (Ord. 709, 5-21-1984)
5-4-5: NEIGHBORHOOD EVENTS/STREET CLOSURES:
Upon receipt of an application for a block party or other neighborhood event,
not less than thirty (30) days before the proposed event, the chief of police
may authorize a permit to allow the temporary closure of specific streets to
general traffic for the event. The permit shall be valid only for a specific
period of time, which shall be set forth in the permit. The applicant shall be
responsible for the payment of any costs incurred by the city in providing
equipment or services for the event, and said payment shall be made prior to
the issuance of the permit. The permit application shall be denied if, in the
reasonable discretion and determination of the chief of police, the proposed
closure of the specific streets would have a materially adverse effect on the
free flow of traffic in the area adjacent to the event or would otherwise
jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the city or its residents. (Ord.
2167, 9-7-2004)
5-4-6: PUBLIC TRAFFIC PROHIBITED ON CLOSED STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle, except an
authorized emergency vehicle, upon any street or highway within the city that
is officially closed, either temporarily or permanently, to traffic and that is
plainly marked or indicated as such by officially erected barricades, signs, or
signals or other traffic control device or legend. (Ord. O2022-09, 4-4-2022)
CHAPTER 5
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles Used In Connection With Illegal Activities
5-5-2: Notice
5-5-3: Preliminary Hearing
5-5-4: Posttow Hearing
5-5-5: Administrative Fee
5-5-6: Vehicle Possession
5-5-1: IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL
ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Violations Authorizing Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated with the
permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in
connection with the following violations, shall be subject to tow and
impoundment by the city, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be
liable to the city for an administrative fee in addition to any towing and
storage fees, as hereinafter provided:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted
commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq.
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compounds, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
501.
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the
provisions of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/1.
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois
controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100.
      5.   Unlawful use of a weapon in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1; aggravated discharge of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2; and unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm
ammunition, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1.
      6.   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is revoked or suspended, as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-303.
      7.   Operating or using the motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated the offenses of driving while license is
revoked or suspended 1 , operating the motor vehicle without a valid driver's
license 2 , and/or driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs,
intoxicating compound(s) or any combination thereof 3 .
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without a valid license or
permit, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101.
      9.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, in violation of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204 and 204.1.
      10.   Illegally transporting open alcoholic beverages, in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-502.
      11.   Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving, in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-503.
      12.    Street racing, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-506.
      13.   Aggravated assault, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/12-2.
      14.   Domestic battery, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
12-3.2.
      15.   Aggravated battery, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/12-3.05.
      16.   Offense of retail theft when the value of merchandise exceeds
$150.00, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16.
      17.   Robbery, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-1.
      18.   Aggravated arson, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
20-1.1.
      19.   Criminal damage to property, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1.
      20.   Mob action, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
      21.   Prostitution, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
14 or solicitation of a sexual act, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-14.
      22.   Soliciting for a prostitute, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-15.
      23.   Patronizing a prostitute, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-18.
      24.   Patronizing a juvenile prostitute, in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-18.1.
      25.   Failure to stop or remain at the scene of an accident that resulted
in personal injury or death, or failure to report the accident within one-half
hour after the motor vehicle accident or within one-half hour of being
discharged from the hospital, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11- 401.
      26.   Failure to stop or remain at the scene of an accident that resulted
in damage to any motor vehicle, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-402.
      27.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without a commercial driver's
license ("CDL") when a CDL is required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
507.
      28.   Unlawful use of weapon, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1.
      29.   Aggravated discharge of a firearm, in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5.
      30.   Unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition, in
violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing
laws pertaining to vehicle seizure, towing and impoundment, and the owner shall
be subject to these penalties in addition to any penalties that may be assessed
by a court for any criminal charges.
      2.   This chapter shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation
was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered.
      3.   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be
those approved by the chief of police for all tow companies authorized to tow
for the police department. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014; amd. Ord. O2024-54, 12-2-
2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/6-303.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/6-101.
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
5-5-2: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the
city. Before or at a time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
any person identifying himself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, of
the fact of the impoundment, and of the vehicle and of the owner's right to
request a preliminary impoundment hearing to be conducted under section
5-5-3 of this chapter. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion
of the hearings provided for in sections
5-5-3 and
5-5-4 of this chapter, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the city a
cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the accrued
towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014)
5-5-3: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of record of a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter desires
to appeal the impoundment, said owner must make a request for hearing within
twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment. Said request shall be in writing and
filed with the chief of police or his designee, who shall conduct such
preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or city holidays. All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle
impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs. If after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment
pursuant to this chapter, he shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle as provided in this chapter unless the owner of the vehicle posts with
the city a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays
the tower any applicable towing and storage fees. If the chief of police or his
designee determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be
returned without penalty or other fees. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014)
5-5-4: POSTTOW HEARING:
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded pursuant to this chapter, the
city shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of
record of the date, time, and location of a posttow hearing that will be
conducted, pursuant to this section. The hearing shall be conducted by a
hearing officer designated by the city administrator. All interested persons
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either
party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal
rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.
If, after the posttow hearing, the hearing officer determines, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the vehicle was used in connection with a
violation set forth in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the city for an
administrative fee as provided in section
5-5-5 of this chapter and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded
until the owner pays the administrative fee to the city plus fees to the tower
for the towing and storage of the vehicle. If the owner of record fails to
appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor
of the city. If the hearing officer finds no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's vehicle or cash
bond without fees. The decision of the hearing officer shall be subject to
judicial review in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014)
5-5-5: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The administrative fee for a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall
be $500.00; provided however, the administrative fee for a vehicle impounded
pursuant to subsections 5-5-1-A.9, 5-5-1-A.11, 5-5-1-A.12, 5-5-1-A.28, 5-5-1-
A.29, or 5-5-1-A.30 of this chapter shall be $950.00. If an administrative fee
is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such fee shall constitute a debt due and
owing the city. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this chapter the
bond shall be applied to the fee. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a
fee is imposed, the city may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce
such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as provided
otherwise in this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the
fee is paid to the city and any applicable towing fees are paid to the tower,
in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is
legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise
disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the
administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30)
days after an administrative fee is imposed against an owner of record who
defaults by failing to appear at the posttow hearing, the vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative
fee and applicable fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the
expiration of time at which judicial review of the hearing officer's
determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking
judicial review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is
applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the
Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014; amd. Ord. O2024-54, 12-2-2024)
5-5-6: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder,
or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the administrative fee and fees applicable
under this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person with a lien of
record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings,
possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in
writing to refund the city the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure
sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed
the administrative fee, plus the applicable fees.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the
record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state of the state of
Illinois. (Ord. 2898, 12-1-2014)
CHAPTER 6
REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-6-1: Lexington Trace Subdivision
5-6-2: Everton Subdivision
5-6-3: Vanguard Warrenville Apartments Subdivision
5-6-4: Warrenville Horizon Senior Living Community
5-6-1: LEXINGTON TRACE SUBDIVISION:
   A.   The City shall have the authority to enforce signs regulating the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in designated fire lanes installed
on privately owned motor courts and drive aisles within Lexington Trace
Subdivision, which privately owned motor courts and drive aisles are depicted
on the Final Planned Unit Development Site Plan and the Final Plat of
Subdivision for the Lexington Trace Subdivision approved by City Ordinance No.
O2019-12 and recorded with the DuPage County Recorder as Document No. R2019-
025216.
   B.   Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at
its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any and all signs necessary for
the enforcement of the parking restrictions within designated fire lanes on the
private property identified in Subsection
5-6-1 .A.
   C.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within Lexington Trace
Subdivision in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section.
   D.   Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section, the City may enforce
the restriction against such person as if the action had taken place on a
public highway.
   E.   Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall not
deny the City access to the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-1 .A or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that
prevents the City from accessing such private property to enforce the
regulations of this Section. If Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in
interest thereto, violates this Subsection
5-6-1 .E, then the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   F.   Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall, at
its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability insurance in the minimum
amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) that names the City as a party
insured for any claims arising out of the enforcement by the City of the
parking regulations set forth this Section on the private roadways identified
in Subsection
5-6-1 .A. During any time that Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in
interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this Subsection,
the Village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking regulations
set forth in this Section.
   G.   Lexington Trace, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, may rescind
its request for the City to enforce the regulations of this Section on the
private property identified in Subsection
5-6-1 .A by filing a written request with the City Administrator; provided,
however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12)
months after the date that Lexington Trace, LLC filed its written request for
the City to enforce the parking regulations set forth in this Section. After
receipt of such rescission request, the City Council will repeal this Section
5-6-1 , which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following
the action by the City Council to repeal this Section.
(Ord. O2019-43, 8-5-2019)
5-6-2: EVERTON SUBDIVISION:
   A.   The City shall have the authority to enforce signs regulating the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in designated fire lanes installed
on privately owned drive aisles within the Everton Subdivision, which privately
owned drive aisles are depicted on the Final Planned Unit Development Plan and
Final Plat of Subdivision for the Everton Mixed-Use Development approved by
City Ordinance No. O2019-05 and recorded with the DuPage County Recorder as
Document No. R2019-034239.
   B.   M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall,
at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any and all signs necessary
for the enforcement of the parking restrictions within designated fire lanes on
the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-2 .A.
   C.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within the Everton
Subdivision in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section.
   D.   Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section, the City may enforce
the restriction against such person as if the action had taken place on a
public highway.
   E.   M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall
not deny the City access to the private roadways identified in Subsection
5-6-2 .A or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that
prevents the City from accessing such private roadways to enforce the
regulations of this Section. If M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in
interest thereto, violates this Subsection
5-6-2 .E, then the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   F.   M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, shall,
at its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability insurance in the
minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) that names the City as a
party insured for any claims arising out of the enforcement by the City of the
parking regulations set forth this Section on the private roadways identified
in Subsection
5-6-2 .A. During any time that M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in
interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this Subsection,
the Village shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking regulations
set forth in this Section.
   G.   M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC, or any successor in interest thereto, may
rescind its request for the City to enforce the regulations of this Section on
the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-1 .A by filing a written request with the City Administrator; provided,
however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to twelve (12)
months after the date that M/I Homes of Chicago, LLC filed its written request
for the City to enforce the parking regulations set forth in this Section.
After receipt of such rescission request, the City Council will repeal this
Section
5-6-2 , which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following
the action by the City Council to repeal this Section.
(Ord. O2019-43, 8-5-2019)
5-6-3: VANGUARD WARRENVILLE APARTMENTS SUBDIVISION:
   A.   The City shall have the authority to enforce signs regulating the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in designated fire lanes, drive
aisles, and loading/drop-off zones within Vanguard Warrenville Apartments
Subdivision, which privately owned fire lanes, drive aisles, and loading/drop-
off zones are depicted on the Final Planned Unit Development Site Plan and the
Final Plat of Subdivision for the Vanguard Warrenville Apartments approved by
City Ordinance No. 02019-46 and recorded with the DuPage County Recorder as
Document No's. R2019-120712 and R2019-120713.
   B.   Vanguard Warrenville Apartments L.P., or any successor in interest
thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any and all
signs necessary for the enforcement of the parking restrictions within
designated fire lanes on the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-3 .A.
   C.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within Vanguard
Warrenville Apartments Subdivision in violation of the specific restrictions
set forth on any sign prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section.
   D.   Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section, the City may enforce
the restriction against such person as if the action had taken place on a
public highway.
   E.   Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P., or any successor in interest
thereto, shall not deny the City access to the private property identified in
Subsection
5-6-3 .A or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that
prevents the City from accessing such private property to enforce the
regulations of this Section. If Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P., or any
successor in interest thereto, violates this Subsection
5-6-3 .E, then the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   F.   Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P., or any successor in interest
thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 that names the City as a party
insured for any claims arising out of the enforcement by the City of the
parking regulations set forth this Section on the private roadways identified
in Subsection
5-6-3 .A. During any time that Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P., or any
successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this
Subsection, the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   G.   Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P., or any successor in interest
thereto, may rescind its request for the City to enforce the regulations of
this Section on the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-3 .A by filing a written request with the City Administrator; provided,
however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to 12 months after
the date that Vanguard Warrenville Apartments, L.P. filed its written request
for the City to enforce the parking regulations set forth in this Section.
After receipt of such rescission request, the City Council will repeal this
Section
5-6-3 , which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following
the action by the City Council to repeal this Section. (Ord. O2020-04, 1-20-
2020)
5-6-4: WARRENVILLE HORIZON SENIOR LIVING COMMUNITY:
   A   The City shall have the authority to enforce signs regulating the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in designated fire lanes installed
on privately owned parking areas and drive aisles within the Warrenville
Horizon Senior Living Community, located on Lot 1 of the Alden Warrenville
Subdivision Plat, dated March 2, 2020, and recorded with the DuPage County
Recorder as Document No. [insert document number], which privately owned
parking areas and drive aisles are depicted on the Final PUD Site Plan approved
by Ordinance No. 02020-11 and recorded with the DuPage County Recorder as
Document No. [insert document number].
   B.   Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any successor in interest
thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, erect and maintain any and all
signs necessary for the enforcement of the parking restrictions within
designated fire lanes on the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-4 .A.
   C.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the Warrenville
Horizon Senior Living Community property in violation of the specific
restrictions set forth on any sign prohibiting parking installed pursuant to
this Section.
   D.   Where any owner or user of a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in violation of the specific restrictions set forth on any sign
prohibiting parking installed pursuant to this Section, the City may enforce
the restriction against such person as if the action had taken place on a
public highway.
   E.   Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any successor in interest
thereto, shall not deny the City access to the private property identified in
Subsection
5-6-4 .A or erect or maintain any gate or other control device in a manner that
prevents the City from accessing such private property to enforce the
regulations of this Section. If Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any
successor in interest thereto, violates this Subsection
5-6-4 .E, then the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   F.   Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any successor in interest
thereto, shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain general liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 that names the City as a party
insured for any claims arising out of the enforcement by the City of the
parking regulations set forth this Section on the private roadways identified
in Subsection
5-6-4 .A. During any time that Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any
successor in interest thereto, does not maintain the insurance required by this
Subsection, the City shall have no obligation to enforce any of the parking
regulations set forth in this Section.
   G.   Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership, or any successor in interest
thereto, may rescind its request for the City to enforce the regulations of
this Section on the private property identified in Subsection
5-6-4 .A by filing a written request with the City Administrator; provided,
however, that no such rescission request may be filed prior to 12 months after
the date that Warrenville Horizon Limited Partnership filed its written request
for the City to enforce the parking regulations set forth in this Section.
After receipt of such rescission request, the City Council will repeal this
Section
5-6-4 , which repeal will be effective on the January 1 immediately following
the action by the City Council to repeal this Section. (Ord. O2020-13, 3-16-
2020)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Sale and Handling of Food
6-1-1: SALE AND HANDLING OF FOOD 1 :
   A.   Premises and Equipment: All premises and equipment used in the storage
and sale of food or drink for human consumption shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. Premises shall be kept free from flies, insects or vermin
of any kind.
   B.   Personnel: It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted
with a contagious disease to handle any food or drink intended for human use or
to handle any utensils used for this purpose.
   C.   Food and Drink: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome or polluted food or drink. (Ord. 24, 3-25-68)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 6, Title 3 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions; License Required; Fee
6-2-2: Application For License
6-2-3: Insurance Requirement
6-2-4: Vehicles
6-2-5: Dumping
6-2-6: Exclusive Franchise For Waste Collection And Disposal From Residential
Dwellings
6-2-7: Recyclable Materials
6-2-8: Hours Of Operation
6-2-9: Lawful Methods For Refuse Collection And Disposal From Residential
Dwellings
6-2-10: Residential Refuse Collection And Disposal Charge
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS; LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
                      Any refuse that is (i) capable of being decomposed into
                      compost by composting, and (ii) separated by the
ORGANICS:             generator of the refuse from other waste, including, but
                      not limited to, refuse that is not capable of being
                      decomposed into compost by composting.
                      Without limitation, any materials designated as
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: "recyclable materials" in the city's franchise agreement
                      for the collection of recyclable materials.
REFUSE:               Solid waste, yard waste, and recyclable materials.
SCAVENGER:            Any person engaged in the business of the removal and
                      disposal of refuse.
SOLID WASTE:          All household waste that is not yard waste or recyclable
                      materials.
                      All accumulations of grass, shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
                      tree limbs or trunk less than four (4) inches in diameter
YARD WASTE:           and less than four (4) feet in length, and other
                      materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
                      shrubbery, vines and trees.
   B.   License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of scavenger or the collection or disposal of animal or vegetable
refuse or offal, without having first secured a license therefor. The license
period shall be from May 1 through April 30 of the following year. Before a
license may be issued hereunder, the scavenger shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   Payment of an annual license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00); and
      2.   Submission of an insurance policy to the city evidencing that the
scavenger has general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 901, 6-15-1987; amd. Ord. O2021-24, 6-21-2021)
6-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be made prior to May 1. Application for license
shall be made to the city clerk, and payment for such license shall be tendered
at the time of application. (Ord. 901, 6-15-1987)
6-2-3: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
Such application shall be accompanied by an insurance certificate naming the
city as coinsured and the city shall approve said certificate. (Ord. 498, 4-7-
1980)
6-2-4: VEHICLES:
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight and
equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be
driven over or through any street in the city during or on a Sunday. (Ord. 498,
4-7-1980; amd. Ord. 901, 6-15-1987)
6-2-5: DUMPING:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in any
place in the city limits, excepting with the permission of the city council.
(Ord. 498, 4-7-1980; amd. Ord. 901, 6-15-1987)
6-2-6: EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FROM RESIDENTIAL
DWELLINGS.
   A.   Exclusive Franchise: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
chapter, the city will enter into an exclusive franchise agreement with no more
than one scavenger for the collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclable
materials, and yard waste for all single family and attached single family
residential dwellings; provided; however, the city's franchise agreement will
not apply to residential subdivisions governed by a homeowner's association
that adopted by-laws prior June 21, 2021, or otherwise approved by the City
permitting the homeowner's association to enter into its own agreements for a
waste collection and disposal system.
   B.   Provisions of Franchise: The exclusive franchise agreement with a
scavenger, hereinafter, the "franchisee", referred to in subsection A of this
section shall include, at a minimum, the following provisions:
      1.   A requirement that the franchisee must offer and make available to
all of the customers it serves the collection and processing of recyclable
materials.
      2.   Direction as to where the franchisee must or must not dump or
dispose of the solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste it collects.
      3.   A fee schedule and service standards established by the city.
      4.   A requirement for the posting of either a performance bond with an
adequate surety to carry out the purposes of the franchise agreement or an
irrevocable letter of credit from a bank with sufficient capital assets to
ensure that the purposes of the franchise agreement will be carried out.
      5.   A requirement that all residential dwellings, except those
identified in section
6-2-6 (A), be served no less often than once each week. (Ord. O2021-24, 6-21-
2021)
6-2-7: RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a properly licensed scavenger
or persons authorized by the city, to collect, pick up, or otherwise dispose of
any recyclable materials which have been set at curbside for collection.(Ord.
2665, 9-19-2011; amd. Ord. O2021-24, 6-21-2021)
6-2-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to collect or dispose of any refuse,
garbage, or other waste between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1234, 12-7-1992)
6-2-9: LAWFUL METHODS FOR REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FROM RESIDENTIAL
DWELLINGS:
   A.   All refuse produced on the premises of any residential dwelling covered
by the franchise agreement pursuant to section
6-2-6  of this code, except for organics composted in accordance with
subsection C of this section, must be disposed of by the person in possession
of the premises by using the scavenger holding a franchise from the city
pursuant to section
6-2-6  of this Code. Pickup and removal of such refuse by such scavenger must
be only from the premises on which the refuse is generated and not from any
location other than the premises on which the refuse is generated.
   B.   It is unlawful for any scavenger to collect or dispose of refuse in a
manner contrary to the city's exclusive franchise for residential refuse
collection and disposal.
   C.   Organics may be composted on a residential property or taken to an off-
site composting facility subject to the following performance standards:
      1.   Nuisance prohibited: No composting may be conducted on a residential
property in a manner that constitutes a nuisance to neighboring properties or
the general public. A composting pile, container or bin shall be deemed a
nuisance if a foul odor can be detected from any adjacent property line and/or
if the compost container attracts wild animals.
      2.   Prohibited Organics: Meat, bones, oils, lard, grease, liquid dairy,
poultry, fish, human or animal waste, or any organics brought from outside the
property may not be composted on a residential property. (Ord. O2021-24, 6-21-
2021)
6-2-10: RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL CHARGE:
   A.   Rates and Charges: Any person disposing of refuse through the refuse
collection franchise scavenger must pay the rates and charges established by
the City. The amount of such rates and charges will be clearly set forth in the
City's franchise agreement. All occupied residential dwellings in the City
generate refuse, and the rates and charges will be assessed against and
collected from each residential unit subject to the franchise agreement
pursuant to section
6-2-6  of this code.
   B.   Waiver: The City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee may
waive the requirement of subsection A for a particular premises only upon
receipt of a written request from the owner of the premises, when such premises
is vacant, as determined by the City Administrator or the City Administrator's
designee in their sole and absolute discretion, that no refuse is and will be
generated on the premises.
   C.   Billing and Collection: The rates and charges imposed by subsection A
of this section may be billed for and collected by the City or the franchisee
may provide billing services to the city and directly bill the applicable
residential units for the rates and charge. The method of billing and
collection will be set forth in the franchise agreement. (Ord. O2021-24, 6-21-
2021)
CHAPTER 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Administration
6-3-2: Definitions
6-3-3: General Requirements
6-3-4: Light, Ventilation And Occupancy Limitations
6-3-5: Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements
6-3-6: Mechanical And Electrical Requirements
6-3-7: Fire Safety Requirements
6-3-1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   General:
      1.   Title: These regulations shall be known as the PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
CODE OF THE CITY OF WARRENVILLE.
      2.   Scope: This chapter is adopted to protect public property, the
public health, safety and welfare in all existing structures, residential and
nonresidential, and on all existing premises by establishing minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities
for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the
elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and
sanitary maintenance; fixing the responsibility of owners, operators and
occupants; regulating the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and
providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
      3.   Intent: This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they
are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Any nonconforming structure that was legally existing or lawfully
modified may continue, provided, however, that existing structures and premises
that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to
provide a minimum level of health and safety.
      4.   Referenced Standards: The referenced standards shall be as set forth
in the applicable code and standards, adopted periodically by the city council.
Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and referenced
standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
      5.   Existing Remedies: The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
      6.   Workmanship: All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this chapter shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner.
      7.   Application Of Other Codes: Any repairs, additions or alterations to
a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing and mechanical codes and
electrical code listed in title 8 of this code.
   B.   Validity; Saving Clause:
      1.   Validity: If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
      2.   Saving Clause: This chapter shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the
full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
   C.   Maintenance:
      1.   Required: All equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous statute or code for the structure or premises when
erected or altered shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements
of this chapter are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation
of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
   D.   Approval:
      1.   Approved Materials And Equipment: All materials, equipment and
devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with such approval.
      2.   Modifications: Where there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out structural or mechanical provisions of this chapter, the code
official shall have the right to vary or modify such provisions upon
application of the owner or the owner's representative, provided that the
spirit and intent of the law is observed and that the public health, safety and
welfare is assured.
         a.   Records: The application for modification and the final decision
of the code official shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in
the permanent records of the community development department.
      3.   Material And Equipment Reuse: Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good and proper working condition and
approved.
      4.   Alternative Materials And Equipment: The provisions of this chapter
are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any
such alternative has been approved by the code official. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved when the code official
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of
the provisions of this chapter, and that the material, method or work offered
is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this chapter, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability
and safety.
   E.   Duties And Powers Of Code Official:
      1.   General: The code official shall enforce all of the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Notices And Orders: The code official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      3.   Right Of Entry: The code official is authorized to enter any space
commonly open to the general public. The code official is authorized to request
entry into a structure or premises not otherwise open to the general public
where a violation of this chapter has either: a) been reported in the structure
or on the premises by the owner, operator, or occupant of said structure or
premises, or b) has been reported and documented in accordance with the
processing and verification of alleged violations provisions set forth herein.
When requesting entry, the code official shall present proper identification.
Prior to entering into a space not otherwise open to the general public, the
code official shall receive written or verbal approval from the owner,
operator, occupant or other person having charge and control of the structure
or premises. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official shall have
the authority to pursue recourse as provided by law.
      4.   Access By Owner Or Operator: Every occupant of a structure or
premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee, access
to any part of such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   Identification: The code official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
chapter.
      6.   Coordination Of Enforcement: Inspection of premises, the issuance of
notices and orders and enforcement thereof shall be the responsibility of the
code official so charged by the jurisdiction. Whenever inspections are
necessary by any other department, the code official shall make reasonable
effort to arrange for the coordination of such inspections so as to minimize
the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments
for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A
department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency orders. If
the code official has a reasonable basis to believe that any request for
inspection is associated with the sale or resale of the property, the code
official may decline to perform the inspection.
      7.   Rule Making Authority: As outlined hereinbelow, the code official
shall have power as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare, to propose and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret
and implement the provisions of this chapter to secure the intent thereof and
to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or some other
conditions. However, before any such rule or regulation goes into effect, the
code official shall submit said rule or regulation in writing to the city
council for a period of not less than thirty (30) days. If after thirty (30)
days the city council takes no action on the proposed rule or regulation, it
shall automatically go into effect. If, however, at anytime during the thirty
(30) day period, the city council acts to overrule the proposed rule or
regulation, it would not go into effect. Such rules shall not have the effect
of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided
for in this chapter or violating accepted engineering practice involving public
safety.
      8.   Organization: The city council shall appoint such number of
officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be
necessary for the administration of this chapter and as authorized by the
appointing authority. The city council is authorized to designate an employee
as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the code official during
temporary absence or disability of the code official.
      9.   Restriction Of Employees: An official or employee connected with the
enforcement of this chapter shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly
connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the preparation of
construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the
building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work that conflicts
with official duties or with the interests of the community development
department.
      10.   Official Records: An official record shall be kept of all business
and activities of the community development department, and all such records
shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times and according to
reasonable rules to maintain the integrity and security of such records.
      11.   Relief From Personal Responsibility: The code official, officer or
employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the
jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction, or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter; and any officer of the community development
department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
   F.   Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail to maintain,
provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or occupy or permit another
person to occupy any structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause
same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the code
official, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Processing And Verification Of Alleged Violations: The code official
or their designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter in order to abate any violation of this chapter he or she observes on a
premises or in a structure commonly open to the general public. In instances
involving alleged violations on a premises or in a structure not otherwise open
to the general public, the code official or their designee shall only enforce
the provisions of this chapter to abate a specific violation on which a formal
complaint has been filed with the code official or their designee. Such a
complaint shall specifically identify the alleged violation. To the maximum
extent permitted by law, the names, address or other information identifying
the complainant(s) shall be kept confidential and shall not be made public or
known to the alleged violator except upon the permission of the complainant.
      3.   Penalty: (Rep. by Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
      4.   Prosecution: In case of any unlawful acts the code official shall
institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty.
Also, the code official shall ask the jurisdiction's legal representative to
proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation
for the purpose of ordering that person: a) to restrain, correct or remove the
violation or refrain from further execution of work, b) to restrain or correct
the erection, installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of such
structure, c) to require the removal of work in violation, or d) to prevent the
occupancy of the structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      5.   City Abatement Of Confirmed Weed Violations: The city may abate such
violations in accordance with the following provisions:
         a.   Weeds: If a weed violation is not abated within ten (10) days
after the issuance of a written violation notice, the city may proceed to abate
such violation, keeping account of the expense of the abatement, and such
expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner or person(s) responsible. If
a bill for such abatement remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after being
rendered, the city clerk may file a lien on the property for said costs with
the recorder of deeds of DuPage County in accordance with the lien provisions
set forth herein.
   G.   Notices, Orders, Lien; Foreclosure:
      1.   Notice To Owner Or To Person Or Persons Responsible: Whenever the
code official verifies that a violation of this chapter has occurred, notice
should be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefor in
the manner prescribed herein. The procedures set forth herein are the
recommended guidelines to be generally followed by the code official, but the
failure to follow these guidelines shall not be a basis for any property owner
and/or defendant to challenge in court any citation or complaint. The property
owner and/or defendant shall, however, have the right to report any such
failure to the city administrator.
      2.   Procedure: In pursuing the abatement of a confirmed violation to
this chapter, the code official shall issue the owner or responsible person(s)
a written violation notice. If a chapter violation is not abated in accordance
with the provisions of the written violation notice, or in instances involving
the repeat violation of the same chapter provision(s) by the same person(s),
the code official shall be authorized to institute: a) city abatement of the
violation in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code and/or b)
prosecution of the person(s) responsible for the violation in accordance with
the provisions set forth herein and without any further warning notices.
      3.   Form: All written violation notices ("warning tickets") shall:
         a.   Be in writing;
         b.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
         c.   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued and what section(s) of this chapter is being violated;
         d.   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, structure, or
premises into compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
         e.   Be served in compliance with the provisions set forth herein.
      4.   Method Of Service: Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is: a) delivered to the owner, the owner's agent, or, as
appropriate, the occupant personally; or b) sent by certified or first class
mail addressed to the last known address of the owner, the owner's agent, or,
as appropriate, the occupant. If the notice is returned showing that the notice
was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner, the owner's agent, or, as appropriate, the
occupant, shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. Notices for
vehicle storage violations shall be permanently posted on the vehicle if, after
reasonable inquiry, the identity of the owner cannot be obtained.
      5.   Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall
be as set forth herein.
      6.   Transfer Of Ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the compliance order or
notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any
compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall
furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance
order or notice of violation.
      7.   Liens: If after sixty (60) days from being billed for the costs
incurred by the city in performing work authorized under the weed violations,
unsafe structures and equipment, and demolition provisions of this chapter, the
owner does not reimburse the city, the costs may be filed as a lien upon the
premises by the city as authorized by and provided in the applicable provisions
of state law.
   H.   Unsafe Structures And Equipment:
      1.   General: When a structure or equipment is found by the code official
to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
         a.   Unsafe Structure: An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of
the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants
in the event of a fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or
is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is
likely.
         b.   Unsafe Equipment: Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
         c.   Structure Unfit For Human Occupancy: A structure is unfit for
human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or because
the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
         d.   Unlawful Structure: An unlawful structure is one found in whole
or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Chapter, or
was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
      2.   Closing Of Vacant Structures: If the structure is vacant and unfit
for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on
the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed
through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate in
accordance with the lien provisions set forth herein.
      3.   Notice: Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this Section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with the notice procedure set forth herein. The notice
shall be in the form prescribed in subsection G of this Section.
      4.   Placarding: Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the
word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
      5.   Prohibited Occupancy: Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises
or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by
this Chapter.
      6.   Removal Of Placard: The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this Chapter.
   I.   Emergency Measures:
      1.   Imminent Danger: When, in the combined opinion of the code official
and the Chief of the Warrenville Fire Protection District, or his designee,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity
of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or
dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code
official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice
reading as follows: "This structure is Unsafe and its Occupancy has been
prohibited by the Code Official". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter
such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the
required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
      2.   Temporary Safeguards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this
Chapter, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary
work to be done, including the boarding-up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe or whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as
the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
      3.   Closing Streets: When necessary for the public safety, the code
official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places
adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
      4.   Emergency Repairs: For the purposes of this Section, the code
official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
      5.   Costs Of Emergency Repairs: Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the jurisdiction on approval
of the City Administrator. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall
institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
      6.   Implementation Of Emergency Measures: Any person ordered to take
emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person
shall thereafter, upon petition, be directed to the city administrator or, in
the city administrator's absence, to such other person as may be designated by
the city council shall be afforded an appeal review hearing as described in
subsection K of this section.
   J.   Demolition:
      1.   General: Upon acquisition of an appropriate court order, the code
official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the code official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to
repair the structure, to raze and remove such structure; or if such structure
is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary
or to raze and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two
(2) years, to raze and remove such structure.
      2.   Order: All notices and orders shall comply with subsection G of this
section.
      3.   Failure To Comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order issued by a court of law within the time prescribed, the code
official shall cause the structure to be razed and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and
the cost of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
      4.   Salvage Materials: When any structure has been ordered razed and
removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such razing and removal, shall be promptly remitted
with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and
the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any
order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the
report shall so state.
   K.   Means Of Appeal:
      1.   Application For Appeal: Any person affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the city administrator provided that a written application
for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice
or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that
the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other
means.
      2.   Notice Of Appeal Review Hearing: An appeal review hearing shall be
conducted within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal.
      3.   Open Hearing: As the city administrator determines, hearings before
the city administrator may be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant's representative, the code official, and others as determined by the
city administrator should be given an opportunity to be heard.
      4.   City Council Review: Any person affected by the city administrator's
appeal hearing decision shall have the right to appeal to the city council
provided a written application for appeal is filed within ten (10) days after
the day of the decision, notice or order was served. The city clerk will
schedule the appeal review on the next available city council agenda.
      5.   Hearing Decision: The final decision of the city council shall be
reflected in the "official city council minutes". Certified copies shall be
furnished to the appellant and the code official. The code official shall take
immediate action in accordance with the decision of the city council.
      6.   Court Review: The appellant may seek further review of any decision
of the city council within twenty one (21) days of the date of decision or
within such other time as is provided by law, to any court of competent
jurisdiction. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the formal decision of the city council. (Ord. 1668,
4-6-1998; Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003; Ord. 2184, 12-20-2004; Ord. 2394, 10-1-2007;
Ord. O2024-40, 10-7-2024)
6-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section.
      2.   Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
      3.   Terms Defined In Other Codes: Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes adopted
in title 8 of this code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
in those codes.
      4.   Terms Not Defined: Where terms are not defined, through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
      5.   Parts: Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises",
"building", "rooming house", "rooming unit", "story", or "structure" are stated
in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof". (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
   B.   Definitions:
   APPROVED: Approved by the code official.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a structure which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
   BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering
any occupancy.
   BUILDING CODE: The building code officially adopted by the legislative body
of this jurisdiction, or other such codes officially designated by the
legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
   CODE OFFICIAL: The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative.
   COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL: Leaves, grass clippings, garden debris, brush, tree
clippings and other plant material (accumulated as the result of maintenance of
on site lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees); fruits; vegetables; eggshells;
coffee grounds; houseplant materials and cut flowers.
   COMPOSTING: A controlled biological reduction of compostable material to
humus.
   CONDEMN: To adjudge unfit property for occupancy.
   CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS: All the written, graphic and pictorial documents
prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical
characteristics of the elements of the project necessary for obtaining a
building permit. The construction drawings shall be drawn to the appropriate
scale.
   DORMITORY: A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons
not members of the same family group.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
   GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
   HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms, intended or
designed to be occupied, or which are rented or hired out to be occupied, for
sleeping purposes by guests.
   INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises,
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, wheels or other parts have been removed or on which the
engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations, provided that repair operations in no way shall last more
than seven (7) days.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET: To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a person who is or is not
the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease,
agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of
contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT: Any person living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of a space within a building.
   ONE-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing one dwelling unit with not more
than five (5) lodgers or boarders.
   OPENABLE AREA: The part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PLUMBING: The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code listed in subsection
 6-3-1A4 of this chapter.
   PLUMBING FIXTURE: A receptacle or device which is either permanently or
temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and
demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges wastewater, liquid borne
waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system
of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a
discharge to the drainage system of the premises.
   PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes the following:
      1.   The physical condition or occupancy of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law; or
      2.   Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences
or structures; or
      3.   Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
      4.   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation; or
      5.   Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
is manifestly unsafe or unsecure so as to endanger life, limb or property; or
      6.   Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or facilities required
by this chapter have been removed, or from which utilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required
precautions against trespassers have not been provided; or
      7.   Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds in excess of eight inches
(8") in height; or
      8.   Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or
decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by
fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or
failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or
      9.   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies, or other similar
nuisance insects breed or are likely to breed, unless the water is treated to
effectively prevent such breeding or contains natural predators that
effectively prevent such breeding; or
      10.   To discharge sump pumps in a location which does not provide at
least five feet (5') of pervious surface between the point of discharge and any
property line, unless such discharge is:
         a.   Into any open drainage ditch located within the site or on public
right of way; or
         b.   Into a storm sewer, provided that adequate capacity exists in the
system and that the hydraulic grade of the system will not cause a backup into
buildings on the premises or other premises.
   REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL: An architect or engineer, registered or
licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering, as defined by
the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state
in which the project is to be constructed.
   ROOMING HOUSE: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-family dwelling or a two-
family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust, parts intended for use on a motor vehicle, body parts
of motor vehicles, tires, plastic containers, crates, barrels, pallets,
furniture not intended or designed for outdoor use, carpeting, carpet padding,
appliances, construction debris and similar types of materials.
   STREET/HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
which is publicly owned or maintained, when any part thereof is open to use of
the public for vehicular traffic.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TOILET ROOM: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   TWO-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing two (2) dwelling units with not
more than five (5) lodgers or boarders per dwelling unit.
   VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway, except devices moved by human power.
   VENTILATION: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from any space.
   WORKMANLIKE: Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
   YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998;
amd. Ord. 2147, 7-6-2004; Ord. 2234, 8-1-2005; Ord. 2262, 2-6-2006; Ord. 2293,
6-5-2006)
6-3-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property. The provisions of this chapter shall also
protect watercourses and sources of water supply.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in the rubbish and garbage, and extermination
requirements set forth herein. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy premises which do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
      3.   Vacant Structures And Land: All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
   B.   Exterior Property Areas:
      1.   Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
free of public nuisances as defined in section
 6-3-2 of this chapter. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior
property which such occupant occupies or controls free of public nuisances as
defined in section
 6-3-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Grading And Drainage:
         a.   Prevention: All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure
located thereon.
         b.   Exception: Water retention areas and reservoirs approved by the
code official. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      3.   Sidewalks And Driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
private roads, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state
of repair. In addition, all such areas shall be maintained free from hazardous
conditions. Stairs shall comply with the handrails and guards and stairways,
handrails and guards requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 2678, 11-7-2011)
      4.   Weeds:
         a.   Prohibition: All premises and exterior property including lots,
tracts or parcels of land contiguous to a permanent structure shall be
maintained free from: 1) grass growth in excess of eight inches (8") in height,
2) thistle, Queen Anne's lace, and garlic mustard, and 3) all noxious weed
growth as defined in the Illinois noxious weed law (8 Ill. adm. code 220).
         b.   Exceptions: Trees, bushes, crops, garden plants, native woodland
plants, "native Illinois prairie planting areas", ornamental flowers, and
properties designated by a governmental body as a forest, wildlife, or nature
preserve are permitted to grow in excess of eight inches (8") in height unless
prohibited by Illinois state code or by other provisions of this code, as now
existing or hereafter amended.
         c.   Native Illinois Prairie Planting Areas: Notwithstanding
subsection B4a of this section, plants which are native of the tall grass
prairies of the midwestern United States and described as such in the
publication "Plants Of The Chicago Region", by Floyd Swink and Gerould Wilhelm
(1994), or in subsequent editions of said publication, are permitted to grow in
excess of eight inches (8") in height subject to the conditions hereinafter set
forth.
            (1)   Said area shall be actively maintained to eliminate: a)
thistle, Queen Anne's lace, garlic mustard, b) typical suburban lawn grasses
such as, but not limited to, bluegrasses and fescues, and c) any noxious or
exotic weed as defined in the Illinois noxious weed law (8 Ill. adm. code 220).
            (2)   Native Illinois prairie planting areas on private lots shall
be mowed, burned (with an approved city of Warrenville burn permit), or cut to
eighteen inches (18") or less in height at least once per year between October
1 and May 1.
            (3)   Native Illinois prairie planting areas shall be set back a
minimum of two feet (2') from a perimeter property line when said perimeter
property line abuts an adjacent off site area maintained with typical suburban
lawn grasses or ornamental plants. (Ord. 2886, 9-15-2014)
      5.   Barberry Bushes: All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free of the bush of the species of tall, common, or European
barberry, further known as Berberis bulgaris or its horticultural varieties.
(Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      6.   Rodent And Bat Harborage: All structures and exterior property shall
be kept free from rodent and bat infestation. Where rats are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. Where bats are found, every effort shall be made to humanely trap
and remove the bats from the premises. After extermination and removal, proper
precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. (Ord. 2419, 12-17-2007)
      7.   Exhaust Vents: Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
      8.   Accessory Structures: All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
      9.   Motor Vehicles:
         a.   Prohibitions: No person shall abandon, park, store, leave or
permit the abandonment, parking, storage or leaving of:
            (1)   Any unlicensed vehicle; or (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
            (2)   Any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is
in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition (an inoperable
motor vehicle) upon any premises or public property within the city for a
period in excess of seven (7) days unless such vehicle or part thereof: a) is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, or b) is in an area
so zoned that such storage is permitted. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
         b.   Exception: Any motor vehicle kept within a building when not in
use, operable historic vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age, or motor
vehicles on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles shall not be subject to the provisions of this
subsection B9.
         c.   Public Rights Of Way: Any vehicle remaining on city property or
public right of way for a period in excess of seven days may be towed in
accordance with the provisions of state law. The unlawful storage of any
vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be abated within seven days after
the issuance of written notice. Any violation not so abated shall be subject to
a fine as set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance for each and every vehicle in
violation of this chapter and each day shall constitute a separate violation.
The owner of any vehicle subject to being towed and stored shall be responsible
for the payment of any and all towing costs, storage fees, and any other cost
or expense incurred by the city in connection with the removal and storage of
said vehicle, together with any other penalties imposed by law.
      10.   Watercourses And Water Supplies: It is unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person to:
         a.   Pollute, corrupt, or render unwholesome or impure the waters of
any spring, river, stream, pond, lake, well, wellspring, watercourse or public
or private water supply, to the injury or prejudice of others;
         b.   Throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal, in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well, or
common storm sewer;
         c.   Obstruct or impede without lawful authority any watercourse,
river, stream, pond, lake, or other public watercourse.
   C.   Exterior Structure:
      1.   General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
         a.   Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and
watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust and corrosion and all surfaces
with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust
and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces.
Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
      2.   Street Numbers:
         a.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection C2b of this section,
it shall be the responsibility of the owner or resident of any improved
residential property to apply the proper address numbers in such a manner that
they may be read from the street without requiring going on the subject
property. Numbers may not be affixed to any municipal or utility building,
pole, post or sign. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the house or principal
building is not visible from the street, then the address numbers shall be
affixed to a post that is visible from the street. Numbers shall be at least
four inches (4") high and shall be of a color that contrasts with the
background surface to which they are affixed.
         b.   With respect to nonresidential properties, it shall be the
responsibility of all owners and occupants of improved nonresidential
properties to display the following street and unit/suite information:
            (1)   Front Building Facade Identification: Four inch (4") tall
address numbers/letters shall be applied on the front facade of all
nonresidential buildings at a location readily visible from the adjoining
street. Said letters/numbers shall be of a color that contrasts with the
background surface to which they are affixed.
            (2)   Individual Unit/Suite Front Door/Facade Identification:
Individual units in a multi-tenant building shall display two inch (2") unit or
suite numbers/letters on the exterior side of the main front entrance door or
on the side of the front window glass closest to the front door.
            (3)   Rear Exit Door Identification: Four inch (4") tall address
numbers shall be displayed on the rear exit door of each building. In a multi-
tenant building, four inch (4") tall unit or suite numbers/letters shall be
displayed below the four inch (4") tall address numbers. Individual tenants are
also encouraged to display the name of the individual business on their rear
exit door. All address, unit and suite information displayed on the rear exit
doors shall be weather resistant and of a color that contrasts with the surface
to which they are affixed. (Ord. 2094, 10-20-2003)
      3.   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      4.   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents. (Ord. 2419, 12-17-2007)
      5.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      6.   Roofs And Drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance or within five feet (5') of a property line, unless the
discharge is into a public drainage swale, a storm sewer system and/or storm
water management facility. (Ord. 2223, 6-20-2005)
      7.   Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in
good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
      8.   Overhang Extensions:
         a.   Condition: All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang
extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to
be kept in a safe and sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
         b.   Exception: Weather resistant materials such as cedar, copper,
galvanized metal, stainless steel, wrought iron and brushed aluminum need not
receive a periodic application of weather coating materials unless the surface
is in a state of decay or deterioration.
      9.   Chimneys And Towers:
         a.   Condition: All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar
appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good
repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
         b.   Exception: Weather resistant materials such as cedar, copper,
galvanized metal, stainless steel, wrought iron and brushed aluminum need not
receive a periodic application of weather coating materials unless the surface
is in a state of decay or deterioration.
      10.   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good working condition.
      11.   Window And Door Frames: Every window, door and frame shall be kept
in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      12.   Insect Screens:
         a.   Required: During the period from April 1 to November 1, every
door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation
purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with or have available for installation, approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. (Ord.
2062, 6-2-2003)
         b.   Exception: Screen doors shall not be required for outswinging
doors or other types of openings which make screening impractical, provided
other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are
employed.
      13.   Doors: All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good
condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      14.   Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
      15.   Guards For Basement Windows: Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodentproof shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents. (Ord. 2419, 12-17-2007)
      16.   Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained in a structurally sound manner, in good repair, with proper
anchorage and capable of supporting imposed loads. (Ord. 2161, 8-16-2004)
   D.   Interior Structure:
      1.   General: The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Every occupant shall keep that part of the structure which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more
dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain,
in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure
and exterior property.
      2.   Structural Members: The supporting structural members of every
structure shall be maintained structurally sound, and capable of supporting the
imposed loads.
      3.   Interior Surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and
doors, shall be maintained in a safe condition. Unsafe conditions created by
cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective materials shall be
corrected.
      4.   Lead Based Paint: Interior and exterior painted surfaces of
dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and outbuildings,
which contain in excess of six one-hundredths percent (0.06%) of lead by weight
shall be removed or covered in an approved manner. Any surface to be covered
shall first be marked with warnings as to the lead content of such surface.
      5.   Stairs And Railings: All interior stairs and railings shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
      6.   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   E.   Rubbish And Garbage:
      1.   Accumulation Of Rubbish And Garbage: All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
      2.   Disposal Of Rubbish:
         a.   Sanitary Manner: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
         b.   Rubbish Storage Facilities: The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish no less than every two
(2) weeks.
      3.   Disposal Of Garbage:
         a.   Sanitary Manner: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
         b.   Garbage Facilities: The owner of every dwelling shall supply one
of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling
unit, an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants
in each dwelling unit, or an approved leakproof outside garbage container. The
owner of every occupied premises shall be responsible for the removal of
outside garbage containers before said garbage becomes a public nuisance, but
in all cases no less than every two (2) weeks.
         c.   Garbage Containers: The operator of every establishment producing
garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, leakproof
approved containers provided with close fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
         d.   Exception: Garbage produced from individual detached single-
family homes may be disposed of in leakproof, sealed plastic bags. (Ord. 1668,
4-6-1998)
      4.   Location And Size Of Garbage Containers:
         a.   Garbage and rubbish containers shall be kept a minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from the street edge adjacent to any premises. Dumpsters or
other garbage containers not exceeding four (4) cubic yards in capacity may be
stored on residential properties provided they are screened on all four (4)
sides by a solid wood fence, solid landscaping or an equivalent material to a
height of not less than six feet (6').
         b.   Dumpsters or other garbage containers exceeding four (4) cubic
yards in capacity shall not be placed on any residential property for more than
ten (10) consecutive days; provided this section shall not prohibit the
placement and use of such dumpsters and containers during the term of a valid
building permit issued for the property on which the dumpster or container is
located.
         c.   Refuse, recyclables or compostable materials stored in containers
or otherwise appropriately secured, may be placed on the parkway after six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. the evening preceding scheduled scavenger service. Refuse,
recyclables, compostable materials and containers used to store these items
shall be removed from the parkway by seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of the day of
scheduled scavenger service.
         d.   Any refuse, recyclables or compostable materials placed on the
parkway shall be stored in containers or otherwise appropriately secured to
ensure that debris or refuse is not scattered by weather, animals or other
causes. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
   F.   Extermination And Removal:
      1.   Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect, rodent
and bat infestation. Insects and rodents found in structures shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health.
Every effort shall be made so that bats found in structures are promptly and
humanely captured, removed from the premises and released. After extermination
and/or removal, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
      2.   Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination and/or removal within the structure prior to renting or leasing
the structure.
      3.   Single Occupancy: The occupant of a structure containing a single
dwelling unit or a single nonresidential structure shall be responsible for
extermination/removal on the premises.
      4.   Multiple Occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two (2) or
more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination and/or removal in the public
or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area
occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination/removal.
      5.   Occupant: The occupant of any rodent or bat proof structure shall be
responsible for the structure to continue to remain free of rodents, insects
and bats, and if the occupant fails to maintain said condition, the cost of the
extermination/removal shall be the responsibility of the occupant. (Ord. 2419,
12-17-2007)
   G.   Residential Composting:
      1.   Compost Piles:
         a.   Permitted And Prohibited Compost Materials: Compost piles shall
only be composed of compostable material and commercial compost additives. No
other material shall be placed in a compost pile. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing prohibition, the depositing of garbage, pet waste,
meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the
compost pile or which may provide an obnoxious odor shall be prohibited.
Materials in a compost pile shall be placed in such a way to prevent them from
being windblown.
         b.   Location And Size Requirements And Restrictions: A compost pile
shall not exceed five feet (5') in height and ten feet (10') in side length,
shall not be located less than twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring
dwelling unit, and shall comply with the following property line setbacks:
 
                       Minimum Front               Minimum
Lot Size               And Corner    Minimum Rear  Interior Side Maximum Ground
                       Side Yard     Yard Setback1 Yard Setback1 Area Per Lot
                       Setbacks
Less than 15,000       30            5             5             25
square feet
15,001–40,000 square 40            10            5             50
feet
40,001 plus square     40            10            10            100
feet
 
Note:
   1.   The minimum rear and side yard setback requirements may be reduced to 1
foot upon mutual agreement of adjoining property owners filed with the city.
   2.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate,
maintain or permit a compost pile in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2147, 7-
6-2004; amd. Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
6-3-4: LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this Chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for the occupancy of
a structure.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another
person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
Chapter.
      3.   Alternative Devices: In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the building code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter shall be permitted.
   B.   Light:
      1.   Habitable Spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable space
shall be eight percent (8%) of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens
where artificial light is provided in accordance with the provisions of the
building code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (3')
(914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the
room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a
court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
      2.   Common Halls And Stairways: Every common hall and stairway, other
than in one- and two-unit dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at
least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each two
hundred (200) square feet (19 m2) of floor area, provided that the spacing
between lights shall not be greater than thirty feet (30') (9144 mm). Every
exterior stairway shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle (11
lux) at floors, landings and treads.
      3.   Other Spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
   C.   Ventilation:
      1.   Habitable Spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum glazed area required
in subsection B1 of this Section.
      2.   Bathrooms And Toilet Rooms: Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
subsection C1 of this Section, except that a window shall not be required in
spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system that complies with the
following:
         a.   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom
within a dwelling unit shall be exhausted to the exterior and shall not be
recirculated to any space, including the space from which such air is
withdrawn.
         b.   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from all other
bathrooms or toilet rooms shall be exhausted to the exterior without
recirculation to any space, or not more than eighty five percent (85%) of the
exhaust air shall be recirculated where the system is provided with effective
absorption and filtering equipment.
      3.   Cooking Facilities:
         a.   Prohibition: Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.
         b.   Exception: An exception to the provisions of subsection C3a of
this Section may be granted where specifically approved in writing by the code
official.
      4.   Process Ventilation: Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
      5.   Clothes Dryer Exhaust: Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
   D.   Occupancy Limitations:
      1.   Privacy: Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory
units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
      2.   Minimum Room Widths: A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall
not be less than seven feet (7') (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens
shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (3') (914 mm) between
counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
      3.   Minimum Ceiling Heights: Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have
a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (7') (2,134 mm).
Exceptions:
         a.   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not
less than four feet (4') (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six
inches (6") (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
         b.   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet eight inches (6'8") (2,033 mm) with not less than six
feet four inches (6'4") (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts
and similar obstructions.
         c.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least seven feet (7') (2,134 mm) over not less than one-
third (1/3) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area
of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling
height of five feet (5') (1,524 mm) or more shall be included.
      4.   Bedroom Requirements: Every bedroom shall comply with the
requirements of subsections D4a through D4e of this section.
         a.   Area For Sleeping Purposes: Every bedroom occupied by one person
shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet (6.5 m) of floor area, and
every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least fifty
(50) square feet (4.6 m) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
         b.   Access From Bedrooms: Bedrooms shall not constitute the only
means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as
the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. Exceptions: Units that
contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms.
         c.   Water Closet Accessibility: Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or in an
adjacent story.
         d.   Prohibited Occupancy: Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
         e.   Other Requirements: Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation,
room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the
plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of section
6-3-5 of this chapter; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of section
 6-3-6 of this chapter and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements
of section
6-3-7 of this chapter.
      5.   Overcrowding: Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of table 6-3-4D5 of this
section.
         a.   Sleeping Area: The minimum occupancy area required by table 6-3-
4D5 of this section shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply
with subsection D4 of this section.
         b.   Combined Spaces: Combined living room and dining room spaces
shall comply with the requirements of table 6-3-4D5 of this section if the
total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is
located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
   TABLE 6-3-4D5
   MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
   Minimum Area In Square Feet2
 
Space        1–2 Occupants 3–5 Occupant6 Or More Occupants
Living room1 No requirements 120           150
Dining room1 No requirements 80            100
Kitchen      50              50            60
Bedrooms3    Shall comply with subsection D4 of this section
 
Notes:
1.   See subsection D5b of this section for combined living room/dining room
spaces.
2.   For SI: one square foot = 0.093 m2.
3.   See subsection D4a of this section for limitations on determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
 
      6.   Efficiency Unit: Nothing in this section shall prohibit an
efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:
         a.   A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a
clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet (20.4
m). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not
less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m). These required areas
shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections D2 and D3 of this
section.
         b.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than thirty inches (30") (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to
this code shall be provided.
         c.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
         d.   The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3).
      7.   Food Preparation: All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage. (Ord. 1881, 11-6-2000)
6-3-5: PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this Chapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   Required Facilities:
      1.   Dwelling Units: Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located.
      2.   Rooming Houses: At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units.
      3.   Hotels: Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants.
      4.   Employees' Facilities:
         a.   Requirements: A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one
drinking facility shall be available to employees.
         b.   Drinking Facilities: Drinking facilities shall be a drinking
fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
   C.   Toilet Rooms:
      1.   Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior.
      2.   Location: Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
      3.   Location Of Employee Toilet Facilities:
         a.   Requirements: Toilet facilities shall have access from within the
employees' regular working area. The required toilet facilities shall be
located not more than one story above or below the employees' regular working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of
five hundred feet (500') (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate
facilities or public customer facilities.
         b.   Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, and which are located in adjacent structures under the
same ownership, lease or control shall not exceed a travel distance of five
hundred feet (500') (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the
facilities.
   D.   Plumbing Fixtures:
      1.   General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
      2.   Fixture Clearances: Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
   E.   Water System:
      1.   General: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing shall be properly connected to either a public
water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered cold running water.
      2.   Contamination: The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
      3.   Supply: The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
      4.   Water Heating Facilities: Water heating facilities shall be properly
installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F)
(43°C). A gas burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet
room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure
relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained on water heaters.
   F.   Sanitary Drainage System:
      1.   General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either
a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
      2.   Maintenance: Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. (Ord.
1668, 4-6-1998)
   G.   Storm Drainage:
      1.   General: Drainage of roofs and paved areas, sump pumps, yards, and
courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance or ice of any thickness on a public
sidewalk or roadway. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
6-3-6: MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Heating Facilities:
      1.   Facilities Required: Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
      2.   Residential Buildings: Every dwelling shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty five degrees
Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the outside design temperature required for the locality by the
mechanical code listed in title 8 of this code. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
         a.   Heat Supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom
on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply sufficient heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to
maintain the room temperatures specified in subsection B2 of this section
during the hours between six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock
(10:30) P.M. of each day and not less than sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
(16°C) during other hours. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003)
         b.   Room Temperature Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below
the outdoor design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code
listed in title 8 of this code, the owner or operator shall not be required to
maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating system is
operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open
position.
      3.   Nonresidential Structures:
         a.   Heat: Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with
sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a
temperature of not less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) during
all working hours.
         b.   Exceptions: 1) Processing, storage and operation areas that
require cooling or other special temperature conditions; and 2) areas in which
persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities are not subject
to the provisions of subsection B3a of this Section.
      4.   Room Temperature Measurement: The required room temperatures shall
be measured at a point three feet (3') (914 mm) above the floor and three feet
(3') (914 mm) from the exterior walls.
   C.   Mechanical Equipment:
      1.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment, fireplaces and solid
fuel-burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
      2.   Cooking And Heating Equipment: All cooking and heating equipment,
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water-heating device
shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions.
      3.   Flue: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected
to an approved chimney or vent.
      4.   Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall
be maintained.
      5.   Safety Controls: All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment
shall be maintained in effective operation.
      6.   Combustion Air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
      7.   Energy Conservation Devices: Devices purporting to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
   D.   Electrical Facilities:
      1.   Facilities Required: Every occupied building shall be provided with
an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this subsection D
and subsection E of this Section.
      2.   Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve
as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with the National Electrical Code listed in subsection
 6-3-1A4 of this Chapter. Every dwelling shall be served by a main service that
is not less than 60 amperes, three (3) wires.
      3.   Electrical System Hazards: Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the
hazard.
   E.   Electrical Equipment:
      1.   Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
      2.   Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture.
      3.   Lighting Fixtures: Every public hall, interior stairway, water
closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture.
   F.   Elevators, Escalators And Dumbwaiters:
      1.   General: Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained
to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from
physical and fire hazards.
      2.   Elevators:
         a.   Requirements: In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at
least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the
building is occupied.
         b.   Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing. (Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
      3.   Elevator Safety Regulations And Inspections: Pursuant to the city's
2007 agreement with the office of the state fire marshal, the following
regulations shall apply to elevator and escalator operation:
         a.   Elevator Safety Act: The elevator safety act 1  and associated
administrative rules (41 Ill. adm. code 1000), as now existing or hereafter
amended.
         b.   American Society Of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
            (1)   Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1-2005,
A17.1(a)-2005k and A17-1(e)-2005);
            (2)   "Guide For Inspection Of Elevators, Escalators, And Moving
Walks" (ASME 17.2-2004);
            (3)   Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME
A17.3-2005);
Upgrades required by this subsection must be completed no later than January 1,
2009, except that upgrades to the hydraulic cylinder system and firefighter
control system must be completed by January 1, 2011.
For the purposes of this subsection, an existing elevator is an elevator
contained in a building for which a building permit was issued prior to the
effective date of the administrative rules or a conveyance for which a permit
was issued for that conveyance prior to the effective date of the
administrative rules adopted in conformance with the elevator safety act.
            (4)   Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts
(ASME A1B.1-2005); and
            (5)   Standard for the qualification of elevator inspectors (ASME
QEI-1-2004).
         c.   American National Standards:
            (1)   Safety requirements for personal hoists and employee
elevators (ANSI A 10.4-2004).
         d.   American Society Of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
            (1)   Automated people mover standards (ASCE 21-2000). (Ord. 2420,
12-17-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 312/140.
6-3-7: FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter govern the minimum conditions
and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner- occupant or permit another person to occupy
any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Means Of Egress:
      1.   General: A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall
be provided from the interior of a structure to a public way.
      2.   Exit Capacity: The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be
sufficient for the occupant load thereof as determined by the building code
listed in subsection
 6-3-1A4 of this chapter.
      3.   Number Of Exits:
         a.   Requirements: In nonresidential buildings, every occupied story
more than six (6) stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two
(2) independent exits. In residential buildings, every story exceeding two (2)
stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two (2) independent
exits. In stories where more than one exit is required, all occupants shall
have access to at least two (2) exits. Every occupied story which is both
totally below grade and greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be
provided with not less than two (2) independent exits.
         b.   Exception: A single exit is acceptable under any one of the
following conditions:
            (1)   Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system and an automatic fire detection system with smoke detectors
located in all corridors, lobbies and common areas.
            (2)   Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
fire detection system and the exit is an approved smokeproof enclosure or
pressurized stairway.
            (3)   Where an existing fire escape conforming to the building code
listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this chapter is provided in addition to the single exit.
            (4)   Where permitted by the building code identified in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this chapter.
      4.   Arrangement: Exits from dwelling units, rooming units, guestrooms
and dormitory units shall not lead through other such units, or through toilet
rooms or bathrooms.
      5.   Exit Signs: All means of egress shall be indicated with approved
"Exit" signs where required by the building code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this chapter. All "Exit" signs shall be illuminated at all times
that the building is occupied.
      6.   Corridor Enclosure:
         a.   Requirements: All corridors serving an occupant load greater than
thirty (30) and the openings therein shall provide an effective barrier to
resist the movement of smoke. All transoms, louvers, doors and other openings
shall be closed or shall be self-closing.
         b.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection B6a of this section do
not apply to the following:
            (1)   Corridors in occupancies in other than use group H which are
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system;
            (2)   Patient room doors in corridors in occupancies in Use Group
I-2 where smoke barriers are provided in accordance with the fire prevention
code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter;
            (3)   Corridors in occupancies in Use Group E where each room that
is occupied for instruction or assembly purposes has at least one-half (1/2) of
the required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior of the
building at ground level;
            (4)   Corridors that are in compliance with the building code
listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter.
      7.   Dead-End Travel Distance: All corridors that serve more than one
exit shall provide direct connection to such exits. The length of a dead-end
corridor shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') (21,336 mm) where the building
is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.
      8.   Aisles: Arrangements of chairs, or tables and chairs, shall provide
for ready access by aisle accessways and aisles to each egress door. The
minimum clear width of each aisle in occupancies in Use Groups A, E and I-
2 shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the building code
listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter. In all other occupancies, aisles shall have a minimum
required clear width of forty four inches (44") (1,118 mm) where serving an
occupant load greater than fifty (50), and thirty six inches (36") (914 mm)
where serving an occupant load of fifty (50) chairs or less. The clear width of
aisles shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or other objects.
      9.   Stairways, Handrails And Guards: Every exterior and interior flight
of stairs having more than four (4) risers, and every portion of a stair,
landing or balcony which is more than thirty inches (30") (762 mm) above the
floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty
inches (30") (762 mm) nor more than forty two inches (42") (1,067 mm) high,
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor
of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than thirty inches
(30") (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing or balcony.
      10.   Information Signs: A sign shall be provided at each floor landing
in all interior stairways more than three (3) stories above grade, designating
the floor level above the floor discharge. All elevator lobby call stations on
all floor levels shall be marked with approved signs in accordance with the
requirements for new buildings in the building code listed in subsection 6-3-
1A4 of this Chapter.
      11.   Locked Doors:
         a.   Requirements: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except as provided herein.
         b.   Locks Permitted: Locks or fasteners shall not be installed on
egress doors except in accordance with the following conditions:
            (1)   In mental, penal or other institutions where the security of
inmates is necessary, in which case properly trained supervisory personnel
shall be continuously on duty and approved provisions are made to remove
occupants safely in case of fire or other emergency;
            (2)   In problem security areas, special-purpose door alarms or
locking devices shall be approved prior to installation. Manually operated edge
or surface-molded flush bolts are prohibited;
            (3)   Where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the
building code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter.
      12.   Emergency Escape:
         a.   Requirements: Every sleeping room located in a basement in an
occupancy in Use Group I-1 or R shall have at least one openable window or
exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue; or shall have access to
not less than two (2) approved independent exits.
         b.   Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic fire
suppression system shall not be subject to the provisions of subsection B12a of
this Section.
   C.   Accumulations And Storage:
      1.   Accumulations: Rubbish, garbage or other materials shall not be
stored or allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire
escapes or other means of egress.
      2.   Hazardous Material: Combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or
combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be
accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the applicable
requirements of the building code and the fire prevention code listed in
subsection
 6-3-1A4 of this Chapter.
   D.   Fire Resistance Ratings:
      1.   General: The fire resistance rating of floors, walls, ceilings, and
other elements and components shall be maintained.
      2.   Maintenance: All required fire doors and smoke barriers shall be
maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for the
proper operation thereof. Fire doors shall not be held open by doorstops,
wedges and other unapproved hold-open devices.
   E.   Fire Protection Systems:
      1.   General: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire, or any combination thereof
shall be properly maintained.
      2.   Fire Suppression System: Fire suppression systems shall be in proper
operating condition at all times.
         a.   Valves: Control valves shall be in the fully open position.
         b.   Sprinklers: Sprinklers shall be clean and free of corrosion,
paint and damage. Stock shall be at least eighteen inches (18") (457 mm) below
sprinkler deflectors.
         c.   Piping: Piping shall be properly supported and shall not support
any other loads.
      3.   Standpipe Systems: Standpipe systems shall be in proper operation
condition at all times.
         a.   Valves: Water supply control valves shall be in the fully open
position.
         b.   Hose Connections: Hose connections shall be identified and have
ready access thereto.
         c.   Hose: Where provided, the hose shall be properly packed, dry and
free from deterioration.
      4.   Fire Extinguishers: All portable fire extinguishers shall be
visible, provided with ready access thereto, and maintained in an efficient and
safe operating condition. Extinguishers shall be of an approved type.
      5.   Smoke Detectors: A minimum of one approved single-station or
multiple-station smoke detector shall be installed in each guestroom, suite or
sleeping area in occupancies in Use Groups R-1 and I-1, and in dwelling units
in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in occupancies in Use Groups R-2 and
R-3. In all residential occupancies, smoke detectors shall be required on every
story of the dwelling unit, including basements. In dwelling units with split
levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke
detector installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
         a.   Installation: All smoke detectors shall be installed in
accordance with the building code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter. When actuated, the smoke detectors shall provide an
alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual room or dwelling
unit.
         b.   Power Source: The power source for smoke detectors shall be
either an AC primary source or a monitorized battery primary power source.
         c.   Tampering: Anyone tampering or interfering with the effectiveness
of a smoke detector shall be in violation of this Chapter.
      6.   Fire Protective Signaling Systems: Fire protective signaling systems
shall be in proper operation condition at all times.
         a.   Control Panel: The "power on" indicator shall be lit. Alarm or
trouble indicators shall not be illuminated.
         b.   Manual Fire Alarm Boxes: All manual fire alarm boxes shall be
operational and unobstructed.
         c.   Automatic Fire Detectors: All automatic fire detectors shall be
operational and free from any obstructions that prevent proper operation,
including smoke entry.
      7.   Records: A complete written record of all tests and inspections of
fire protection systems shall be maintained on the premises by the owner or
occupant in charge of said premises.
   F.   Elevator Recall:
      1.   Required: All elevators having a travel distance of twenty five feet
(25') (7,620 mm) or more above or below the primary level of elevator access
for emergency firefighting or rescue personnel shall conform to the
requirements set forth in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter.
      2.   Smoke And Heat Detection: Approved smoke or heat detectors shall be
installed in return air ducts or plenums in each recirculating air system with
a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) cfm and serving more than one
floor in buildings that exceed six (6) stories in height in accordance with the
mechanical code listed in subsection
6-3-1A4 of this Chapter. Actuation of the detector shall stop the fan(s)
automatically and shall be of the manual-reset type. Automatic fan shutdown is
not required where the system is part of an approved smoke control system.
(Ord. 1668, 4-6-1998)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
TREES AND PLANTS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Public Nuisance Defined
6-6-2: Abatement Of Public Nuisance
6-6-3: Prohibited Acts
6-6-4: Violation And Penalty
6-6-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following are hereby declared public
nuisances: (Ord. 829, 3-3-1986)
   A.   Any tree or shrub growing in such a manner as to:
      1.   Obstruct the reflection of streetlights,
      2.   Obstruct the view by motor vehicle operators of any traffic control
device within the public right-of-way,
      3.   Obstruct or interfere with the passage of persons or vehicles on the
street or sidewalks of the city,
      4.   Create a dangerous condition for persons or property on public
streets, sidewalks or other public property including, but not limited to, any
tree or shrub or part therof which is likely to fall on or across any public
property, or
      5.   Interfere with overhead utility lines.
      Any person violating this section shall be required to prune or remove
any such tree or shrub within the period of time authorized by the Public Works
Director or their designee so that it will not create such an obstruction.
      For the purposes of this section, “traffic control device” shall include,
but not be limited to, any sign, signal, or opticom equipment, placed or
maintained by the City to regulate, warn or guide traffic. (Ord. 2062, 6-2-
2003)
   B.   Any tree, shrub, other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on
City owned property or on private property, which obstructs the view in the
“vision clearance triangle” as defined by section
8-14-9 of this Code.
   C.   Trees in a state of irreparable or untreatable decline due to heavy
infestation or disease and infested or infected trees identified by federal or
state departments of agriculture as quarantined or potentially able to infect
or infest other trees, including, without limitation, Ash (Fraxinus) trees
infested with emerald ask borer that are not being treated or whose treatment
is ineffectual, and Elm trees (Ulmus) infected with Dutch elm disease.
      1.   The city will enforce state and federal regulations governing
quarantine zone boundaries, and regulated articles.
      2.   It shall be illegal to move out of established quarantine zone(s)
regulated articles, as defined in section 7-7-1 of this code, unless those
articles have met all requirements of the local, federal and state regulatory
agencies.
      3.   It shall be illegal for any person or entity to transfer any
regulated articles from a quarantine zone into a non-quarantine zone.
      4.   All contractors working within and near any quarantine zone(s) are
required to comply with the quarantine regulations set forth in this section
and supply records that may be required for inspection to the city, county,
state or federal agencies upon request.
   D.   Tree in decline or dead, any part of which could potentially fall on or
otherwise create a potential risk of damage or injury to a person or property.
(Ord. 829, 3-3-1986; amd. Ord. 2144, 6-17-2004; Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
6-6-2: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this
chapter:
   A.   City Owned Property: Any public nuisance under this chapter which is
located on City owned property shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated
by the Public Works Department of the City in whatever fashion is required to
cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its
discovery.
      1.   Exception: Any person owning any lot or parcel of land, whether such
lot is improved, unimproved, occupied or vacant, abutting on any dedicated
public right-of-way is hereby required to:
         a.   Maintain grass and weeds less than eight (8) inches;
         b.   Keep mailboxes and support structures in good repair;
         c.   Keep culverts open and free of debris;
         d.   Maintain plantings.
   B.   Private Property: Any public nuisance under this chapter which is
located on private property shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by
the property owner in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of
the nuisance.
   C.   Notice: No property owner may be found guilty of a violation of this
chapter unless and until the following requirements of notice have been
satisfied:
      1.   A City employee shall cause a written notice to be provided by first
class mail or hand delivered to the owner of the property upon which the
nuisance is found.
      2.   Such notice shall describe with particularity the tree or other
plant which has been declared to be a public nuisance and actions which the
property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance, and shall require the
elimination of the nuisance by the property owner within 10 days after receipt
of the notice by the property owner if notice was provided by hand delivery or
as provided in subsection 6-6-2C3 below, or within 13 days after the notice was
deposited in the mail if notice was mailed, provided that, upon a showing of
good cause, said period may be extended by the code official.
      3.   If the property owner cannot be located following diligent inquiry
by the City employee, such notice shall be served upon the occupant or person
in charge of the property upon which the nuisance is located or posted in a
conspicuous location at the property upon which the nuisance is located.
   D.   If after ten (10) days the property owner has not abated the nuisance
tree or plant then the City may issued a second notice in the same manner as
set forth in subsection C. of this section, notifying the owner of the property
that if the nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days of the day of the
notice, the City may take action to have the nuisance tree removed and provide
to the property owner a written invoice outlining all costs associated with the
removal, including but not limited to staff time, materials and oversight fo
the removal. If the property owner does not reimburse the city may place a lien
on the property until all expenses related to the removal and subsequent lien
are paid.
   E.   Immediate Abatement: The foregoing provisions of this section
notwithstanding, the City is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any
public nuisance under this chapter or to seek from any court of competent
jurisdiction an order directing the immediate abatement of any public nuisance
under this chapter, provided that the nuisance is declared by the City to
threaten imminent and serious danger of injury or death to any person and
provided that the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located cannot
be found.
(Ord. 829, 3-3-1986; amd. Ord. O2024-40, 10-7-2024; Ord. O2024-51, 11-18-2024;
Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
6-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to do any
of the following:
   A.   Deposit, store or maintain on city owned property any construction
equipment, stone, brick, sand, concrete, lumber, tile, pipe, or other material
within the critical root zone, as defined in article 7, chapter 7 of this code,
which reasonably may be expected to impede the free passage of water, air or
fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub or other plant.
   B.   Cause any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which because of the
nature or amount reasonably may be expected to be toxic or otherwise harmful to
trees, shrubs or other plants to be located where such substance reasonably may
be expected to affect trees, shrubs, or other plants located on the city owned
property.
   C.   Cause any fire to burn on city owned or private property if such fire,
or the heat, smoke, or ash therefrom, reasonably may be expected to injure any
portion of any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city owned property,
provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed as exempting any
person from complying with state or city laws respecting burning, or a
controlled burn designed to enhance the biological structure of an area. (Ord.
829, 3-3-1986)
   D.   Unless otherwise authorized by a permit obtained from the public works
department, no person shall plant, prune, remove, destroy, break, cut, deface,
or in any way injure or interfere with any tree or shrub in any right of way of
any street or alley, conservation or preservation area, or on any property
owned or maintained by the city that is dedicated to public use; however, to
the extent that the language on the recorded plat or covenant establishing the
conservation or preservation area is in conflict with the section
6-6-3, the language on the plat or covenant will control.
   E.   Plant any tree under utility wires that is anticipated to grow to a
height that will interfere with the wires.
(Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003; amd. Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
6-6-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon being
found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine as set forth in the
Annual Fee Ordinance for each separate offense. Each day during which any
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a
separate offense. If, as the result of the violation of any provisions of this
chapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant
located on city owned property is caused, the person in violation must either
replace the plant or city tree in accordance with title 7, chapter 7 of this
code or be responsible for the cost of repair or replacement of such tree,
shrub, or other plant by the city.
(Ord. 2062, 6-2-2003; amd. Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024; Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
CHAPTER 7
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
6-7-1: Open Burning Prohibited
6-7-2: Allowable Open Burning Without Permit
6-7-3: Allowable Burning That Requires A Permit
6-7-4: Permits And Administration
6-7-5: Definitions
6-7-6: Penalty
6-7-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall cause or allow open burning except as provided for in sections
6-7-2 through
6-7-5 of this chapter. Any open burning that involves the use of wood that
generates a large volume of smoke shall be extinguished immediately. The open
burning of household garbage and waste, leaves, grass, automotive materials and
debris, and construction debris is specifically prohibited. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-
2010)
6-7-2: ALLOWABLE OPEN BURNING WITHOUT PERMIT:
   A.   Recreational fires and small landscape waste fires shall be allowed on
all properties without prior notification to the City and without a City burn
permit when conducted in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      1.   All recreational fires and small landscape waste fires shall comply
with the following requirements and restrictions:
         a.   Location:
            (1)   If located in an approved container: All such fires shall be
set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all temporary or permanent
buildings and/or wooden fences.
            (2)   If not located in an approved container: All such fires shall
be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from all temporary or permanent
buildings and/or wooden fences.
         b.   Supervision: Are conducted with the consent and under the
constant and direct supervision of an owner, lessee, or occupant of the
property where the recreational fire/small landscape waste fire is occurring
who is at least sixteen (16) years of age or older.
         c.   Size: Are limited to an area that does not exceed two feet by two
feet by two feet (2' x 2' x 2').
         d.   Fuel Source: The source of fuel is limited to seasoned dry
firewood and/or dry branches and limbs collected from trees, shrubs, or bushes
located on the property where the recreational fire or small landscape waste
fire is occurring and is ignited with a small amount of clean paper. The fuel
shall be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
         e.   Days And Duration: Are permitted any day of the week at any time.
(Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010)
6-7-3: ALLOWABLE BURNING THAT REQUIRES A PERMIT:
   A.   Bonfires, large landscape waste fires, IEPA fires, and ecological burns
shall be allowed on all properties after obtaining a City burn permit from the
Community Development Department and when conducted in strict conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
      1.   All bonfires and large landscape waste fires shall comply with the
following requirements and restrictions:
         a.   Location: All such fires shall be set back a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from all temporary or permanent buildings and/or wooden fences.
         b.   Supervision: Are conducted with the consent and under the
constant and direct supervision of an owner, lessee, or occupant of the
property where the bonfire/large landscape waste fire is occurring who is at
least sixteen (16) years of age or older. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010)
         c.   Size: Unless specifically approved in writing by the Director of
Community and Economic Development, all bonfires and large landscape waste
fires shall be limited to an area that does not exceed five feet by five feet
by five feet (5' x 5' x 5'). (Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-
2018)
         d.   Fuel Source: The source of fuel is limited to seasoned dry
firewood and/or dry branches and limbs collected from trees, shrubs, or bushes
located on the property where the bonfire or large landscape waste fire is
occurring and is ignited with a small amount of clean paper. The fuel shall be
chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants. (Ord. 2567,
3-1-2010)
         e.   Days And Duration: Unless specifically approved in writing by the
Director of Community and Economic Development, bonfires shall only occur on
Fridays or Saturdays for a maximum of five (5) consecutive hours. (Ord. 2567,
3-1-2010; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
         f.   Permits Per Month: No more than one City of Warrenville burn/
bonfire permit shall be issued per month to the same applicant or for the same
location.
   B.   All IEPA fires and ecological burns shall comply with the following
requirements and restrictions:
      1.   Supervision: Is conducted with the consent of the property owner and
under the constant and direct supervision of trained professionals experienced
in the fuel types being burned.
      2.   Permit Requirements: All applicable State of Illinois and City of
Warrenville burn permits shall be obtained prior to conducting an IEPA fire or
ecological burn.
      3.   Notice: The individual, company, or agency responsible for
supervising a permitted IEPA fire or ecological burn shall notify surrounding
property owners as well as local Police and Fire Departments of the actual day
and time of said IEPA fire or ecological burn a minimum of twenty four (24)
hours in advance of any such fire or burn being conducted. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-
2010)
6-7-4: PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Permit Application Requirements: Applications for all open burning that
requires a City burn permit shall be submitted in writing to the City of
Warrenville Community Development Department at least three (3) days before the
open burning is proposed to be conducted. Such applications shall be on the
form provided by the City and shall contain the following information: (Ord.
2616, 11-15-2010)
      1.   Purpose of the proposed open burning,
      2.   The location/address of the burning site,
      3.   The nature and quantities of material/fuel to be burned,
      4.   A site map showing the location of the open burning, all nearby
structures and wood fences, and the location of any extinguishing mechanism
including hoses, buckets and fire extinguishers,
      5.   Name, age, and contact information (including business, home, and
mobile phone numbers) of the individual responsible for supervising the open
burning during its duration, and
      6.   The date and exact times when the proposed open burning will take
place, and
      7.   Applications for ecological burns and IEPA fires shall include a
copy of the approved IEPA burn permit. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010)
   B.   Permit Approval And Denial: Before issuing an open burn permit, the
Director of Community and Economic Development, or his duly authorized
representative, shall: 1) review and verify that all applicable open burning
application requirements and restrictions have or will be satisfied, and 2)
consider then current weather conditions, past problems with burning on the
property/site of the proposed open burning, past violations of the provisions
of this chapter, and any other factor which may affect the health and safety of
persons and property in the City.
The Director of Community and Economic Development shall have the authority to
deny an open burning permit application if all application requirements and
restrictions have not been met, weather conditions would not allow the proposed
open burning to be conducted safely, or if there has been a violation of this
chapter on the property/site of the proposed open burning, by the owner of the
property/site of the proposed open burning, or by the individual responsible
for supervising the proposed open burning within one year from the City's
receipt of the then pending open burning application. The Director of Community
and Economic Development or his duly authorized representative shall approve or
deny all open burning permit applications within five (5) days after receipt of
the application. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
   C.   Permit Cost: There shall be no City fees or charges associated with the
review of an open burn permit application or issuance of an open burn permit.
(Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010)
   D.   Special Permit Conditions: The Director of Community and Economic
Development may allow the size and duration of a bonfire to be increased when
it has been shown by the applicant that fire safety requirements of the
situation and the desirable duration of the bonfire warrant the increase. Any
such special approval shall be documented in written form.
When weather or locational requirements dictate, the Director of Community and
Economic Development may require the applicant for an ecological burn or an
IEPA fire to submit and follow a detailed burn plan designating the preferred
wind direction and speed, location of firebreaks, and necessary personnel and
equipment shall be prepared and utilized in planning and burn implementation.
(Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
6-7-5: DEFINITIONS:
   APPROVED CONTAINER: A manufactured or constructed outdoor fireplace,
permanent or portable fire pit, and chimenea when all are fitted and operated
with a spark arrestor designed to reduce hot embers emitted by the fire from
being carried in the wind to nearby structures.
   BONFIRE: A fire which does not exceed five feet by five feet by five feet
(5' x 5' x 5') in area that is used for entertainment gatherings on
residentially zoned properties or for the disposal of seasoned dry firewood.
   ECOLOGICAL BURNS: A fire that is conducted in accordance with generally
accepted industry practices to: a) promote responsible silvicultural,
ecological, range or wildlife management and/or prairie restoration, b) prevent
or control disease or pests, and/or c) maintain or increase the quantity or
quality of agricultural or horticultural production.
   IEPA FIRES: A fire that is specifically authorized by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) for the disposal of hazardous or toxic
material where the IEPA determines that there is no practical alternative
method of disposal, instruction in methods of firefighting or for research in
control of fires, in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any
purpose determined to be necessary by the IEPA.
   LARGE LANDSCAPE WASTE FIRE: A fire that is conducted by the owner or lessee
of a property that is used to dispose of dry branches and limbs collected from
trees, shrubs and/or bushes located on the property where the fire is being
conducted and does not exceed five feet by five feet by five feet (5' x 5' x
5') in area.
   OPEN BURNING: All intentionally ignited outdoor fires including, but not
limited to, recreational fires, campfires, ecological burns, IEPA fires, and
bonfires.
   RECREATION FIRE: A campfire or fire used for cooking or warmth of workers
which does not exceed two feet by two feet by two feet (2' x 2' x 2') in area.
   SEASONED FIREWOOD: Wood that has completed the drying process and is
identified by bark that has no green on the underside, darkened cracks shaped
like bicycle spokes in the cut ends, is light in weight, and emits little to no
smoke when ignited. Seasoned firewood does not contain any leaves or needles.
Seasoned firewood includes dry branches and limbs from trees, and/or shrubs or
bushes only when they are collected from the property where the open burning is
being conducted.
   SMALL LANDSCAPE WASTE FIRE: A fire that is conducted by the owner or lessee
of a property that is used to dispose of dry branches and limbs collected from
trees, shrubs and/or bushes located on the property where the fire is being
conducted and does not exceed two feet by two feet by two feet (2' x 2' x 2')
in area.
   SPARK ARRESTOR: A screen or other similar tightly interwoven wire gauze
device intended to prevent combustible materials, usually sparks or other tiny
flaming debris, from escaping into areas where they might start unintended
fires. (Ord. 2567, 3-1-2010)
6-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. O2017-75, 12-4-2017)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
7-1-1: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   No public improvements will be accepted by the City until there has
first been deposited with the City a document of conveyance executed by the
record owner of the improvements, in form satisfactory to the City, purporting
to convey such improvements to the City.
   B.   After the aforesaid deposit, the subject public improvements can and
will be accepted only by resolution of the City Council and only after the
following conditions precedent have been met:
      1.   The City Council must be in receipt of a written report from the
City's engineer stating that he has made final inspection of the improvement
and that it either complies with the City's standards for construction or that
it does not and, if it does not, the exact deficiencies.
      2.   The City must be provided, at the expense of the proposed donator,
evidence deemed adequate by the City's attorney, to establish that the proposed
conveyance and acceptance will vest in the City clear, unencumbered title to
the improvement or improvements. (Ord. 418, 2-20-1979)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Street Signs
7-2-2: Encroachments On Public Rights-Of-Way
7-2-3: Construction
7-2-3-1: General
7-2-3-2: Permit And Cost
7-2-3-3: Repair Or Reconstruction
7-2-3-4: Residential Streets
7-2-3-5: Commercial Or Collector Streets
7-2-3-6: Determination Of Residential Versus Commercial Or Collector Streets
7-2-3-7: Pavement Repairs For Streets Containing Portland Cement Concrete
7-2-3-8: Engineering And Construction Practice
7-2-3-9: Exemptions
7-2-3-10: Application For Permit For Excavation
7-2-3-11: Manner Of Excavating
7-2-3-12: Notice Of Work; Damage To Underground Utilities
7-2-3-13: Damage To Vegetation
7-2-3-14: Temporary Sidewalks Required
7-2-3-15: Notice Prior To Backfilling
7-2-3-16: Safety
7-2-3-17: Surfacing Requirements In Public Rights-Of-Way
7-2-3-18: Restoration Of Parkways
7-2-4: Depositing Snow Or Other Unauthorized Materials On The Paved Roadway And
Public Sidewalks
7-2-5: Additional Requirements
7-2-6: Vacation Of Public Streets And Alleys
7-2-1: STREET SIGNS:
   A.   At each street intersection there shall be one or more street signs
showing the names of the streets and the street number at such location.
   B.   All street signs hereafter erected shall be of the type currently used
by DuPage County; that is, white lettering on a green background.
   C.   Signs shall be mounted in conformity with accepted standards and shall
be so located as to provide maximum visibility. The Street Department is hereby
authorized and instructed to remove any overhanging tree branches which
interfere with visibility of any street sign or traffic control sign. (Ord.
169, 5-20-1974)
7-2-2: ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Definitions:
 
              Any building, parking pad, driveway, standard and ornamental mailbox structure,
              sidewalk, fence, sign, tree, landscape improvement, outdoor seating area, or any
              other structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utility improvement,
ENCROACHMENT: sidewalk, streetlight, traffic control device, tree, landscape, retaining wall,
              or sign installed by a public body and all facilities covered by chapter 5 of
              this title), which is placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any
              portion of the right-of-way.
OUTDOOR       A seating area located outdoors that is accessory to a food and/or beverage
SEATING AREA: service establishment and is a seating area for the consumption of food and/or
              beverages purchased at the establishment.
              Non-permanent improvements constructed to allow an outdoor seating area to be
              located in the street, parking space, or parking lot, which improvements may
PARKLET:      include a platform, short walls, planters, and or ornamental fencing installed to
              separate outdoor seating area visitors from adjacent public sidewalks and
              automobile traffic.
              Encroachments that may be allowed subject to City approval and compliance with
              the regulations, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this section. The
              permissible encroachments are all privately constructed and installed:
              1.   Permissible landscape improvements.
PERMISSIBLE   2.   Permissible ornamental mailbox installations.
ENCROACHMENT: 3.   Permissible private parking encroachments.
              4.   Permissible private driveways.
              5.   Deck/patios or shed (in a public utility easement only which is located on
              private property provided that written permission from all affected public
              utilities is filed with the City).
              6.   Permissible outdoor seating area encroachments.
              Encroachments that are allowed, without special approval, as long as the
              encroachments comply with the regulations set forth in this section. The
              permitted encroachments are:
              1.   Standard private driveways and related culvert improvements constructed in
PERMITTED     accordance with the applicable City permit and design requirements in effect at
ENCROACHMENT: the time of driveway construction or expansion.
              2.   Standard mailbox installations installed in accordance with subsection C2 of
              this section.
              3.   Permitted sign encroachments.
              4.   Private walkways installed in accordance with subsection C.4 of this
              section.
PUBLIC RIGHT- Those areas existing or acquired by dedication, by easement or by fee simple by a
OF-WAY:       public body for highway, pedestrian, bicyclist or public utility purposes.
 
   B.   Encroachment Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect
or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment
except a permitted encroachment or permissible encroachment within the limits
of the public right-of-way.
   C.   Permitted Encroachments: The following encroachments upon the public
right-of-way shall be allowed as permitted encroachments:
      1.   Standard private driveways: Vehicular access driveway improvements
constructed in the improved section of right-of-way to connect the driveway
improvements on private property to the adjacent public road in accordance with
all applicable City permit and design requirements in effect at the time of
construction or expansion.
      2.   Standard mailboxes installed in accordance with the applicable
design criteria established by the local United States Post Office and with the
following safety standards. Standard mailbox installations shall: a) be
constructed to promote breakaway, bending or otherwise yield in order to
minimize damage and harm to motor vehicles and their occupants in the event of
a collision or impact with the support and b) utilize one of the following
support structures or such other similar structure as may be approved by the
Director of Community and Economic Development or his designee as comparably
safe:
         a.   Wooden post (minimum of 4 inches by 4 inches and a maximum of 6
inches by 6 inches).
         b.   Light gauge hollow cast iron, galvanized steel or painted steel
pipe (maximum of 3 inch diameter).
      3.   Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or similar
overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to the
limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway. The permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the right-of- way line and not confined by adjacent buildings. The sign
encroachment must be in existence as of March 31, 2009, to be treated as a
permitted sign encroachment hereunder.
   4.   Private walkways: Pedestrian walkway improvements constructed in an
unimproved section of right-of-way that:
      a.   Provide pedestrian access from a primary or accessory structure on
the property to a public road, public sidewalk, mailbox, permitted right-of-way
encroachment, or an approved permissible right-of-way encroachment;
      b.   Comply with all applicable City zoning, permit, and design
requirements in effect at the time of construction or expansion; and
      c.   Are five feet wide or less.
   D.   General Requirements For All Permissible Encroachments:
      1.   No permissible encroachment shall be installed or maintained in the
public right-of-way unless the encroachment complies with the general
requirements of this subsection D and with the particular requirements of
subsections E through M of this section, as applicable to the specific
encroachment type.
      2. Revocable Right-Of-Way Covenant Agreements and Building Permit:
         a.   A revocable right-of-way covenant agreement shall be required for
all permissible encroachments located in City of Warrenville right-of-way
except and permissible outdoor seating areas. The revocable right-of-way
covenant agreement shall set forth the description of encroachment, location of
encroachment, and owner/responsible party for encroachment. The revocable
right-of-way covenant agreements shall be substantially in the form
periodically approved by the Warrenville City Council.
         b.   A building permit is required prior to the construction and
installation of any permissible encroachment.
         c.   Fees: The review and processing fee for all revocable right-of-
way covenant agreement applications shall be thirty as set forth in the annual
fee ordinance and shall be in addition to any applicable building permit fees.
The applicant shall also be responsible for reimbursing the City for all DuPage
County fees associated with the recordation of an approved and executed
revocable right-of-way covenant agreement in accordance with Subsection D.2.e
of this Section.
         d.   Review And Processing: Revocable right-of-way covenant agreement
and building permit applications shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department. The revocable right-of-way covenant agreement will be
processed by the Public Works Department. The Director of Public Works or their
designee shall be responsible for the final approval, issuance, and recording
of all revocable right-of-way covenant agreements that comply with all
applicable City codes, ordinances and requirements. The building permit
authorizing the construction and installation of the encroachment will be
processed and approved by the Department of Community Development.
         e.   Approved and applicant executed revocable right- of-way covenant
agreements shall be recorded against the applicant’s parcel of property in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds, DuPage County, as a permanent record of the
hold harmless, insurance, and maintenance obligations that will be assumed by
the current and future owner of the applicant’s parcel.
   E.   Permissible Ornamental Mailbox Installations: Nonstandard mailbox
installations placed or constructed in the public right-of-way by a private
individual after applying for a permit and complying with all applicable City
approval requirements shall be allowable as permissible ornamental mailbox
installations.
      1.   Permit Requirements: No new ornamental mailbox installations shall
be constructed in the right-of-way after March 31, 2009, until the required
revocable right-of-way covenant agreement and a building permit have been
applied for by the adjacent property owner and issued by the City of
Warrenville Community Development Department.
      2.   Design And Construction Requirements: The design of any ornamental
mailbox installation permitted and constructed in the right-of-way after March
31, 2009, shall comply with the following restrictions and requirements:
         a.   The maximum width of any face of the ornamental mailbox
installation shall be twenty eight inches (28").
         b.   The maximum height of the ornamental mailbox installation shall
be five feet (5') measured from the adjacent road surface.
         c.   No electrical lighting shall be incorporated into any ornamental
mailbox installation.
         d.   Reflectors shall be securely affixed to ornamental mailbox
installations as required by the City building inspector and Public Works
Department.
         e.   All applicable design/installation criteria established by the
local United States Post Office.
   F.   Permissible Private Parking Encroachment: A privately constructed and
maintained parking pad adjacent to the roadway pavement in the City of
Warrenville right-of-way shall be allowable as a permissible private parking
encroachment, provided that the parking pad shall not be:
      1.   Adjacent to a curbed street, or
      2.   Adjacent to a roadway that is designated as a major arterial, minor
arterial or collector street in the Warrenville Land Use Plan, or
      3.   Adjacent to a roadway with a pavement width of twenty four feet
(24') wide or more, or
      4.   Surfaces that are not paved (in accordance with City requirements),
or
      5.   Which may, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or Public Works
Superintendent, create a safety problem on existing improved areas in the
right- of-way, unreasonably impact drainage in the immediate vicinity, or
interfere with the maintenance of existing or planned utilities in the
immediate vicinity, or
      6.   On roadway rights-of-way where the City Council has adopted
restrictions which prohibit private parking encroachments in such areas.
   G.   Permissible Driveway Encroachment: Driveways constructed by a private
party on unimproved sections of public right-of-way (e.g., Townline Road right-
of-way between Glen Drive South and Mignin Drive, etc.) shall be allowable as
permissible driveway encroachments after applying for and complying with all
applicable City approval requirements.
   H.   Permissible Landscape Improvements: Any underground lawn sprinkler,
tree, shrub, annual, perennial, ornamental/native grass, related landscape
planting bed improvements, other than standard turf grass, planted or installed
in the right- of-way by a private individual shall be allowable as permissible
landscape improvements after applying for and complying with all applicable
City approval requirements.
   I.   Outdoor Seating Areas: Outdoor seating areas installed on public right-
of-way shall be allowable as permissible outdoor seating areas only in
accordance with and pursuant to the following regulations, conditions, and
restrictions:
      1.   License Required: No outdoor seating area may be installed on public
right-of-way or other city-owned property without the operator first entering
into an outdoor seating area license agreement with the City in a form approved
by the City. The license agreement must be in a form approved by the City
Attorney and the Director of Community and Economic Development; provided,
however, that the terms of the license agreement may not vary or modify the
regulations, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this section or the
Outdoor Seating Area Rules.
         a.   Terms And Conditions: The outdoor seating area license agreement
shall require the applicant to, among other things, hold harmless and indemnify
the City against claims resulting from the installation and use of the outdoor
seating area and provide specific insurance coverages as set forth in the
Outdoor Seating Area Rules.
         b.   Term: Outdoor seating area license agreements shall expire on the
December 31 following the commencement date of the outdoor seating area license
agreement.
         c.   Approval Of Initial License Agreement: All initial license
applications for outdoor seating areas shall be reviewed by the Director of
Community and Economic Development; provided, however, that the following
license applications shall be reviewed by the City Council: (i) applications
for outdoor seating areas proposed to be located within parking spaces; (ii)
applications for outdoor seating areas that will include parklet improvements,
(iii) applications for outdoor seating areas that will include the service of
alcohol; and (iv) applications for outdoor seating areas with hours of
operation that deviate from the requirements of this section or request
approval to play amplified music or other sounds. Initial license applications
for outdoor seating areas previously approved by the City Council, by
resolution or ordinance, prior to the adoption date of this section, shall only
require review and approval by the Director of Community and Economic
Development.
         d.   Approval Of License Renewals: All applications for the renewal of
an outdoor seating area license agreement shall be reviewed by the Director of
Community and Economic Development; provided, however, that the City Council
shall review applications for renewal of license agreements that were initially
approved by the City Council and consist of a material change to the outdoor
seating area.
         e.   Non-Transferable: License agreements are not transferrable to a
person other than the applicant or to a location other than the one described
in the agreement.
      f.   Additional Conditions: The Director of Community and Economic
Development and the City Council, as applicable, may impose additional
conditions regarding the outdoor seating area to address operational or public
safety concerns.
      g.   Fees: The review and processing fee for all outdoor seating area
license agreement applications is set forth in the annual fee ordinance. Review
and processing fees shall be in addition to any applicable building permit
fees. The applicant shall also be responsible for reimbursing the City for all
DuPage County fees associated with the recordation of an approved and executed
license agreement.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Outdoor seating areas must be located on an impermeable surface.
         b.   Outdoor seating areas must not obstruct or limit accessibility of
the sidewalk or building for people with disabilities.
      3.   Hours Of Operation: Outdoor seating areas may be used and occupied
between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M., unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
      4.   Outdoor Seating Area Rules: Outdoor seating areas must comply with
the Outdoor Seating Area Rules approved by the City Council and maintained by
the Department of Community and Economic Development.
      5.   Amplified Music Or Other Sound: No amplified music or other sound
may be played outdoors in an outdoor seating area unless approved by the City
Council.
      6.   The outdoor seating area license applicant must obtain necessary
building permits and have all necessary City and state licenses in good
standing.
   J.   City Reimbursement For Mailbox Damage: The City will reimburse the
owner of a mailbox damaged by a City snowplow or from any other City utility or
road work up to a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon receipt of a
sales receipt or invoice showing the actual costs incurred by the mailbox owner
for repair or replacement of a City damaged mailbox.
   K.   Additional Provisions: This section is intended to and shall be in
addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations concerning
encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other
ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith.
   L.   Labor Dispute Exemption: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this section, signs, tents or temporary shelters used by picketers in
conjunction with a labor dispute, pursuant to the terms and conditions of 820
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1.4, shall be permitted to the extent provided by
said statute.
   M.   Violations: Any person violating this section shall be fined as set
forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation
continues or exists. (Ord. 2498, 4-6-2009; amd. Ord. 2741, 9-17-2012; amd. Ord.
O2018-10, 3-19-2018; amd. Ord. O2021-45, 12-20-2021; Ord. O2022-32, 8-15-2022;
Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-50, 11-18-2024; Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
7-2-3: CONSTRUCTION:
7-2-3-1: GENERAL:
   No person shall build, rebuild, remove, repair, or disturb in any manner any
public way, including, but not limited to, any sidewalk or public street, or
cutting any existing curb within the City, or damage, alter, or remove any City
tree (as set forth in title 7, chapter 7), except upon permit issued by the
City to perform such work.
(Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998; amd. Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-2-3-2: PERMIT AND COST:
   Any person desiring to build, rebuild, remove, repair, or disturb in any
manner any public way, including any street or City tree (as defined in title
7, chapter 7), within the public right-of-way or sidewalk or cutting any
existing curb in the City shall first obtain a permit to perform such work from
the City.
(Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998; amd. Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-2-3-3: REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION:
Whenever more than fifty percent (50%) of an improved roadway surface is
disturbed or adversely impacted in such a manner that, in the opinion of the
City's Engineer, or the City's designated engineering firm, future
reconstruction or major repair to the street will be required as a consequence
of the proposed work, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to
provide a full width, full depth reconstruction of the street in accordance
with the specifications set forth herein. Permittee shall make application to
the City, together with the appropriate plans, specifications and drawings, and
no work shall be commenced except upon approval of those plans, specifications
and drawings and the issuance of the necessary permit and the payment of fees,
if any, as may be required. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-4: RESIDENTIAL STREETS:
Residential streets shall be newly built or reconstructed in accordance with
the following specifications:
Geotechnical fabric
Subbase granular material, type B - 4 inches
Hot-mix asphalt binder course, IL-19.0, N50 - 7 inches
Hot-mix asphalt surface course, mix "D", N50 - 2 inches
The Public Works Director or his designee shall determine, based upon relevant
design criteria and acceptable engineering practice, the final design of the
street construction or reconstruction. (Ord. O2018-26, 6-18-2018)
7-2-3-5: COMMERCIAL OR COLLECTOR STREETS:
Commercial or collector streets shall be newly built or reconstructed in
accordance with the following specifications:
Geotechnical fabric
Subbase granular material, type B - 4 inches
Hot-mix asphalt binder course, IL-19.0, N50 - 8 inches
Hot-mix asphalt surface course, mix "D", N50 - 2 inches
The Public Works Director or his designee shall determine, based upon relevant
design criteria and acceptable engineering practice, the final design of the
street construction or reconstruction. (Ord. O2018-26, 6-18-2018)
7-2-3-6: DETERMINATION OF RESIDENTIAL VERSUS COMMERCIAL OR COLLECTOR STREETS:
The City shall determine whether or not the right-of-way proposed to be
disturbed qualifies as a residential street or a commercial or a collector
street, which determination shall be binding upon the applicant. (Ord. 1663, 3-
16-1998)
7-2-3-7: PAVEMENT REPAIRS FOR STREETS CONTAINING PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE:
Whenever an excavation is proposed to any street or road constructed in whole
or in part with Portland cement concrete, the street or road shall be repaired
or reconstructed to the following standards:
   A.   All street openings shall be first saw cut in a manner approved by the
City or the City's designated engineering firm.
   B.   Replacement pavement shall be of Portland cement concrete full depth
equal to the existing pavement and the replacement pavement shall be tied in to
the existing pavement with steel tie bars of a size, length, and in a manner
approved by the City's Engineer or the City's designated engineering firm.
   C.   All bituminous courses shall be replaced with equal or better
bituminous courses.
   D.   All pavement patching shall be done in accordance with section 442 of
the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", latest edition,
published by the Illinois Department of Transportation. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-8: ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE:
All construction shall be done consistent with best engineering and
construction practices, and the determination of the City Engineer or the
City's designated engineering firm as to those practices shall be final and
binding. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-9: EXEMPTIONS:
Provisions of this section
7-2-3 relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of
the City engaged in doing work for the City; nor to persons doing work for the
City under contract; nor to persons operating under a franchise or grant from
the City, if such franchise provides for the making of excavations or any
tunneling without securing a permit therefor. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-10: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT FOR EXCAVATION:
If the application for work in the public right-of-way proposes excavations,
the permit application shall describe the location of the intended excavation,
the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person or entity doing the actual
excavating work, and the name of the person for whom the work is being done.
The application shall also contain an agreement that the applicant shall comply
with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-
1998)
7-2-3-11: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
It shall be unlawful to make any excavation without providing proper bracing to
prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and no excavation shall have anywhere
below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.
(Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-12: NOTICE OF WORK; DAMAGE TO UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of
excavations; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such
pipes, cables or conduits, or the City department or officer charged with the
care thereof, which are or may be in danger or affected by the making of any
such excavation before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed. (Ord.
1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-13: DAMAGE TO VEGETATION:
Excavations and other construction within the right-of-way must be done in a
manner to minimize damage or injury done to any trees or shrubs or the roots
and include all City tree protection requirements or City tree replacement
requirements set forth in title 7, chapter 7 of this code.
(Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998; amd. Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-2-3-14: TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any excavation work, a temporary sidewalk shall
be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-15: NOTICE PRIOR TO BACKFILLING:
Notice shall be given to the City at least ten (10) hours before the work of
refilling any excavation, and no backfilling shall be undertaken unless a
representative of the City or the City's designated engineering firm is
present. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-16: SAFETY:
At all relevant times the permittee shall provide appropriate barricades,
warning signs, electronic directional signals, or such other devices as may be
necessary to assure the safety of the public ways is not impaired during
construction. (Ord. 1663, 3-16-1998)
7-2-3-17: SURFACING REQUIREMENTS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director or his designee, with
specific justification for such approval documented in writing, the following
specifications are required:
   A.   Where a public sidewalk passes through a driveway, a minimum of seven
inches (7") of fiberized concrete must be provided over two inches (2") of CA-
6 aggregate. Expansion joints on both sides of the sidewalk through the
driveway must be provided for total thickness of the concrete.
   B.   For public sidewalks located outside of driveways, a minimum five
inches (5") of fiberized concrete must be provided over two inches (2") of CA-
6 aggregate.
   C.   All new or replacement private single family residential driveway
aprons and approaches constructed in the public right-of-way shall be
constructed so that the lesser of: 1) the first fifteen feet (15') of driveway
measured from the edge of the road, or 2) the driveway section located between
the edge of the road and a parallel public sidewalk shall provide seven inches
(7") of fiberized concrete over two inches (2") of CA-6 aggregate or eight
inches (8") of CA-6 aggregate with three inches (3") of compacted hot-mix
asphalt surface course.
   D.   All new or replacement private driveway aprons and approaches
constructed in the public right-of-way that are not for single family
residential homes, shall be constructed so that the lesser of: 1) the first
fifteen feet (15') of driveway measured from the edge of the road, or 2) the
driveway section located between the edge of the road and a parallel public
sidewalk shall provide seven inches (7") of fiberized concrete over two inches
(2") of CA-6 aggregate or a full-depth asphalt cross-section matching section
7-2-3-4 of this chapter.
Fiberized concrete shall be Class SI with a minimum 6.1 bag mix, in accordance
with section 1020 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", latest edition, published by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, and ASTM C-1116, and shall include fibrous reinforcement.
Fibrous reinforcement is one-half inch (1/2") length synthetic fiber, added at
a rate of 1.5 pounds per cubic yard of concrete. (Ord. O2018-26, 6-18-2018)
7-2-3-18: RESTORATION OF PARKWAYS:
   Any party responsible for disturbing or destroying the unimproved “parkway”
portion of City right-of-way shall be responsible for repairing and restoring
the disturbed area as directed by the Public Works Director or his authorized
designee in accordance iwth the provisions of title 7, chapter 7 of this code.
Required restoration shall be done to a first class standard and, at the
direction of the Public Works Director or his designee, may include sodding,
hydroseeding, erosion control matting, City tree replacement, and regular
application of irrigation water to newly seeded or sodded areas.
(Ord. 2065, 6-16-2003; amd. Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-2-4: DEPOSITING SNOW OR OTHER UNAUTHORIZED MATERIALS ON THE PAVED ROADWAY AND
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Harmful Substances: No person shall throw or deposit upon any public
street, road or highway any glass, bottles, nails, scrap metal, wire,
landscaping material, leaves, cans, garbage, refuse, tar, sealcoat, mud, clay,
soil, gravel, rock, stone, sand or other substance or material that could
potentially: a) cause injury to any person or damage to any vehicle upon such
road or highway, b) negatively impact the permeability of a permeable pavement
road surface, c) negatively alter the appearance of the road surface, or d)
pollute stormwater runoff.
      2.   Snow And Ice: No person shall throw, blow, shovel or plow ice or
snow onto any public street or public way or onto any sidewalk, or onto any
other public place that could create a potential hazard to vehicular traffic or
a potential danger to pedestrians.
      3.   Materials Deposited From Vehicles And Trailers: No person shall
permit soil, mud, clay, rock, tar, sealcoat or similar materials accumulated on
a vehicle or trailer under their direct control to be deposited on any public
street, road or highway that could potentially: a) create a hazard to vehicular
traffic, bicyclists, or pedestrians, b) negatively impact the permeability of a
permeable pavement road surface, or c) pollute stormwater runoff.
   B.   Duty To Reimburse: It shall be unlawful for any party, individual, or
corporation responsible for depositing materials on a permeable pavement street
in violation of subsection A of this section to fail to reimburse the City,
within sixty (60) days after the mailing of an invoice for the proper and
professional cleanup of said illegal deposits. The City shall be reimbursed for
all cleanup costs incurred by the City, including any costs associated with
having a private contractor assist in the cleanup at the request of the City.
An additional charge of twenty five percent (25%) shall be added to any private
contractor invoices to cover City administrative and executive services. If
City equipment is used to properly remove illegal deposits and clean the
permeable pavement roadway, the reimbursement fee for said work will be
calculated as set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance.
   C.   Authorization: Notwithstanding the foregoing, City improvements as well
as other emergency depositing of materials may be authorized by the Public
Works Superintendent, Director of Community and Economic Development or his/her
designee.
   D.   Penalty: In addition to the payment of any outstanding fees, any person
violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the general
penalty provisions set forth at section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2499, 4-6-
2009; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018; Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
7-2-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the construction of any
facility in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the provisions of
chapter 5 of this title. To the extent of any conflict between the provisions
of this chapter and chapter 5 of this title, the more restrictive provision
shall control. (Ord. 2372, 5-7-2007)
7-2-6: VACATION OF PUBLIC STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever the Corporate Authorities determine, in accordance with subsection C
of this section, that the public interest will be served by vacating any City
street or alley, or part thereof, within the City of Warrenville, they may
vacate that street or alley, or part thereof, by adopting an ordinance.
Pursuant to its home rule powers, a) when all abutting property owners are to
pay compensation or when no compensation is required at all, title will vest
equally in all abutting owners; or b) when compensation is paid only by one
abutting owner, title to the entire portion of the vacated street will vest
with the property owner paying the compensation. Thus, the vacation ordinance
will provide which owner or owners of real property abutting the portion of the
street or alley to be vacated will acquire title, upon vacation, to all or any
portion of the street or alley.
   A.   Determination: The determination of the Corporate Authorities that the
nature and extent of the public use or public interest to be served warrants
the vacation of any street or alley, or part thereof, shall be conclusive.
   B.   Application Fee And Cash Deposit: Whenever an owner of property
abutting any street or alley proposes a vacation, the owner shall file with the
Office of the Director of Community and Economic Development an application for
vacation. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and a cash deposit in an amount determined by the
Director of Community and Economic Development. As a condition precedent to the
Corporate Authorities' final approval of any vacation, the applicant shall pay
compensation pursuant to subsection F of this section and the costs incurred by
the City in completing the vacation, including, without limitation, all survey
and engineering costs, attorney's fees, and the actual cost of an appraisal
which may be ordered by the Director of Community and Economic Development. The
cash deposit shall be credited toward the actual costs incurred by the City in
completing the vacation. Any excess amount above the City's actual costs shall
be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall be required to increase the
cash deposit if necessary to cover the City's actual costs.
   C.   Votes Required:
      1.   The ordinance shall require the concurrence of a majority of all
members of the Corporate Authorities then holding office, in accordance with
subsection
1-5-7B of this Code, when: a) the portion of the street or alley to be vacated
is located wholly within the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville; and
b) the portion of the street or alley to be vacated does not form a link within
a State highway.
      2.   The ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-
fourths (3/4) of the Aldermen then holding office when: a) any portion of the
street or alley proposed to be vacated is located within an unincorporated area
or otherwise outside the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville; or b) the
street or alley proposed to be vacated forms a link within a State highway.
   D.   Hearing Required: No ordinance to vacate any street or alley outside
the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville shall be passed without notice
thereof pursuant to subsection E of this section and a hearing thereon by the
Corporate Authorities. At the hearing, all interested persons shall be heard
concerning the proposed vacation.
   E.   Notice Required: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing
required pursuant to subsection D of this section, notice of the time, place,
and subject matter of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation serving the area in which the street or alley proposed to be
vacated is located.
   F.   Compensation: The ordinance shall not become effective until the owner
or owners to acquire title in the vacated portion of the street or alley shall
have paid compensation to the City of Warrenville in an amount which, in the
judgment of the Corporate Authorities, shall be the fair market value of the
property acquired. The fair market value of the right-of- way to be vacated may
be determined by the appraisal (if required), or based on the benefits that
will accrue to the applicant by reason of the requested vacation, or on such
other factors as the Corporate Authorities may determine are in the best
interests of the public health, safety, and welfare. The ordinance shall also
reserve to the City of Warrenville or to any public utility or both, as the
case may be, owning such facilities, such property, rights-of-way, and
easements as, in the judgment of the Corporate Authorities, are necessary or
desirable for continuing public service by means of those facilities and for
the maintenance, renewal and reconstruction thereof. (Ord. O2018-21, 5-21-2018)
CHAPTER 3
CITY PARKS; CELEBRATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: City Park Use Regulations
7-3-1-1: Permit Required
7-3-1-2: Failure To Show Permit
7-3-1-3: Bond Required
7-3-1-4: Fees
7-3-1-5: No Reservation Of Facilities
7-3-1-6: Electrical Hookups
7-3-1-7: Portable Toilets
7-3-1-8: Park Hours
7-3-1-9: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
7-3-1-10: Controlled Substances Prohibited
7-3-1-11: Cleanup Required
7-3-1-12: Limiting Size Of Private Parties; Groups
7-3-1-13: Entertainment
7-3-1-14: Parking
7-3-2: July Fourth Events
7-3-2-1: City Sponsored Events
7-3-2-2: Animals Prohibited At City Sponsored Events
7-3-1: CITY PARK USE REGULATIONS:
7-3-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Groups of twenty five (25) or more utilizing Cerny or Albright Park are
required to obtain a use permit from the city, which permit may be issued upon
the completion of an application therefor and upon such terms and conditions as
are provided in this section
7-3-1 and in subsequent amendments thereto. (Ord. 1969, 3-18-2002)
7-3-1-2: FAILURE TO SHOW PERMIT:
Any group of twenty five (25) or more persons utilizing Cerny or Albright Park
shall show proof of the acquiring of said permit upon request by a city
official. Failure to show proof of the acquisition of said permit shall result
in the immediate ejection of such group from the park and shall further subject
any and all individual members of said group to such penalties as may be
provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2591, 6-21-2010)
7-3-1-3: BOND REQUIRED:
Before a permit may be issued to a resident group of 25 or more persons, a cash
bond in an amount set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance shall be deposited with
the city clerk. Before a permit shall be issued to a nonresident group of 25 or
more persons, a cash bond in an amount set forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance
shall be deposited with the city clerk.
Said bond shall be forfeited to the city if any rule or regulation governing
the use of the park is violated by the group or any member thereof. The bond
shall be returned only upon the delivery to the city clerk of a special release
from the community development department stating that the group complied with
all applicable rules and regulations in its use of the parks. (Ord. 1969, 3-18-
2002; amd. Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
7-3-1-4: FEES:
Permits for resident groups of twenty five (25) or more shall be issued upon
the basis of the following fee schedule:
 
Nonprofit organization       $25.00
Private party                25.00
Commercial or business group 75.00
 
Additional services requested of the city shall be charged on an hourly basis.
Upon receipt of a proper application, the city may issue permits to nonresident
groups. Permits for nonresident groups of twenty five (25) or more shall be
issued upon the basis of the following fee schedule:
 
Nonprofit organization       $ 50.00
Private party                50.00
Commercial or business group 150.00
 
(Ord. 2519, 6-1-2009)
7-3-1-5: NO RESERVATION OF FACILITIES:
Facilities of Cerny or Albright Park cannot be made available on a reserved
basis even with the holding of a bond and permit, except for city sponsored
functions. The city, therefore, assumes no liability regarding reserved usage
of Cerny or Albright Park facilities and it is incumbent upon a sponsoring
group to secure timely occupancy of the parks on the desired date. (Ord. 1177,
11-4-1991)
7-3-1-6: ELECTRICAL HOOKUPS:
Usage of electrical hookups at Cerny Park other than authorized by the city is
prohibited. Groups may request on their permit application the use of
electricity at Cerny Park for a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per event. (Ord.
1969, 3-18-2002)
7-3-1-7: PORTABLE TOILETS:
All parties of fifty (50) or more shall be required to provide acceptable
portable toilet facilities during their usage of the park and ensure removal of
said facilities within forty eight (48) hours of using the parks. (Ord. 1177,
11-4-1991)
7-3-1-8: PARK HOURS:
Park hours shall extend from one hour after sunrise until one hour after
sunset. Occupancy of the park before or after the above stated hours without
city permission shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1177, 11-4-1991)
7-3-1-9: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2108, 12-15-2003)
7-3-1-10: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED:
Possession and/or use of cannabis or controlled substances, as those terms are
defined in the cannabis control act, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410
ILCS 705/1, the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 or in the controlled substances act is prohibited in Cerny
and Albright Parks and shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1177, 11-4-
1991; amd. Ord. 2019-65, 12-16-2019)
7-3-1-11: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
All individuals and/or sponsoring groups who use Cerny or Albright Park are
required to clean up all trash and all garbage must be bagged or removed from
the parks. (Ord. 1177, 11-4-1991)
7-3-1-12: LIMITING SIZE OF PRIVATE PARTIES; GROUPS:
The number of people attending private parties and commercial or business
groups shall be limited to no more than two hundred (200) people. (Ord. 1769,
7-6-1999)
7-3-1-13: ENTERTAINMENT:
Rides, live bands, disc jockeys and/or concession stands are prohibited,
however, city sponsored events and events funded in whole or in part by the
city’s hotel tax grant program may include such activities. (Ord. 1769, 7-6-
1999; amd. Ord. O2020-05, 2-3-2020)
7-3-1-14: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for persons using city parks to park other than in
designated areas or on public streets where parking is permitted by ordinance
and then only in accordance with the provisions of this code. Park patrons may
not park on private property unless written permission has been previously
given by the owner of the private property. (Ord. 1769, 7-6-1999)
7-3-2: JULY FOURTH EVENTS:
The city will annually sponsor Fourth Of July events including, but not limited
to, a parade, a picnic, a canoe race, water fights, a jog-in, a bike-a-thon, an
arts and crafts show, a flea market, children's games, bingo, food concessions,
horseshoe pitching, musical entertainment, and pony rides.
The duration of scheduled Fourth Of July events may vary from year to year, and
include extra days before and/or after the Fourth Of July. (Ord. 577, 6-15-
1981)
7-3-2-1: CITY SPONSORED EVENTS:
The city will annually sponsor certain events, including, but not limited to:
a) a Fourth Of July parade and celebration; b) Summer Daze; c) National Night
Out; d) bike rodeo; e) Arbor Day; f) Holly Days; g) shredding day; and h) Art
On The Prairie. City sponsored events shall be exempt from all permit, bond and
fee requirements and from the restrictions and provisions of sections
7-3-1-6,
7-3-1-7,
7-3-1-8,
7-3-1-11 and
7-3-1-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2704, 3-19-2012)
7-3-2-2: ANIMALS PROHIBITED AT CITY SPONSORED EVENTS:
   No animal shall be permitted to be on the premises of a city sponsored event
except an animal used in business related demonstrations or amusements, which
has been properly licensed as hereinafter provided.
   Any person who desires to use an animal in a business related demonstration
or amusement during the course of a city sponsored event shall apply for a
license to do so. The application for a license shall identify: a) the business
related demonstration or amusement; b) the type of animal to be used; c) the
area where the animal will be located; d) the applicant’s name and business
address; e) the city sponsored event for which a license is sought; and f) such
other information as the city administrator shall deem necessary to process the
license request. A fee, as set forth in the annual fee ordinance, shall
accompany each such license request. No license request may be submitted less
than two (2) working days prior to the city sponsored event.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, animals specifically trained to assist a
handicapped person (e.g., seeing eye dogs) shall be permitted at city sponsored
events without being licensed pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 1448, 11-20-1995; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
CHAPTER 4
WATER AND SEWER
ARTICLE A. WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Applicability
7-4A-2: Definitions
7-4A-3: Supervision Of Waterworks
7-4A-4: Permits
7-4A-5: Inspections
7-4A-6: Potable Water
7-4A-7: Resale Of Water
7-4A-8: Tampering Forbidden
7-4A-9: Construction Of Mains
7-4A-10: Shut-Off Boxes
7-4A-11: Water Meters
7-4A-12: Correction Of Water Leaks
7-4A-13: Repair And Replacement
7-4A-14: Fire Hydrants
7-4A-15: Excavations
7-4A-16: Plumbing Regulations
7-4A-17: Water Use For Sprinkling
7-4A-18: Cross-Connection Control
7-4A-18.1: General Policy
7-4A-18.2: Definitions
7-4A-18.3: Water System
7-4A-18.4: Cross-Connection Prohibited
7-4A-18.5: Survey And Investigations
7-4A-18.6: Where Protection Is Required
7-4A-18.7: Type Of Protection Required
7-4A-18.8: Backflow Prevention Devices
7-4A-18.9: Inspection And Maintenance
7-4A-18.10: Booster Pumps
7-4A-18.11: Violations
7-4A-1: APPLICABILITY:
This article and articles B and C of this chapter shall apply only to the water
and sewer system, or part thereof, which is operated and maintained by the
city; provided, however, that sections
7-4A-4,
7-4A-6, subsections
7-4A-9A,
7-4A-9B,
7-4A-9C, sections
7-4A-16,
7-4A-18 of this article and section
7-4B-2 of this chapter shall apply to all water and sewer systems located
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
   POTABLE WATER: Water from a public or private supply which is approved and
accepted by proper and qualified authority as suitable for human consumption.
   SERVICE PIPE: The water supply pipe extending from the water main to the
customer's property line.
   SHUT-OFF BOX: A device located in a public area, usually the parkway of an
abutting street, inserted in the water service pipe line between the water
meter and the water main and used to turn on or shut off the flow of water from
the water main to the water meter.
   WATER CUSTOMER: That person, whether tenant, occupant or owner, who applies
for water service from each water meter, or if unmetered service, from each
service pipe.
   WATER MAIN: The pipes located in a street, road, alley or easement through
which water is distributed to all service connections.
7-4A-3: SUPERVISION OF WATERWORKS:
The Director of Public Works shall have general supervision over the waterworks
system of the City comprising the wells, water mains, pumping stations,
grounds, buildings and appurtenances thereto.
7-4A-4: PERMITS:
All applications for permits as required by provisions of this Chapter shall be
made to the Director of Public Works, who shall issue same, provided such
applications conform to the provisions of this Chapter 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-6-12 of this Code.
7-4A-5: INSPECTIONS:
All inspections required to be made in regard to permits issued under Section
 7-4A-4 of this Chapter shall be made by the Director of Public Works or his
duly authorized representative.
7-4A-6: POTABLE WATER:
The water distribution system for any building intended or used for human
habitation or occupancy shall contain and be supplied by potable water only.
For the purposes of this Section all such buildings shall be deemed to have
only one such water distribution system.
7-4A-7: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the City
water supply to any premises other than that for which the original sale has
been made, as evidenced by meter installation, except as may be specifically
authorized by the Director of Public Works in cases of emergency use.
7-4A-8: TAMPERING FORBIDDEN:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by the
Director of Public Works, to tamper with, injure, damage or alter any part of
the City waterworks, supply system or any water meter installed therein.
7-4A-9: CONSTRUCTION OF MAINS:
   A.   All extensions of water mains or construction of new water mains shall
not be undertaken unless the permit therefor has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of Section
7-4A-4 of this Chapter and has been approved by the Director of Public Works.
   B.   All water mains shall be of ductile iron in accordance with ANSI
Specifications A.21.51, ductile iron pipe for water and other fluids. All
ductile iron pipe shall have cement joints being either mechanical joint or
bell-type. (Ord. 503, 4-21-80, eff. 5-1-80)
   C.   Fittings such as tees, bends, "Y"s, offsets, crosses and elbows shall
be ductile iron. Valves shall be ductile iron.
   D.   The following described plastic pipe shall be used only for
transmission water lines (defined for the purpose of this Article as a primary
potable water supply feeder line not less than 10 inches in diameter and 5,000
feet long).
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic water main pipe shall conform to ASTM 2241
(SDR-PR), AWWA C900, and Commercial and Product Standard PS22. Pipe shall be
approved by National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) and be appropriately marked as
specified by the Foundation. Minimum acceptable polyvinyl chloride material
shall be Type I, Grade 1 or Type I, Grade 2 with a hydrostatic design stress of
two thousand (2,000) psi for water at twenty three degrees (23°) C. (73°F. ) or
PVC 1120 or 1220 respectively. Minimum working pressure (maximum sustained
operating pressure) shall be one hundred sixty (160) psi for Standard Dimension
Ration (SDR-26). Minimum pressure (PC) class (which includes working pressure
and surge pressure) for AWWA C 900 PVC pipe shall be one hundred (100) psi.
Special provisions shall indicate the SDR or PC (and OD base) of the PVC pipe
to be used. Joints shall be elastomeric gaskets conforming to ASTM 3139. (Ord.
630, 8-2-82)
   E.   Water mains constructed as additions to or portions of the City
waterworks shall not be turned onto the system until such mains have been
sterilized, in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works, and this
sterilization verified by a written report on samples taken from such mains.
This report shall have been prepared by a duly authorized testing laboratory.
Such samples shall be taken in the presence of the Director of Public Works and
delivered to or caused to be delivered to the testing laboratory by the
Director of Public Works.
7-4A-10: SHUT-OFF BOXES:
Shut-off boxes shall be placed on every service pipe by the City and shall be
subject to the specifications set forth in the Building Code 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 8 of this Code
7-4A-11: WATER METERS:
No customer shall be supplied with water from the City system until a meter
shall be set and ready for use, except in cases where it is impractical to set
a meter and as a temporary measure. All meters used in connections with said
water system shall be supplied and installed by the City and shall be and
remain the property of the City.
The actual cost to the City of furnishing and installing each meter shall be
paid by the person ordering the same immediately upon the installation and
before water is turned on. The actual cost of keeping such meter in repair
shall be paid by the person ordering same or by the owner or occupant of the
premises as soon as the billing therefor is presented. The person upon whose
application any meter is installed or the occupant or owner of the premises
where installed shall be liable for any breakage by freezing or otherwise, or
any loss or damage to said meter in any manner except by ordinary use and wear,
and the cost of making good such damage or loss shall be paid by the person
upon whose application such meter was installed, or by the occupant or owner of
the premises where installed as soon as a bill therefor is presented, and the
amount thereof shall be a lien against the premises in which such meter is
located to the same extent and with the same effect as delinquent water charges
and sewer charges.
7-4A-12: CORRECTION OF WATER LEAKS:
It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to correct and repair all
water leaks occurring on the customer's side of the shut-off box, at his own
expense, where the Director of Public Works determines that such water leak
warrants corrective action.
7-4A-13: REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT:
All repairs and replacements of service pipes from the shut-off box to the
building being served shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the
premises served, and shall require full compliance with all of the regulations
and requirements of this Chapter, including permits. The City may, in case of
emergency, repair any service pipes, and if this is done the owner shall be
responsible for the cost of such repair work and the amount thereof shall be a
lien against the premises to the same extent and with the same effect as
delinquent water and sewer charges. However, the City shall be responsible for
the repair of service pipes from the tap to the shut-off box.
7-4A-14: FIRE HYDRANTS:
No person shall open or draw water from any City or other fire hydrant or plug
or interfere in any manner therewith without the prior permission of the
Director of Public Works, or except in the case of a fire or similar emergency.
7-4A-15: EXCAVATIONS:
Excavations and the backfilling thereof, shall conform to the provisions of the
Building Code.
7-4A-16: PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
All work performed under the provisions of this Chapter shall also conform to
the provisions of the Plumbing and Building Codes. (Ord. 503, 4-21-80, eff. 5-
1-80)
7-4A-17: WATER USE FOR SPRINKLING:
   A.   Hours For Use; Purposes: The use of water from the CWWWWT distribution
system is prohibited from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. (local time) for the purpose of:
      1.   Watering or sprinkling lawns, trees, shrubs and gardens except that
the prohibition shall not apply to the use of handheld watering devices for
watering of newly planted lawns, trees, shrubs and gardens; and
      2.   Filling swimming pools.
   B.   Limited Use, Emergency Proclamation: Whenever the water supply of the
CWWWWT is diminished, from any cause whatever, to an amount which in the
opinion of the mayor is or is likely to become dangerous to the health and
safety of the public, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a
proclamation in the form of a public notice containing regulations on the use
of water from the city water distribution system. Such regulations may provide
for the limited usage of water, limitations on days and hours of use for some
or all purposes, and the prohibition of specified uses. Upon issuing said
proclamation, the mayor shall make the contents thereof known to the public by
news release to the local newspapers and radio media, and may also notify the
citizens in any other practical manner that he shall devise. Further, the mayor
shall immediately notify all members of the city council of the nature of the
emergency and the regulations that have been imposed.
The emergency proclamation of the mayor, and the regulations imposed thereby,
shall remain in full force and effect until any one of the following shall
occur:
      1.   The mayor determines that the emergency no longer exists and that
the emergency proclamation, and the regulations imposed thereby, shall no
longer continue in effect.
      2.   The city council modifies, repeals or makes permanent the emergency
proclamation, and the regulations imposed thereby, by means of an ordinance
passed at any regular or special meeting of the city council.
      3.   The first regular meeting of the city council occurring more than
thirty (30) days after the emergency proclamation of the mayor. (Ord. 385, 7-
17-1978)
   C.   Notify Public Of Proclamation: Any city employee or officer, may, at
the direction of the mayor, notify and warn any person of the effect of said
proclamation and direct said person to comply with said watering or sprinkling
restrictions. If any said person after having first been warned about said
restrictions and said proclamation, shall continue to violate said restrictions
of the proclamation, they shall be deemed to be in violation of this section
and shall be liable for the penalty provided for in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2591, 6-21-2010)
7-4A-18: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
7-4A-18.1: GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   B.   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the city.
   C.   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system or to prevent a potential health
hazard, the superintendent of water shall give notice to the consumer to
install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to
the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection
7-4A-18.5D4 below for a period of at least five (5) years. The Superintendent
of Water may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection
report to the City to assist in determining whether or not service line
protection will be required. All cross- connection inspections shall be
conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
7-4A-18.2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
   AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   CITY: The City of Warrenville, Illinois.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
   NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604.
   PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   B.   Process waters;
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   D.   Cooling waters;
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems;
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public by the City, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs,
storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or
intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general
domestic use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main to the shut-off box through which water is supplied to the
user.
   SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross- connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and
should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR: The city's public water supply. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff.
5-1-1980)
7-4A-18.3: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   B.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the superintendent of water up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   C.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   D.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   E.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4A-18.4: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances which may constitute a health
hazard or a source of pollution are prohibited except when and where approved
cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and
maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   1. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality
as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
      2.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4A-18.5: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   Inspection: The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the approved cross connection control device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the
consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection
control devices within the consumer's premises.
   B.   Information, Availability: On request by the director of public works,
or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information
regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's
premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
director of public works for the verification of inspections, information
submitted by the consumer to the city regarding cross connection inspection
results.
   C.   Responsibility, Surveys And Reporting: It shall be the responsibility
of the water consumer to obtain and pay for annual surveys and associated
reporting requirements of water use practices on his premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public
potable water system. All cross connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with Illinois plumbing code section
890.1130(g)(5) as now existing or as hereafter amended.
   D.   Responsibility, Backflow: It is the responsibility of the water
consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   Removal: All cross connections are removed; or approved cross
connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back
siphonage.
      2.   Installation: Cross connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Inspection: Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at
the time of installations and at least annually by a person approved by the
state of Illinois as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI) in
accordance with Illinois plumbing code section 890.1130(b) as now existing or
as hereafter amended. The inspections of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   Testing And Records:
         a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         b.   Records submitted to the city shall be available for inspection
by state personnel in accordance with appropriate Illinois Statutes, codes and
administrative law.
         c.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test;
            (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            (3)   Test results;
            (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
            (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
            (6)   Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. O2017-19, 4-17-
2017)
7-4A-18.6: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 653.801 - 653.805. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving
premises, where an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and
the source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      2.   Premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the superintendent of water.
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   C.   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 653.801. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
superintendent of water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 1068, 12-4-
1989)
7-4A-18.7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   The type of protection required under subsections
7-4A-18.6B1, B2, and B3 of these regulations shall depend on the degree of
hazard which exists as follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   B.   The type of protection required under subsections
7-4A-18.6B4 and B5 of these regulations shall be approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention
device.
   C.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals; or
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   D.   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord.
1068, 12-4-1989)
7-4A-18.8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation For Cross-Connection
Control Of The University Of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   B.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on site. (Ord. 1068, 12-4-1989)
7-4A-18.9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   B.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
state of Illinois as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall
be in writing.
   C.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   D.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   E.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection A of this section.
   F.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
director of public works.
   G.   Copies of all test results shall be forwarded immediately to the
director of public works or his designee at the time of each inspection as
described in section
7-4A-18.5 of this article. Contractors who perform such testing are required to
electronically submit all compliant and noncompliant reports to the city of
Warrenville director of public works via a method approved by the director of
public works, which may include the filing of reports with a third party
contractor and the payment of any filing fees. (Ord. O2017-19, 4-17-2017)
7-4A-18.10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the superintendent of
water, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 1068, 12-4-
1989)
7-4A-18.11: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   In addition to the penalties otherwise provided for, the superintendent
of water shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants
thereof, as provided in section
7-4C-9 of this chapter, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device is not installed or maintained as requested by this section,
or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing discontinuation of service procedures, in
the event that the superintendent of water determines that there is an existing
or imminent danger of contamination of the public water supply which would pose
a hazard to the public health and safety, the superintendent shall immediately
take all steps necessary to protect the public water supply, including, but not
limited to, disconnection of the source of contamination from the public water
supply.
   C.   If terminated, water service to such premises shall not be restored
until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the
superintendent of water, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
   D.   The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system and any charge to persons or
property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 1068, 12-4-1989)
ARTICLE B. WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
SECTION:
7-4B-1: Requests For Service
7-4B-2: Certificate Of Approval
7-4B-3: Turning On Water
7-4B-4: New Service Connections
7-4B-5: Tapping Water Mains
7-4B-6: Tapping Sanitary Sewer Mains
7-4B-1: REQUESTS FOR SERVICE:
The provisions of this section and sections
7-4B-2,
7-4B-3 and
7-4B-4 of this article shall govern requests for water and sewer service under
this chapter.
   A.   Requests for water and sewer service shall be made on forms provided
and by accepting service applicant agrees to comply with all rules, regulations
and conditions relating to such water and sewer service, including payment when
due of all water and sewer rates, assessments, rentals, fines and penalties
assessed, or charges imposed, for or in connection with such requested service.
Forms are available upon request from the director of public works or his
representative.
   B.   In the case of new construction, or plumbing modifications, alterations
or repairs involving new service pipes or related connections, a request for
service shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of such work issued
by the director of public works under the provisions of section
7-4B-2 of this article. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
   C.   Where such requested service is for the use or benefit of a person
other than the owner of the premises to be so served, such request for service
shall be made together with a deposit in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).
This deposit shall be retained by the city to secure payment of all bills. At
such time as such service is terminated, said deposit shall be refunded without
interest, less any amounts still due and owing the city for such service up to
the time of termination. (Ord. 614, 4-19-1982)
   D.   Water and sewer services shall be provided only to: 1) properties
located within the corporate limits of the city, or 2) properties located
outside the city limits, provided that there is a preannexation agreement in
effect, or 3) governmental agency properties located outside the city limits,
provided that there is in effect an intergovernmental agreement between the
governmental agency and the city. The rates and charges for service outside the
corporate limits of the city shall be established in the preannexation
agreement or intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 2135, 5-17-2004)
7-4B-2: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
No water shall be pumped from any well nor shall water be turned on or sewer
service provided to any premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the
provisions of the building code. In the case of work completed under permit
issued by the director of public works, such compliance shall be evidenced by
the issuance of a certificate of approval.
The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, water service may be
rendered on a temporary basis by the director of public works for construction
work in progress upon the recommendation of the building commissioner. (Ord.
503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4B-3: TURNING ON WATER:
Upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the director of public
works or his representative shall be notified of the request for service, and
he shall make the necessary arrangements for the turning on of the water. No
water shall be turned on by any person other than authorized by the director of
public works. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4B-4: NEW SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No service pipes shall be installed, connected or repaired without a
permit for each such installation or connection. Application for such permit
shall be made to the director of public works and shall be signed by the owner
or tenant of the premises involved, and by the plumbing contractor by whom the
work is to be performed. Such applications shall be made on forms furnished by
the city and shall state the size and location of the tap and shutoff box
required, if any, and the size and composition of the service pipe to be used,
a description of the property to be served, and the location upon said property
of the service pipe and water meter to be installed therein.
   B.   If the director of public works shall find that the application
conforms to the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a permit for such
work.
   C.   All work shall conform to specifications set forth in the building
code, including the size and composition of the service pipe and related
fittings, and the manner of laying same.
   D.   All excavations in connection with the installation of service pipe
shall be performed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
building code.
   E.   Before commencing the installation of any service pipe hereunder, the
contractor or owner or tenant of the premises shall notify the director of
public works at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of commencing such
work.
   F.   No excavation performed in connection with such work shall be
backfilled before the installation has been inspected and approved by the
building inspector. At such time of inspection the completed service pipe,
water meter and related fittings shall be subjected to a pressure test at city
pressure; each such installation shall sustain the existing city pressure for a
period of not less than fifteen (15) minutes without leakage before being
approved.
   G.   Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection and testing of such
work, and upon the satisfactory backfilling of all excavations made in
connection with such work, the director of public works shall issue a written
certificate of approval for such installation.
   H.   The filing of an application for a permit pursuant to this section
shall be deemed consent by the owner or tenant of the premises involved to
entry upon such premises by the director of public works or his duly authorized
representative for the purpose of making such inspections. (Ord. 503, 4-21-
1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4B-5: TAPPING WATER MAINS:
   A.   Where new service pipes require the tapping of water mains and the
installation of shutoff boxes, it shall be the responsibility of the person
obtaining water service, at his own expense, to provide proper excavating to
the water main, to backfill same, to restore the street area to its original
condition, including repaving where necessary, to make such tap-ons, install
and connect service pipe to the shutoff box, install the shutoff box, and
furnish all materials respecting same. If any of the aforesaid work does not
conform with the building code, or this chapter, the city may complete the work
and bill the occupant or owner of the premises to the same extent and with the
same effect as delinquent water and sewer charges. All work shall conform to
the specifications of the city building code and such amendments thereto as may
be enacted. All such work shall be done under the supervision of the director
of public works and a certificate of approval must be issued prior to the
provision of any water service.
   B.   Where such tap-ons are required, the applicant for a permit under this
subsection B shall also, as a condition precedent to the issuance thereof, pay
to the city a tap-on fee. The minimum amount of said fee shall be as set forth
in the annual fee ordinance.
      There will be an additional charge for meters as follows: Cost to the
city plus a twenty percent (20%) administrative charge.
   C.   In the event that the city requests a customer to relocate the domestic
water service line due to the city’s construction of a new water main, the
customer shall not be responsible for any water tap-on fee associated with the
new connection, and the city shall reimburse the customer up to two hundred
dollars ($200.00) toward the customer’s cost of relocation of the water service
line. This subsection C shall only apply to connections made on or before
November 1, 1993.
   D.   In the event that the city incurs extraordinary or additional
facilities costs beyond those normally and customarily required to provide
water service to the customer (e.g., oversized water mains, additional wells,
etc.), a tap-on surcharge shall be added to the minimum water service tap-on
charge. The city engineer and city council shall determine the appropriate
amount of the tap-on surcharge to be charged the customer based upon: 1) the
total amount of extraordinary or additional costs incurred by the city, and 2)
an allocation of the extraordinary or additional city costs to each benefited
customer property. The determination of the tap-on surcharge shall be recorded
with the recorder of deeds of DuPage County and shall identify the customer
properties subject to the tap-on surcharge and the amount of the tap-on
surcharge applicable to each such property.
   E.   The aforesaid water service connection fees and charges and water
service tap-on surcharges are hereby adopted by the city pursuant to, and in
the exercise of, its home rule authority.
(Ord. 2870, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
7-4B-6: TAPPING SANITARY SEWER MAINS:
   A.   Where sanitary sewer service requires the tapping of sanitary sewers,
it shall be the responsibility of the person obtaining sanitary sewer service,
at his own expense, to provide proper excavating to the sanitary sewer, to
backfill same, to make the necessary connection to the sanitary sewer, and to
restore the street area to its original condition, including repaving or any
other restoration where necessary.
   B.   All work shall conform to specifications set forth in the building
code. When the sanitary sewer connection is made to the public sewer system of
the city, the connection shall be made under the supervision of the director of
public works or his representative, and a certificate of approval must be
issued prior to the use thereof.
   C.   Where such tap-ons are required with the combined water and sewer
system which is operated and maintained by the city, the applicant for a permit
under subsection
7-4D-3B of this chapter shall also, as a condition prerequisite to the issuance
thereof, pay to the city a tap-on fee.
   D.   The charge for each sanitary sewer service connection shall be as set
forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   E.   In the event the city incurs extraordinary or additional facilities
costs beyond those normally and customarily required to provide sewerage
service to the customer (e.g., oversized sewer mains, lift stations, additional
treatment capacity, etc.), a tap-on surcharge shall be added to the minimum
sewer connection charge and local facilities charge set forth hereinabove. The
city engineer and city council shall determine the appropriate amount of the
tap-on surcharge to be charged the customer based upon: 1) the total amount of
extraordinary or additional costs incurred by the city, and 2) an allocation of
the extraordinary or additional city costs to each benefited customer property.
The determination of the tap-on surcharge shall be recorded with the recorder
of deeds of DuPage County and shall identify the customer properties subject to
the tap-on surcharge and the amount of the tap-on surcharge applicable to each
such property.
   F.   The aforesaid sanitary sewer connection fees and charges and sanitary
sewer services tap-on surcharges are hereby adopted by the city pursuant to,
and in the exercise of, its home rule authority.
(Ord. 2870, 8-4-2014; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
ARTICLE C. RATES, BILLING AND COLLECTION
SECTION:
7-4C-1: Billing
7-4C-2: Water Charges And Billing
7-4C-3: Bimonthly Rates Outside City Limits (Rep. by Ord. 1060, 9-18-1989)
7-4C-4: Sewer Charges And Billing
7-4C-5: Inaccessible Water Meters
7-4C-6: When Payable
7-4C-7: Delinquent Accounts
7-4C-8: Shutting Off Water
7-4C-9: Procedure For Challenging Termination Of Water Service
7-4C-10: Terminating Service
7-4C-11: Restoration Of Water Service
7-4C-12: Lien; Foreclosure
7-4C-1: BILLING:
   Unless specifically provided elsewhere, all water and sewer rates shall be
computed and billed on a monthly basis.
(Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980; amd. Ord. O2024-16, 4-15-2024)
7-4C-2: WATER CHARGES AND BILLING:
The water charges for water furnished by the City by means of its water supply
system, to water customers located within the corporate limits of the City,
shall be and are hereby fixed as follows:
   A.   Demand And Customer Charge:
      1.   Charge as of May 1, 2025:
 
Water Meter Size Residential Commercial
3/4 inch or less $8.72       $10.90
1 inch                       $21.80
11/2 inch                    $34.87
2 inch                       $54.47
3 inch                       $95.88
4 inch                       $156.91
 
   B.   Commodity Charge:
      1.   Effective May 1, 2025, the water commodity charge shall be $2.68 per
thousand gallons or increment thereof.
   C.   Computation Of Charges: Where a master meter, or group of master
meters, is installed in any duplex, townhouse, apartment building or other
multiple-family dwelling, the minimum demand and customer charge for the use of
water in and on such premises shall be computed by multiplying the applicable
minimum charge by the number of dwellings or family units in such duplexes,
townhouses, apartment buildings, condominiums or other multiple-family
dwellings.
   D.   Billing: The aforesaid charges shall be applicable on a monthly basis,
and the charges shall be based upon actual or estimated meter readings. If the
customer’s meter should malfunction, the City shall estimate the customer’s
usage for the billing period during which said malfunction occurred. Such
estimate shall be based on the customer’s previous usage or on the average
usage of similar customers if no personal customer history is available.
Employees of the City Department of Public Works shall be allowed by the
customer upon the customer’s property for the purpose of reading water and
sewer meters and for emergency servicing of any water and sewer system.
   E.   Water Service For Construction Work: The monthly charge for water
service in construction work sites shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per month.
   F.   Water And Wastewater Treatment Facility Charge: The City is authorized
to charge and collect an annual fee of $40,140 from the City water and
wastewater treatment utility for administrative and support services provided
said utility by the City.
(Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980; amd. Ord. 590, 10-19-1981; amd. Ord.
O2018-24, 6-4-2018, eff. retroactive to 5-1-2018; amd. Ord. O2019-22, 5-20-
2019; amd. Ord. O2020-31, 8-17-2020; amd. Ord. O2021-13, 4-19-2021; amd. Ord.
O2022-20, 5-16-2022; amd. Ord. O2023-10, 4-3-2023; amd. Ord. O2024-16, 4-15-
2024; Ord. O2025-20, 4-21-2025)
7-4C-3: BIMONTHLY RATES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1060, 9-18-1989)
7-4C-4: SEWER CHARGES AND BILLING:
   A.   Wastewater Service Charges For Customers Served By City Water Systems:
The charges for wastewater service to all classes of customers shall be and are
hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Monthly Demand And Customer Charge As Of May 1, 2025:
 
Water Meter Size Charge
3/4 inch or less $21.72
1 inch           $23.12
11/2 inch        $24.53
2 inch           $25.28
3 inch           $28.67
4 inch           $32.89
 
      2.   Volume Charge as of May 1, 2025: For all customers with metered
water service, a wastewater volume charge shall be $5.63 per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water metered or sewage metered per billing period which
shall be and is hereby charged.
      3.   Naperville Wastewater Treatment Capital Improvement Volume Charge:
All customers with metered water service shall be charged a wastewater capital
improvement volume charge of three dollars and eight cents ($3.08) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of water metered or sewage metered per billing period.
      4.   The aforesaid charges shall be applicable on a monthly basis, and
the charges shall be based upon actual or estimated meter readings. If the
customer’s meter should malfunction, the City shall eliminate the customer’s
usage for the billing period during which said malfunction occurred. Such
estimate shall be based on the customer’s previous usage or on the average
usage of similar customers if no personal customer history is available.
Employees of the City Department of Public Works shall be allowed by the
customer upon the customer’s property for the purpose of reading water and
sewer meters and the emergency servicing of any water and sewer system.
   B.   Wastewater Service Charges for Customers Not Served by City Water
System:
      1.   In all cases where a customer is not served by the City water
system, effective May 1, 2025, the monthly customer capacity, and volume charge
shall be $59.23, and the monthly Naperville wastewater treatment capital
improvement volume charge shall be $19.40 , for a total bimonthly wastewater
service charge of $78.62.
      2.   All commercial, industrial and government/institutional wastewater
customers not served by the City water system shall be required to meter their
water supply and shall be charged for wastewater service in accordance with
subsection A of this section.
   C.   Multiple-Family Dwellings: Where a master meter, or group of master
meters, is installed in any duplex, townhouse, apartment building or other
multiple-family dwelling, the minimum charge for the use of sewers in and on
such premises shall be computed by multiplying the applicable minimum charge by
the number of dwelling or family units in such duplexes, townhouses, apartment
buildings, condominiums or other multiple-family dwellings.
   D.   Wastewater Capacity Surcharges: All customers discharging wastewater
with a strength exceeding three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/L) BOD or
three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/L) suspended solids shall be charged
a wastewater quality surcharge as follows:
      $0.095 per pound BOD
       0.056 per pound suspended solids
   In addition to the surcharge provided herein, customers discharging
excessive strength wastewater shall also be required to pay the City’s actual
costs in testing costs, which shall be billed separately from the standard
wastewater charges. Said charges shall be in addition to the customer, capacity
and volume charges.
   E.   Billing And Collections: All billing and collections of sewerage
charges shall be bimonthly and included with the water billing and shall be
governed by the provisions of sections 7-4C-6 through 7-4C-12 of this article.
Sewer service may be terminated in accordance with the provisions of said
sections.
(Ord. 2381, 5-21-2007, eff. retroactive to 5-1-2007; amd. Ord. O2018-24, 6-4-
2018, eff. retroactive to 5-1-2018; amd. Ord. O2019-22, 5-20-2019; amd. Ord.
O2020-31, 8-17-2020; amd. Ord. O2021-13, 4-19-2021; amd. Ord. O2022-20, 5-16-
2022; amd. Ord. O2023-10, 4-3-2023; amd. Ord. O2024-16, 4-15-2024; Ord. O2025-
20, 4-21-2025)
7-4C-5: INACCESSIBLE WATER METERS:
Where a water meter is so located that it is not readily accessible to reading
by city officials, the director of public works may require the installation,
at the water customer's expense, of a device whereby such water meter may be
read at a convenient location outside of the premises served. (Ord. 503, 4-21-
1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4C-6: WHEN PAYABLE 1 :
   Statements for water and sewer charges shall be due and payable when
rendered. If such statements remain unpaid 21 days following the billing date,
there shall be added to such statements a late penalty charge in the amount of
ten percent of the current charges. The late charge date and the total amount
due thereafter shall be separately listed on such statements. (Ord. 1378, 3-20-
1995; amd. Ord. O2024-19, 5-6-2024; Ord. O2024-34, 8-19-2024)
 
Notes
  1. Pursuant to ordinance 1378, the provisions of section
1 7-4C-6 shall take effect, and be applicable to, all water and sewer charges
  for which bills are rendered on or after June 1, 1995.
7-4C-7: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
   All statements, including penalties, still remaining unpaid 13 days
following the late penalty charge date as provided in Section
7-4C-6  of this Code shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent,
as provided by law. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980; amd. Ord. O2024-19, 5-
6-2024; Ord. O2024-34, 8-19-2024)
7-4C-8: SHUTTING OFF WATER:
Immediately upon the delinquency of an account for water or sewer, the finance
director or his designee shall notify the customer prior to termination of
service. Said written notice of termination shall include the proposed date of
termination and a brief description of the procedure for challenging the
termination. There shall be added to the delinquent amount a notification fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to cover the cost of processing and delivering
the notice of termination of water service. (Ord. 1617, 10-6-1997)
7-4C-9: PROCEDURE FOR CHALLENGING TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE:
   A.   The finance director, or his designee, shall deliver a written notice
of termination of water service to the service address prior to termination of
service. Said notice of termination shall set forth the proposed date of
termination and notify the customer that he has seven days within which to
challenge termination of service as being unjustified by written notice to the
finance director.
   B.   The finance director, upon receipt of said written notice, shall
schedule a hearing on the challenge. The director shall hold the hearing and
render a final decision thereon. The customer may be present at the hearing
with counsel, may cross examine witnesses, may offer witnesses and evidence and
may present defenses to the termination. All testimony shall be taken under
oath.
   C.   In the event a decision to terminate service is rendered, the customer
may appeal said decision to the mayor and city council within five (5) days.
   D.   The finance director shall have the power to terminate service after
compliance with the foregoing provisions of this section.
(Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980; amd. Ord. 1617, 10-6-1997; Ord. O2024-19,
5-6-2024)
7-4C-10: TERMINATING SERVICE:
Service may also be terminated when any customer violates any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation of the building code plumbing requirements.
The procedure for terminating service shall be governed by section 7-4C-9 of
this article. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4C-11: RESTORATION OF WATER SERVICE:
If water service has been terminated, the water shall not be turned on again
until all arrearages, both as to water charges and sewer charges, together with
any respective penalties, shall have been paid. There shall be paid, prior to
the renewal of water service after disconnection by the finance director for
delinquency or at the request of the user, a charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) to cover the cost of shutting off and turning on the water. (Ord.
1007, 11-21-1988; amd. Ord. 1617, 10-6-1997)
7-4C-12: LIEN; FORECLOSURE:
   A.   Delinquent Charges: Delinquent water or sewer charges shall be a lien
on the premises, as provided by law. Whenever a statement for water or sewer
service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the city may
file with the recorder of deeds of DuPage County a notice of the lien claim.
This notice shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid statement, and an assertion that the city claims a lien
for this amount as well as for the amount of all charges subsequent to the
period covered by this statement.
If the consumer or user whose statement is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises in question, the finance director shall send to the owner or owners of
record of the real estate, as referenced by the taxpayer's identification
number: 1) a copy of each delinquency notice sent to the person who is
delinquent in paying the charges or rates or other notice sufficient to inform
the owner or owners of record, as referenced by the taxpayer's identification
number, that the charges or rates have become delinquent and 2) a notice that
unpaid charges or rates may create a lien on the real estate under this
section.
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a
description of such real estate sufficient for the identification thereof, 2)
the amount of money due for such service, and 3) the date when such amount
became delinquent. The finance director shall send a copy of the notice of the
lien to the owner or owners of record of the real estate, as referenced by the
taxpayer's identification number. The city has the power to foreclose this lien
in the same manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages
on real estate.
In addition, the occupant or user of the real estate, or any person or entity
receiving any direct or indirect benefit from such water and sewer services,
including the owner of the real estate and the owner's successors in interest
and assigns, shall be liable for any unpaid delinquent water or sewer charges.
The city also has the power, from time to time, to sue the occupant or user of
the real estate or a person receiving any direct or indirect benefit from such
services, including the owner of the real estate or the owner's successors in
interest or assigns in a civil action to recover the money due for services
rendered, plus a reasonable attorney fee, to be fixed by the court. Whenever a
judgment is entered in such a civil action, the foregoing provisions in this
section with respect to filing sworn statements of such delinquencies in the
office of the recorder and creating a lien against the real estate shall not be
effective thereafter as to charges sued upon and no lien shall exist thereafter
against the real estate for the delinquency. Judgment in such a civil action
operates as a release and waiver of the lien for the amount of the judgment.
(Ord. 2345, 10-2-2006)
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Real estate subject to a lien for unpaid,
delinquent water charges or sewer charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the
same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay such charges, after
deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such
foreclosure shall be made in equity in the name of the city.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction,
against any real estate as above provided. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
ARTICLE D. SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4D-1: Applicability
7-4D-2: Definitions
7-4D-3: Permits
7-4D-4: Expenses Borne By Owner
7-4D-5: Separate Sewers
7-4D-6: Conformance To Code
7-4D-7: Sewer Elevation
7-4D-8: Connections Of Surface Runoff Water
7-4D-9: Connection To Public Sewer
7-4D-10: Excavations And Restoration
7-4D-11: Discharges Into Storm Sewers
7-4D-12: Certain Discharges Into Sanitary Sewers Prohibited
7-4D-13: Certain Discharges Into Public Sewers Prohibited
7-4D-14: Certain Discharges Prohibited Unless Approved
7-4D-15: Discharge Pretreatment Standards, EPA
7-4D-16: Interceptors
7-4D-17: Maintenance
7-4D-18: Control Manholes
7-4D-19: Laboratory Analyses
7-4D-20: Standards For Tests, Measurements And Analyses
7-4D-21: Special Agreements
7-4D-22: Deposit Of Objectionable Waste Prohibited
7-4D-23: Discharge Of Polluted Waters Prohibited
7-4D-24: Malicious Damage Prohibited
7-4D-25: Entrance Upon Properties
7-4D-26: Compliance With Safety Rules
7-4D-27: Defective Sewers
7-4D-28: Old Sewers To Meet Requirements
7-4D-29: Reimbursement For Disconnection Of Drains From Sanitary Sewer System
7-4D-30: Civil Liability
7-4D-1: APPLICABILITY:
Article B, this article and article E of this chapter apply to all water and
sewer facilities located within the city except as hereinafter provided. (Ord.
503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen- ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard
Methods".
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.22
pounds of suspended solids.
   PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the sewerage works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sewers, even
though those sewers may not have been constructed with City of Naperville
funds.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE WORKS: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping and treatment of wastewater and discharge of effluent.
   SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
   STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a wastewater service customer of the City. It
may be a combination of the liquid and water- carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES: Synonymous with "sewerage works".
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
7-4D-3: PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized personnel shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
   B.   Two Classes of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building
sewer permits:
      1.   For residential and commercial service, and
      2.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Director of Public Works. Connection and inspection fees as established
by this Chapter shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
All nonresidential applicants shall, as a condition of permit authorization,
provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity. No excavations or construction of sewer lines shall occur
unless a permit has been previously issued therefor.
   C.   Issuance of Permit Conditioned Upon Sufficient Capacity: A building
sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed
if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including
sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient
reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
7-4D-4: EXPENSES BORNE BY OWNER:
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
7-4D-5: SEPARATE SEWERS:
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
7-4D-6: CONFORMANCE TO CODE:
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American society of testing materials shall be complied with. Water pollution
control federal manual of practice no. 9 and standard specifications for water
and sewer main construction in Illinois, 1973 edition, shall apply, three (3)
copies of each being on file in the office of the city clerk, and which are
hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-7: SEWER ELEVATION:
All buildings shall be served by overhead sewer connections. (Ord. 761, 5-20-
1985)
7-4D-8: CONNECTIONS OF SURFACE RUNOFF WATER:
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-9: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER:
   A.   Conformance With Codes: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes, other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the American society of testing
materials, water pollution control federation manual of practice no. 9, and
standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in Illinois. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installation.
   B.   Supervision: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or
its representative. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-10: EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATION:
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. If such work does
not conform to the building code or this chapter, the city may complete the
work and bill the occupant or owner of the premises, and the amount thereof
shall be a lien against the premises to the same extent and with the same
effect as delinquent water and sewer charges. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-
1980)
7-4D-11: DISCHARGES INTO STORM SEWERS:
   A.   Storm Water To Be Discharged Into Storm Sewers: Storm water and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged
on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. (Ord. 503, 4-21-
1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
   B.   Discharge Of Sanitary And Industrial Wastewater Into Storm Sewers: It
shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sanitary and industrial
wastewater into the storm sewers constructed as part of an Illinois Route 56 or
Illinois Route 59 improvement; nor shall there be any discharge of wastewater
into any storm sewer in the city. (Ord. 1373, 3-6-1995)
      Any person violating this subsection shall be fined in an amount as set
forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation
continues or exists. (Ord. 406, 12-4-1978; amd. Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
7-4D-12: CERTAIN DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SEWERS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Storm Water: No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
   B.   Disposal Unlawful: All disposal by any person into the sewer system is
unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local
standards.
   C.   Prohibited Connections: No person shall connect or cause the
connection, either directly or indirectly, of any of the following (hereinafter
referred to as "storm water connections") to any public sanitary sewer or
permit any such existing connection to remain connected:
      1.   Building storm drains.
      2.   Driveway drains.
      3.   Roof downspouts.
      4.   Exterior foundation drains.
      5.   Areaway drains.
      6.   Area drains.
      7.   Patio drains.
      8.   Yard drains.
      9.   Combination drains.
      10.   Storm sumps.
      11.   Diverter valves.
      12.   Sump pump drains or outlet pipes which collect or include the
collection of rainwater, storm water or ground water.
      13.   Any drain, pump, outlet or other structure which admits surface
water runoff or ground water.
   D.   Disconnection Of Prohibited Connections: Any prohibited connection as
defined in this section shall be disconnected, not later than one hundred
eighty (180) days after notice from the city, by the property owner or agent
responsible for maintenance of any structure or property having a connection to
a public sanitary sewer. Once disconnected, a prohibited connection shall not
be reconnected, and any such reconnection shall be a separate violation
immediately subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
   E.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon
being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to fines in amounts as set
forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance. Each day on which the violation continues
beyond the aforesaid second compliance period shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 1981, 5-20-2002; amd. Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
7-4D-13: CERTAIN DISCHARGE INTO PUBLIC SEWERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
   C.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewerage works.
   D.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewerage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, either whole or
ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-14: CERTAIN DISCHARGES PROHIBITED UNLESS APPROVED:
No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if the director of public works shall
determine that such wastes are harmful to either the sewers, wastewater
treatment process or equipment of sewerage works; have an adverse affect on the
receiving stream; or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In making such determination as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the director of public works shall give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment plant and maximum
limits established by regulatory agencies. Any such determination may be
appealed to the city council by any person affected by such determination. The
decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final. The substances
prohibited are:
   A.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and 65°C).
   C.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
   D.   Any waters or wastes containing iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
   E.   Any waste at any time containing more than the maximum concentration in
milligrams per liter of any substance shown in the following table:
Arsenic (total)         0.50
Barium (total)          5.00
Cadmium (total)         0.30
Chromium (total triv.)  3.00
Chromium (total hexav.) 0.60
Copper (total)          2.00
Cyanide                 0.50
Iron (total)            5.00
Lead (total)            0.25
Manganese (total)       2.00
Mercury                 0.0005
Nickel (total)          2.00
Phenol                  0.60
Selenium (total)        2.00
Silver (total)          0.10
Zinc (total)            2.00
 
      
   F.   Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor producing substances.
   G.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations.
   H.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   I.   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and limit residues or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
      2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
      3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
works;
      4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
   J.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-15: DISCHARGE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS, EPA:
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in this article, and/or which are in violation of
the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA rules and
regulations, subchapter D, water programs part 12B – pretreatment standards,
federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any
amendments thereto, and which may have a deleterious effect upon the sewerage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
   A.   Reject the wastes;
   B.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   C.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
   D.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating such
wastes under the provisions of this article.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-16: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-17: MAINTENANCE:
When preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-18: CONTROL MANHOLES:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required
by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-19: LABORATORY ANALYSES:
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and
wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and any special conditions or
discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction
over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than
once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-
1980)
7-4D-20: STANDARDS FOR TESTS, MEASUREMENTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-21: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern,
provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for
user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980,
eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-22: DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-
1-1980)
7-4D-23: DISCHARGE OF POLLUTED WATERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-24: MALICIOUS DAMAGE PROHIBITED:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
sewerage works. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-25: ENTRANCE UPON PROPERTIES:
The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event
that the director of public works or other duly authorized employee is refused
admittance or is in any way hindered in the making of the inspection, the
director of public works or his duly authorized agent may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction for an order commanding the owner or occupant of any
premises to permit access for purposes herein described. The director of public
works or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment. (Ord. 1981, 5-20-2002)
7-4D-26: COMPLIANCE WITH SAFETY RULES:
While performing the necessary work on private properties, the director of
public works or duly authorized employees of the city, shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company. (Ord. 503, 4-21-
1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-27: DEFECTIVE SEWERS:
Whenever a building sewer or drain is obstructed or otherwise found to be
broken or defective so that sewage or drainage escapes into surrounding soils
or into adjacent premises, repair or replacement may be ordered by the director
of public works. Such repair or replacement shall be at the expense of the
owner or person in control of the property concerned. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain and keep in repair the sewer
service line between the collector sewer and the building. The city may, in
case of emergency, repair any sewer service lines, and if this is done, the
owner shall be responsible for the cost of such work and the amount thereof
shall be a lien against the premises to the same extent and with the same
effect as delinquent water and sewer charges. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-
1980)
7-4D-28: OLD SEWERS TO MEET REQUIREMENTS:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4D-29: REIMBURSEMENT FOR DISCONNECTION OF DRAINS FROM SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
Any property owner or any agent who is responsible for maintenance of any
structure or property within the city, which is served by any drain or outlet
pipe or other structure, as set forth in this chapter, for which disconnection
is required, may be eligible for partial reimbursement for actual out of pocket
expenses incurred as a consequence of performing or having performed storm
water connection work in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The
reimbursement amount, if any, shall be subject to prior appropriation by the
city and further subject to the terms and conditions of the city program, as it
may exist from time to time. (Ord. 1981, 5-20-2002)
7-4D-30: CIVIL LIABILITY:
In addition to the penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code, any person who shall damage any portion or component of the
sewerage works of the city by violating any provision in this article, or
otherwise, shall be civilly liable to the city for such damage. (Ord. 503, 4-
21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
ARTICLE E. PRIVATE SEWERAGE FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-4E-1: Privies, Septic Tanks, Cesspools Prohibited
7-4E-2: Installation Of Toilet Facilities Required
7-4E-3: Variances
7-4E-4: Construction Permits
7-4E-5: Compliance
7-4E-6: Connection When Public Sewer Becomes Available (Rep. by Ord. 1981, 5-
20-2002)
7-4E-7: Maintenance
7-4E-8: Additional Requirements
7-4E-1: PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4E-2: INSTALLATION OF TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED:
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the county of DuPage, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be thereupon
abandoned and properly removed or sealed in the manner required by the county
of DuPage. (Ord. 1981, 5-20-2002)
7-4E-3: VARIANCES:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available and a variance from the
construction of a sanitary sewer has been granted by the city council, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4E-4: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the director of public works. The application for such permit shall be made on
a form furnished by the said director, which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
said director. A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   B.   Effective Date Of Permit: A permit for a private sewage disposal system
shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the director of public works. He shall then be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
application for the permit shall notify the said director when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
(Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4E-5: COMPLIANCE:
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the state of Illinois private sewage
disposal licensing act and code and with the state of Illinois environmental
protection agency 1 , and the ordinances of the county in which said system is
to be constructed. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
7-4E-6: CONNECTION WHEN PUBLIC SEWER BECOMES AVAILABLE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1981, 5-20-2002)
7-4E-7: MAINTENANCE:
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city. (Ord. 503, 4-21-
1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
7-4E-8: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the county in which said system
is to be constructed. (Ord. 503, 4-21-1980, eff. 5-1-1980)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose And Scope
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Annual Registration Required
7-5-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-5-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-5-6: Effect Of Permit
7-5-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-5-8: Insurance
7-5-9: Indemnification
7-5-10: Security
7-5-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-5-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-5-13: General Construction Standards
7-5-14: Traffic Control
7-5-15: Location Of Facilities
7-5-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-5-17: Vegetation Control
7-5-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
7-5-19: Cleanup And Restoration
7-5-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-5-21: Small Wireless Facilities
7-5-22: Variances
7-5-23: Penalties
7-5-24: Enforcement
7-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City
rights-of-way and the City as a whole.
   B.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City, except as may be otherwise
provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The City, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the City enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   D.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   E.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all policies,
resolutions, ordinances, or parts thereof adopted prior hereto that are in
conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   F.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   G.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the City so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
   APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CITY: The City of Warrenville.
   CITY STANDARDS: Any codes, ordinances or regulations of the City which are
applicable to construction of utility facilities in City rights-of-way.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area shall consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The codified ordinances of the City of Warrenville.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines
of a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The City Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any work that obstructs the right-of- way or
causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right- of-way for its
intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following:
excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of
materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of
vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of
traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right- of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track
and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-
of- way under this chapter, except those owned by the City.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A ground mounted facility that is not a crossing
facility, an overhead facility, or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, equipment enclosure, equipment cabinet, meter station or
similar ground mounted appurtenance.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: A roadway providing access to land adjacent to the highway
where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristic, is determined by the
Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A right-of-way used for vehicular traffic, including rural or urban
roads or streets, whether classified as arterial, collector, minor or local.
Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches
and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective
structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ILCC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility
Notification Program.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of- way.
   OVERHEAD FACILITY: A facility that is mounted on a pole.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections
7-5-4 and
7-5-5 of this chapter.
   PERSON OR ENTITY: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of court.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility to its original condition.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location
of facilities other than those of the City. Right-of-way shall not include any
real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include City buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-5-10 of this chapter.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: As defined in section
7-5-21 of this chapter.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Private line" means a
dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer and/or a dedicated
nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer
to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such
channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person who installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Any person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY: Any person or entity owning or operating any "facility", as defined
in this section.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201
(v).
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. O2018-29,
7-16-2018)
7-5-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the City shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person and
evidence of insurance as required in section
7-5-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. O2018-
29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any City
right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the "right-of-way" (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit
from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
Small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the permit requirements of
section
7-5-21 of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or
confidential by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. Small
wireless facilities shall also be subject to the application requirements of
section
7-5-21 of this chapter.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of
the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of
the work to be performed, as determined by the Director of Public Works, with
special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work
proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the City:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-5-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
7-5-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
 7-5-22 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric, power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ILCC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District and other local or State entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
      6.   In the case of small wireless facilities, applications shall address
all items required by section
7-5-21 of this chapter.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the City within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that
is paying to the City the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax or the
optional State telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to
the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any
electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
Application fees for small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the
requirements of section
7-5-21 of this chapter. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of
Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed, and subject to the variance
procedure if applicable.
      2.   Except in cases where a variance is required, in the event that the
Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of
notice to the City by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not
involving excavation for new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after
service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
7-5-4 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided
the holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted, No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on City rights-of-way to the extent
of the City's property rights therein. The permit does not create a property
right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others
who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way, including, without
limitation, such rights as may exist by virtue of 605 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/9-113 (the Illinois Highway Code).
   B.   Duration: No permit under this chapter shall be valid for a period
longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion; provided, however,
that permits for small wireless facilities shall be subject to the duration
provided for SWF permits in section
7-5-21 of this chapter.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the City, with such City
representatives in attendance as the City deems necessary. The meeting shall be
for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special
considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without
limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and
their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the City
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
City and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set
of drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) days after the completion
of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically
identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
7-5-22 of this chapter. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the City and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional noncontributory insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section. The utility's insurance shall be
primary, and any City policies of insurance shall be deemed secondary.
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for environmental liability;
      3.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      4.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits;
      5.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident; and
      6.   Property insurance for its property replacement cost against all
risks.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the City within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-
insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-
insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act. Self-insurance shall be primary,
and any City policies of insurance shall be deemed secondary.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the City and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-
2018)
7-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the sole negligence, misconduct or breach of
this chapter by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. A utility shall also waive any claims it may have against the
City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however
caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
City and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals From Cash Security Funds: The City, upon fourteen (14)
days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention
to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount
from the Security Fund if the fund is a Cash Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the fourteen (14)
day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   E.   Replenishment Of Cash Security Funds: Within fourteen (14) days after
receipt of written notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from
the Cash Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Cash Security Fund to
the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest On Cash Security Funds: The permittee may request that any and
all interest accrued on the amount in the Cash Security Fund be returned to the
permittee by the City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Cash Security Fund below
the minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Cash Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Cash Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Cash Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become
the property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Other Security Funds: Withdrawals, replenishment, renewal and closing
of letter of credit or surety bond Security Funds shall be governed by the
terms of the letter of credit or surety bond.
   I.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other
right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which
may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   City Right To Revoke Permit: The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The City shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal
to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the City or a
contractor designated by the City may, at the option of the City: 1) correct
the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less
than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the City. The permittee
shall be liable in all events to the City for all costs of correction, removal
or abandonment. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the City no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's right-of-
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. O2018-29,
7-16-2018)
7-5-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   City Standards: In addition, all applicable "City standards", as
defined in this chapter, shall also apply to construction in the rights-of-way.
   C.   Interpretation Of City Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The City's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this Code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
7-5-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the City. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection:
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
City's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the City's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be
located in culverts or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: If a variance has been
granted, an overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only
if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The City may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The City may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   Immediately upon filing a permit application which includes a
freestanding facility, the utility shall meet with the Director of Public Works
and schedule an on-site review. In accordance with the standards and purposes
of this chapter, the City may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way, as appropriate to mitigate
the impact upon the right-of-way and adjoining property.
      2.   The City may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities, including
freestanding facilities, may be installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location and will employ
suitable design and materials to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety.
Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless,
single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable;
the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   I.   Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless facilities shall be subject
to the additional requirements of section
7-5-21 of this chapter and the SWF Act. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the City to be preserved shall be bored under or around
the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction" or with City standards, whichever standards are more restrictive.
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction" or with City standards, whichever standards are
more restrictive. When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill as determined by the Director of Public
Works shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if required by sound engineering judgment,
as determined by the Director of Public Works.
If a variance to the limitations set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted
under section
7-5-22 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Director of Public Works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
City.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.45 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by City)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within City rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code 305 (formerly
general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: If overhead facilities have been permitted
by the City under section
7-5-15 of this chapter, the overhead power or communication facilities shall
use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum Federal safety standards (49 CFR
192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", and
all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois" and City standards.
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way by
variance, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1')
(305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation
free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty
plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the
approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" and City standards, the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established
by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval
must be obtained from the City. No materials may be stored in the floodway or
floodplain.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the City
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
shall be between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the City shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. O2018-
29, 7-16-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-5-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations and, additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the City as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right- of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the City for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City,
a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the
rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in
or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the City shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights-of-way of the City, the utility shall notify the City within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the City may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public
Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. In the event that the City does not direct the
utility that the abandoned facility be removed, the abandoning utility shall be
deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the
facility by another utility or person at the City's sole discretion. (Ord.
O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup
and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project and as per City standards. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the City a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-21: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the
location, installation, and maintenance of small wireless facilities in
compliance with the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act 1  and
City standards. Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the requirements
of this section, this chapter, and Federal law.
   B.   Definitions: Words or phrases in this section that are not defined in
this subsection B or in section
7-5-2 of this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. The following words and phrases have
the meanings ascribed to them:
   ANTENNA: Means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
   RIGHT-OF-WAY OR ROW: For the purposes of collocation of small wireless
facilities, means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use, and does not include City-owned aerial lines.
   SWF ACT: Means the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 835/1 et seq.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY OR SWF: Means a wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: 1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and 2) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE: Means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
1) equipment associated with wireless communications and 2) radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment regardless of technological configuration. Wireless
facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include
the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is
collocated or wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Means any entity authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: Means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Means any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: Means an entity that provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole.
   C.   Permit Required: No SWF may be installed within the City unless a
permit is first obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
provided, however, that micro wireless facilities may be subject to the limited
permitting requirements of subsection Q of this section.
   D.   Permit Application: All applicants for a permit to install an SWF
within the City must submit a written permit application to the Director of
Public Works by personal delivery, on a form provided by the City. The permit
application must include the following information and the information required
by section
7-5-4 of this chapter, as applicable:
      1.   Contact Information: The names and contact information of the
wireless services provider and the wireless infrastructure provider if any.
      2.   Description: A description and depiction of the wireless services
provider's existing SWFs located within the City.
      3.   Location, Photographs: The location where each proposed small
wireless facility or utility pole would be installed, including photographs of
the location and its surroundings, depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or the location
where a utility pole would be installed.
      4.   Specifications, Drawings: Specifications and drawings prepared by a
licensed professional structural engineer for each proposed SWF as it is
proposed to be installed, with a certification that each SWF complies with all
applicable size and location standards.
      5.   Structural Analysis: A site-specific structural analysis for each
location by a licensed professional structural engineer as well as any make-
ready analysis for a City utility pole that includes addressing the
acceptability of the site for factors such as pole loading from existing
utility equipment and conductors as well as the small wireless facility.
      6.   Equipment, Model Numbers: The equipment type and model numbers for
the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with each proposed
SWF.
      7.   Number: The total number of SWFs the wireless services provider
estimates it will seek within the City.
      8.   Schedule: A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of
each proposed SWF, if approved.
      9.   Proof Of Insurance: Proof of insurance coverage of the types and
amount set forth in section
7-5-8 of this chapter.
      10.   Certification Of SWF Act Compliance: A certification that the
proposed SWF complies with subsection 15(d)(6) of the SWF Act and this chapter.
      11.   Application Fees: An application fee in the amount established in
the amount of: a) six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for a single SWF, or b)
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each proposed SWF if the application
includes two (2) or more SWFs, or c) one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
SWF that includes the installation of a new utility pole.
      12.   Owner, Co-Owner Certification: A certification from the owner or
co-owner of the utility pole or wireless support structure that the owner or
co-owner has approved installation of an SWF on the utility pole or wireless
support structure.
   E.   Review Of Application: Applications will be reviewed in accordance with
the following process, except that the Director of Public Works may alter the
review process for an application as appropriate based on the elements of that
application; provided, however, that the review process will be consistent with
the SWF Act:
      1.   Determination Of Completeness: Within thirty (30) days after an
application is filed, the Director of Public Works will determine whether the
application is complete. The Director of Public Works will notify the applicant
of his or her determination. If an application is not complete, then the
Director of Public Works will identify the missing information.
      2.   Processing Time Period: The Director of Public Works will process a
complete application to collocate: a) an SWF on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure within ninety (90) days, and b) an SWF on a new
utility pole within one hundred twenty (120) days.
      3.   Approvals; Permits; Duration: The Director of Public Works will
approve an application and issue a permit if it meets all requirements of the
SWF Act and applicable City Code requirements. All collocation under the permit
must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the
permit, unless otherwise mutually agreed or for reasons authorized under the
SWF Act. A permit is valid for five (5) years.
      4.   Renewal: When the permit expires, the City will renew the permit
except if the City determines the SWF does not conform to any applicable
Federal, State, or local code or regulation. The wireless provider must provide
all reports, plans, and other documents and data necessary for the City to
determine conformance of the SWF.
      5.   Denial: The Director of Public Works will deny an application if it
does not meet all requirements of the SWF Act and applicable requirements of
this Code. The Director of Public Works will notify the applicant of the denial
and the reason or reasons for the denial.
      6.   Extensions Of Time: The time period for applications may be tolled
by express written agreement of the applicant and the City or a local, State,
or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
   F.   Guidance On SWF Locations: Based on various factors including, among
others, public safety, existing utility poles and wireless facilities, and
potential adverse impacts, the applicant must consider collocation in these
locations, with the items listed from most preferable to least preferable:
      1.   Public Utilities' Poles: Utility poles owned or maintained by ComEd
or other public utilities.
      2.   City Poles: City-owned utility poles other than light poles or
standards (whether existing or to be installed) in the following order of
priority: a) within an arterial street right-of-way, b) within a parking lot or
on other property related to a governmental or institutional use, and c) within
a collector street right-of-way.
      3.   Privately Owned Poles: Privately-owned utility poles, but only in
locations approved by the City.
      4.   City Light Poles: City-owned light poles or standards (whether
existing or to be installed) in the following priority: a) within an arterial
street right-of-way, b) within a parking lot or on other property related to a
governmental or institutional use, and c) within a collector street right-of-
way.
      5.   Other Poles; Nonresidential: Utility poles, regardless of ownership,
located in a rear yard (or abutting easement) of any non-residential property.
      6.   Other Poles; Residential: Utility poles, regardless of ownership,
located in a rear yard (or abutting easement) of any residential dwelling.
   G.   Decorative Utility Poles; Concealment Of SWF: If the Director of Public
Works determines that an SWF proposed by the applicant would have an unduly
adverse impact on the abutting area unless the SWF is collocated on a
decorative pole or is concealed, then the Director of Public Works may require,
as a condition of approval of that SWF, a decorative utility pole or
concealment. The Director of Public Works or a designee may meet with the
applicant to determine the plans for the SWF under that circumstance. If an
agreement on plans cannot be reached, then the Director of Public Works may
deny the permit for that proposed SWF.
   H.   Prohibited Locations:   SWFs are prohibited at the following locations
except as otherwise required by applicable law:
      1.   Residential Property: On any property classified in a residential
district under the City's zoning ordinance.
      2.   Private Property: On any privately-owned property except with the
approval of the City.
      3.   Government Property: On any property owned or controlled by a unit
of local government that is not located within rights-of- way, except with the
permission of the local government and approval of the City.
      4.   Poles With Equipment: On any utility pole that includes equipment
such as capacitor banks, transformers, cable terminals, cable rises, fuses, or
disconnects.
   I.   Size, Height, And Location Of Components:
      1.   Volume: No element of an SWF may exceed six (6) cubic feet in volume
and all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated
with the SWF is cumulatively not more than twenty five (25) cubic feet.
      2.   Height Above Pole: No element of an SWF may extend more than ten
feet (10') above a utility pole or wireless support structure on which it is
collocated.
      3.   New Utility Pole, Wireless Support Structure Height: A new or
replacement utility pole or a new wireless support structure on which an SWF
will be collocated may not exceed the higher of: a) ten feet (10') in height
above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting
only wireless facilities, that is in place as of the date the application is
submitted to the City, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the
new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in
the same right-of-way within the City, or b) forty five feet (45') above ground
level.
      4.   New Utility Pole Location: No new utility pole may be constructed
for an SWF within one hundred feet (100') of an existing utility pole that the
applicant may use on reasonable terms and conditions and without undue
technical limits or undue additional costs.
   J.   Color: Antennas and equipment cabinets must be in colors harmonious
with, and that blend with, the natural features, buildings and structures that
surround such antenna and supporting structures, as well as the utility poles
or wireless support structures to which they are attached, as determined by the
Director of Public Works. Any wiring or cables must be covered with an
appropriate cover.
   K.   Landscaping: The immediate area around any ground-mounted equipment or
cabinets must be landscaped in a manner that largely screens the equipment and
cabinets.
   L.   Safety Requirements:
      1.   Mounting Strength: The strength and sufficiency of the support
structure, and the mounting of the antenna and related equipment, must be
verified and stamped by a licensed structural engineer on the drawing required
under subsection D of this section.
      2.   Guy Wires Prohibited: No guy wire or other support wires may be used
in connection with an SWF antenna or its related equipment except for
preexisting guy wires or other support wires on a preexisting wireless support
structure.
      3.   Grounding: An SWF antenna and related structure must be bonded to a
ground rod.
      4.   Emergency Disconnection: An SWF antenna must have an emergency
disconnect.
      5.   Lighting: No SWF may be lighted unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other Federal or State agency with jurisdiction and
authority.
      6.   Signs And Advertising: Unless required by Federal or State law, or
by a rule of a Federal or State regulatory agency with jurisdiction and
authority, no markings, signs, or advertising of any kind may be placed on any
SWF component except unobtrusive identification or location markings.
      7.   Building Codes And Safety Standards: An SWF must meet or exceed: a)
all requirements of this Code, b) all other applicable local and State Building
Codes and Electrical Codes, c) and industry standards.
      8.   Regulatory Compliance: Each SWF and wireless facility must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other Federal or State
agency with jurisdiction and authority.
      9.   Utility Worker Safety: Prior to the commencement of SWF
construction, the wireless provider must provide the City with any required
safety precautions for individuals working on or near the SWF. If refresher
training, personal protective equipment, or tools are required for safety
purposes related to an SWF collocated on a City-owned utility pole, then the
wireless services provider must reimburse the City for all of its actual costs
of those elements.
   M.   IDOT, DuPage County Approvals: The applicant must provide proof of
concurrence of IDOT or DuPage County for the use of City utility poles located
on State or County roads.
   N.   Abandonment: Any SWF that has been abandoned or is being used for a
purpose other than its original purpose must be removed at the owner's expense.
Abandonment includes, without limitation, any SWF that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, or is otherwise out of operation or
repair for any reason, or used for a purpose other than its original purpose.
Notice to the owner of the facility must be given in compliance with the
requirements of the SWF Act, and the owner must remove the facility within
ninety (90) days of such notice.
   O.   Collocation On City Utility Poles:
      1.   Rates And Fees For Use Of City Utility Pole: The City will set and
charge nondiscriminatory rates and fees for collocation on City utility poles.
The City will keep a written schedule of rates and fees in the Office of the
City Clerk.
      2.   Annual Rate: Each wireless services provider must pay an annual fee
of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each SWF located on a City utility pole in
right-of-way or the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the City's utility pole and an annual fee
of three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) for each SWF on City property
not located in right-of-way.
      3.   Operating Agreement: Prior to commencement of SWF construction on a
City-owned utility pole, the owner must develop an operating agreement
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. The agreement must include
protocols for emergency response and for maintenance of the utility pole and
include emergency contacts, a contact for public inquires, the utility billing
address, and the legal address of the wireless services provider.
   P.   SWF Equipment Replacement: The wireless provider must notify the City
at least ten (10) days prior to a planned equipment replacement and provide the
equipment specifications. The replacement equipment must be the same size and/
or smaller than the original installation.
   Q.   Right-Of-Way Permit: The wireless provider must secure a permit for any
activities in the right-of-way that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
   R.   General Standards:
      1.   No Interference: Every wireless provider's operation of a wireless
facility must not interfere with the frequencies used by any public safety
agency for public safety communications. The wireless provider must install
SWFs of the type and frequency that will not cause interference with any public
safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will be
determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or
any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
      2.   Curing Interference: If an SWF causes interference and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the City or
public safety agency, then the wireless provider, at its expense, must take all
reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference,
including, without limitation, powering down the SWF and later powering it up
for intermittent testing, if necessary. The City may terminate a permit for an
SWF based on interference if the wireless provider is not making a good faith
effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
      3.   Compliance With Contract Terms: Every wireless provider must comply
with all requirements imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and to ground- mounted equipment located in right-of-way.
      4.   Spacing: Every wireless provider must comply with spacing
requirements in this section or any other applicable City code or ordinance
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-
way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation of a spacing requirement.
      5.   Undergrounding: Every wireless provider must comply with all City
codes and regulations regarding undergrounding of utilities and facilities that
prohibit installation of new, or modification of existing, utility poles in a
right-of-way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation of an
undergrounding requirement.
      6.   General City Standards: Every wireless provider must comply with
generally applicable City standards for construction and public safety in the
rights-of-way, including, without limitation, wiring and cabling requirements,
grounding requirements, utility pole extension requirements, and sign
restrictions. Every wireless provider must comply with all City regulations
applicable to the location, size, surface area and height of wireless
facilities and the abandonment and removal of SWFs.
      7.   Poles For Electricity Distribution: No wireless services provider
may collocate an SWF on a City utility pole that is part of an electricity
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the utility pole, except that the
antenna and support equipment of the SWF may be located in the communications
space on the City's utility pole and on the top of the utility pole if no other
utility pole is available and the wireless provider complies with applicable
codes for work involving the top of the utility pole. The terms "communications
space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" shall
have the meanings contained in the National Electric Safety Code.
      8.   Public Safety Codes: Every wireless provider must comply with all
applicable State, County, and City codes, ordinances, and regulations that
concern public safety.
      9.   Decorative, Stealth, And Concealment Standards: Every wireless
provider must comply with the City's generally applicable written standards for
decorative utility poles, and the City's generally applicable standards
regarding stealth, concealment, and aesthetics governing occupiers of the
right-of-way, including the City's design or concealment measures in a historic
district or regarding a historic landmark.
      10.   Insurance: Every wireless provider must provide insurance as
provided in section
 7-5-8 of this chapter.
      11.   Indemnification: Every wireless provider must indemnify the City as
provided in section
7-5-9 of this chapter.
   S.   Installation And Maintenance Of Wireless Facilities: Each wireless
provider must construct, install, and maintain all wireless facilities in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-
2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 835/1 et seq.
7-5-22: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Director of
Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Director of Public Works shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director
of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of
the appeal at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least
seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely
decide the appeal. (Ord. O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists.
There may be times when the City will incur delay or other costs, including
third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties
under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
utility shall bear the City's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be
imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord.
O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
7-5-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
O2018-29, 7-16-2018)
CHAPTER 6
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Scope And Purpose
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Permitted Freestanding Interstate Highway Signage
7-6-4: Filing Requirements And Procedures
7-6-5: Penalties
7-6-1: SCOPE AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish sign regulations which are specific
to freestanding interstate highway signs located on public property along
Interstate Route 88 within the City of Warrenville and shall supersede any
conflicting regulations set forth in this Code with respect to such signage.
All other signage on public property shall be subject to the provisions of
title 8, chapter 14 of this Code, as now existing or hereafter amended. (Ord.
3028, 9-19-2016)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
hereinafter ascribed to them:
   FREESTANDING INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SIGN: A sign supported on the ground or by a
support structure on the ground and not attached to any building and so
configured to convey a message or messages to motorists traveling on the
Interstate 88 corridor.
   INTERSTATE 88 CORRIDOR: That portion of Interstate Route 88 right-of-way
which is located within or immediately adjacent to the corporate boundaries of
the City of Warrenville.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SIGN SITE: Any public property: a) which is owned or
controlled by a governmental agency pursuant to an easement or other interest
in land and b) which is located within six hundred sixty feet (660') of
Interstate Route 88.
   SIGN FACE: The area of the sign on which copy is placed.
   TOTAL FREESTANDING SIGN AREA: A. The area around and enclosing the perimeter
of each cabinet or module shall be summed and then totaled to determine total
sign area. The perimeter of measurable area shall not include pole covers or
support structure, provided that there is no sign copy on such embellishments.
For example, if there are two (2) cabinets or modules, each having five hundred
(500) square feet of sign area, the total freestanding sign area shall be
calculated as one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   If the sign is comprised of more than two (2) sign cabinets or modules,
the area enclosing the entire perimeter of all cabinets and/or modules within a
single, continuous, rectangular geometric figure shall be the area of the sign.
Pole covers or support structure shall not be included in the area of
measurement if they do not bear sign copy. (Ord. 3028, 9-19-2016)
7-6-3: PERMITTED FREESTANDING INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SIGNAGE:
   A.   Freestanding interstate highway signs shall be allowed to be installed
on interstate highway sign sites subject to compliance with the following
regulations:
      1.   Maximum Total Freestanding Sign Area: One thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet;
      2.   Maximum Sign Height (Measured Per Subsection
8-14-5B Of This Code): Sixty five feet (65');
      3.   Maximum Sign Face Area: Seven hundred (700) square feet;
      4.   Maximum Number Of Sign Faces Per Sign: Two (2);
      5.   Minimum Setback From Interstate Highway Sign Site Property Lines:
Ten feet (10');
      6.   Minimum Setback From Residentially Zoned Property Lines: Four
hundred feet (400');
      7.   Minimum Setback From Residentially Occupied Structures On
Residentially Zoned Properties: Four hundred fifty feet (450');
      8.   Illumination Standards:
         a.   At no time shall the sign display exceed a brightness level of
three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle above ambient light, as measured using a foot-
candle meter and measured at a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') from
the sign.
         b.   In no case shall the sign display increase lighting levels at
adjacent off site residentially zoned and occupied properties by more than 0.1
foot-candle above ambient light levels, as measured using a foot-candle meter
and measured at the off site residential property line.
         c.   In no case shall the luminosity of the digital sign display
during full sun daylight hours exceed seven thousand (7,000) nits, as measured
using a nit gun located at an elevated height perpendicular to the digital
display or setback three hundred fifty (350) to five hundred feet (500') back
on the centerline of the sign face provided that at all times nit gun
measurement circle shall not fall outside the lighted digital sign face.
         d.   In no case shall the maximum luminosity of the sign during
nighttime hours, in a full white/full brightness field, exceed two hundred
(200) nits as measured using a nit gun located at an elevated height
perpendicular to the digital display or setback three hundred fifty (350) to
five hundred feet (500') back on the centerline of the sign face provided that
at all times nit gun measurement circle shall not fall outside the lighted
digital sign face.
         e.   Digital sign displays shall be equipped and operated with an
ambient light sensor/photocell and dimming software that automatically adjusts
the brightness and luminosity of the sign relative to ambient light so that at
no time will the sign exceed the preceding maximum foot-candle and luminosity
levels.
      9.   Changeable Copy: The frequency of messages changes on the sign shall
not be less than once every ten (10) seconds. Message changes shall be
completed in one second or less;
      10.   Spacing: A six hundred foot (600') minimum spacing shall be
required between individual freestanding interstate highway signs;
      11.   Sign Agreement: A sign agreement which includes the foregoing
regulatory standards and which is approved by the city council, shall be
required prior to the issuance of a sign permit to a governmental agency for a
new freestanding interstate highway sign;
      12.   Public Information And Input Meeting: From and after the effective
date of this chapter, a mandatory public information and input meeting shall be
conducted on any proposed new freestanding interstate highway sign prior to
city council approval of a sign agreement and community development department
approval of a sign permit for said sign. The public information and input
meeting shall be conducted in general conformance with the provisions contained
in section 2.B.4 of the zoning ordinance. At the conclusion of the public
information and input meeting, the plan commission may make an advisory
recommendation to the city council regarding any such proposal. (Ord. 3028, 9-
19-2016)
7-6-4: FILING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   General: No new freestanding interstate highway sign shall hereafter be
erected, altered, or relocated until the sign conforms with the provisions of
this chapter and a sign permit has been obtained from the community development
department.
Routine maintenance or replacement of parts designed to be changed which do not
require any permit shall not be considered an alteration; provided such change
does not increase the surface area, height, or cause any other structural
change.
   B.   Application Requirements: Applications for sign permits shall be filed
with the community development department upon forms provided by the city and
shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the
governmental agency having an interest in the interstate highway sign site.
      2.   A plat of survey showing the location of the building, structure or
lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected, the location
of the sign in relation to buildings or structures on the lot and on adjacent
lots and rights of way.
      3.   Two (2) drawings of the sign showing method of construction,
illumination, if any, attachment to the building or ground support, and showing
the proposed sign face with the design and lettering to be placed thereon
accurately representing scale as to size, area, proportion and color.
      4.   The name of the person, firm, corporation or association owning and
erecting the sign.
      5.   Such other information as the zoning administrator shall require to
show full compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances
of the city, including formal approval of the application by the governmental
agency.
   C.   Review Process: It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator or
their representative, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit, to
examine plans, specifications, other data, and the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign. If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in
compliance with all regulations applicable thereto, the zoning administrator or
their representative shall issue a sign permit.
   D.   Freestanding Interstate Highway Sign Permit Fee: Five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   E.   Permit Revocation: If the work authorized under the sign permit is not
completed within six (6) months after the issuance of said permit, the permit
shall become null and void. All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, are mere licenses
subject to revocation at any time by the majority of the city council in the
event of violation of any of the terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord.
3028, 9-19-2016)
7-6-5: PENALTIES:
Penalties for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be as
contained in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 3028, 9-19-2016)
CHAPTER 7
TREE PRESERVATION
SECTION:
7-7-1: Purpose; Applicability
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: City Tree Preservation, Planting And Maintenance
7-7-4: Reserved For Future Use
7-7-5: City Tree Care
7-7-6: City Tree Protection Required
7-7-7: City Tree Removal And Replacement
7-7-8: Stop Work Order
7-7-9: Penalty
7-7-10: Emergency Exception
7-7-11: Appeals For Variance
7-7-12: Reserved Civil Remedies
7-7-1: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve, protect and enhance critical
infrastructure - the urban forest that is located within city right-of-way and
other publicly accessible city-owned property. The complete urban forest is
comprised of trees across all land uses and ownership. This chapter
specifically applies to trees located within city right-of-way or on other
city-owned property dedicated to and available for public use.
   This chapter recognizes that trees located in city right-of-way are a
collective asset to the entire community and identifies and effectuates the
city's goals to protect, preserve, care, and plant trees located in city right-
of-way, including, without limitation:
   A.   Protect, preserve and enhance the quality of life and general welfare
of the city, its residents, and property owners; and conserve and enhance the
city's natural, physical, and aesthetic environment by preserving, protecting,
and enhancing the urban forest that is located within city right-of-way to
ensure that trees are properly planted and maintained.
   B.   Recognize that city right-of-way trees are an integral part of the
infrastructure of the city and, as such, should be preserved, protected and
cared for as other critical city infrastructure.
   C.   Recognize that larger trees provide larger benefits. When a large tree
is removed and replaced with a smaller tree the benefits and services are
reduced.
   D.   Recognize that some trees may have a condition that constitutes a
threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property within the city or may be
dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in the city.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
ARBORIST: Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a related
field and is licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited forestry
industry body, e.g. international society of arboriculture.
BUCKTHORN: An undesirable exotic invasive ornamental shrub introduced to North
America. This species inhabits woodlands and savannas where it dominates the
landscape prohibiting the development of native trees and plants. There are six
species of buckthorn listed in the Illinois exotic weed act, which prohibits
the sale, distribution or planting of this species, rhamnus cathartica,
davurica, frangula, argula, utilis, and japonica.
BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA: The area within which development activity is taking
place.
CANOPY: The upper portion of a tree sometimes called the crown. This section of
the tree usually contains branches and leaves.
CITY TREE: Any tree located on or within the city right-of-way or on or within
other city-owned property that has been dedicated to public use. Trees located
on property owned by the city but not open to the public, including, without
limitation, property being held for future development and property housing
utilities or other infrastructure to which the public is prohibited or
restricted from accessing, are not city trees.
CITY TREE BANK: A account established to receive and hold deposits for city
trees that were damaged or removed. The deposited funds, if not returned to the
depositor, in accordance with this chapter, may be used by the city to purchase
and care for city trees throughout the city.
CITY TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A document required by a permit which identifies,
by common name and/or scientific name, certain species of city trees of a
specified DBH within a particular area. The plan shall list all existing and
proposed city trees and shall specifically state how each city tree is proposed
to be destroyed, relocated, replaced, preserved at its present location,
introduced into the site from an off-site source, and whether the city tree is
to receive remediated actions due to construction impacts, e.g. root pruning.
The city may provide that the city tree reservation Plan excludes those
portions of the development site which it determines will not be affected by
the development activity. Any city tree preservation plan required by this
section must be dated within thirty-six (36) months of the start date of the
proposed activity.
CONSERVANCY OR PRESERVATION AREA (EASEMENT): An area under legal restriction
within which certain requirements are enforced regarding the preservation of
certain vegetation, natural character, or special environmental state.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: An area on the ground extending out from the trunk of the
tree in all directions a distance of at least one (1) foot for every inch DBH.
CUTTING:
   1.   Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in the
death or substantial destruction of a tree.
   2.   Cutting does not include normal pruning or trimming of trees consistent
with good forestry practices.
DAMAGE: Impact or loss of function to any city tree including but not limited
to: removal, root compaction, root removal, girdling, soil contamination,
topping, pruning more than twenty percent (20%) of the trees, canopy removal,
bark removal, poisoning and/or actions resulting in the decline or death of a
tree.
DEVELOPMENT: Any proposed change in the use or character of land, including,
but not limited to the replacement of any structure or site improvements, e.g.
irrigation installation, driveway replacement, installation of a retaining wall
among others; or any construction activity, including, without limitation,
grading, excavation, construction traffic access, or material storage.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured
in inches at a point four and a half (4.5) feet above ground line. This
forestry standard measurement is used for established and mature trees and is
referred to as "DBH". All reference to diameter size shall be to the DBH.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFESSIONAL: A degreed environmental scientist, biologist,
botanist, forester, other similarly degreed and/or licensed plant professional
with at least five (5) years' experience in planting and maintaining native
plants and their associated natural ecosystems.
INVASIVE SPECIES LIST: A list established and maintained by, and available
from, the community and economic development department of the city that lists
introduced or exotic species that significantly modifies or disrupts the
ecosystem in which it colonizes (e.g. buckthorn), as may be amended from time
to time.
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A company or individual contracted to perform landscape
services.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan approved by the city as set forth in the zoning
ordinance (See, title 10, section 11 of this code).
LANDSCAPE AGREEMENT COVENANT: An agreement as set forth in the zoning ordinance
(See, title 10, section 11 of this code).
LEGACY TREE: A subset of city trees listed and defined on the legacy tree list
established and maintained by, and available from, the public works department,
as may be updated from time to time.
PARCEL: Shall mean any lot, as defined in the zoning ordinance (see, title 10,
chapter 13 of this code).
PREFERRED TREE LIST: A list of preferred tree species established and
maintained by, and available from, the public works department, as may be
amended from time to time.
PROPERTY OWNER: An individual or organization who owns one or more parcels
within the corporate limits of the city.
REGULATED ARTICLES: Any insects at any living stage of development, any
quarantined materials such as wood products including, but not limited to
chips, limbs, lumber, firewood, contaminated soils, or any other product or
means of conveyance which may be determined by federal or state departments of
agriculture to pose a risk of spread of any infestation or infection.
SIGNIFICANT TREE REMOVAL: The removal of a legacy tree or two (2) or more city
trees on the same frontage.
SIMPLE TREE REMOVAL: The removal of a single tree without other associated site
impacts or other site improvements.
TRANSPLANTING: The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk and
canopy; growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk
system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
TREE REMOVAL: The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any tree,
including damaging by poison or other direct or indirect action.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-3: CITY TREE PRESERVATION, PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The public works director or their designee shall be in charge of city
trees and the enforcement of this chapter, and shall have the authority to make
decisions regarding city tree care and maintenance. When making decisions
regarding tree planting, tree removals, or tree maintenance, the public works
director or their designee may consult a certified arborist.
   B.   City contractors must utilize a certified arborist for all work
pertaining to city trees, including but not limited to removal, pruning and
planting activities, if the city does not utilize a staff or consulting
certified arborist to oversee the work.
   C.   All city tree planting, selection and management should be completed in
accordance with the current city tree inventory and management plan. All trees
planted by the city on publicly owned land shall be sourced from certified
nurseries in accordance with ANSI Z60.1 standards. All tree planting will
follow best management practices in accordance with ANSI A300 standards.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-4: [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-5: CITY TREE CARE:
   A.   Standard Of Care. Proper care and management of the urban forest is
critical for increased longevity of urban trees. The city will maintain city
trees in accordance with ANSI A300 standards.
   B.   Watering. The city will establish sufficient measures and protocols for
providing adequate water to city trees for five (5) years after initial
planting when natural rain fall is not adequate.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-6: CITY TREE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   This section applies to any development or other activities that might
impact city trees, as determined by the public works director or designee.
   A.   Permit Or Written Authorization Required: Unless otherwise authorized
by this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, injure or
undertake any development or other work that might cause death, substantial
damage, or create a hazard, to any city tree , unless such development or other
work is done pursuant to a permit issued by the city; provided, however, the
director of public works may authorize, in writing, the removal or maintenance
of city trees when such removal or maintenance is the sole scope of work to be
completed. Any management practices that will be performed pursuant to such
permit or written authorization, in accordance with ANSI A300 standards and the
other provisions of this chapter.
   B.   City Tree Preservation Plan Required: A city tree preservation plan is
required when:
      1.   A legacy tree is to be removed or impacted by development.
      2.   Site improvements on any parcel might impact city trees.
      3.   The approved city tree preservation plan must be available on the
work site throughout the entire construction period until final approvals for
all site work are be received in writing.
      4.   The city tree preservation plan must require that all measures be
taken to maintain the health of replacement trees transported to the
replacement site meet or exceed the requirements of the most current American
national standards institute.
      5.   When heavy machinery or equipment will be used as part of the
development, the city tree preservation plan must require the following
measures be taken:
         a.   Protective fencing is required for protection of any city tree to
be preserved in place. Fencing shall be installed at a minimum distance of one
(1) foot, for every inch DBH of the tree, from the trunk of the tree. In
instances of tree pits, fencing shall be located at the edge of pavement.
Fencing must be orange snow type fencing, a minimum of four (4) feet in height
and held in place by metal posts driven into the ground no more than ten (10)
feet apart. In the instance of a project that will take place for more than one
year, chain link fencing is required. Chain link fencing must be six (6) feet
in height and held in place by metal posts driven into the ground no more than
ten (10) feet apart. Fencing shall not be removed or relocated unless
authorized in writing by the director of public works.
         b.   All protective fencing shall be in place before any construction
or material delivery is to take place. All protective fencing shall remain in
place until final approval of all site conditions is given in writing.
         c.   No equipment or materials shall be parked, driven or stored
within the protective fencing area or on the critical root zone of any tree.
         d.   No tree shall be impacted within the protective fencing area,
including the canopy.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-7: CITY TREE REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Underground utilities must be located before stumps are removed or city
trees are planted.
   B.   Any city tree that is not listed on the invasive species list that is
damaged or removed must be replaced as follows:
      1.   All replacement city trees must be of a species listed on the
preferred species list. The public works director or their designee may require
a more limited species list in order to promote species diversity in the area.
      2.   All replacement city trees must be planted in a location in the city
right-of-way approved by the public works director or their designee.
      3.   City tree replacement must occur within the landscape season and
within thirty (30) days of the city tree removal. In the event of weather
conditions or species-specific needs that prohibit proper replacement of a tree
during this timeframe, the public works director may issue a written extension
of up to one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request.
      4.   The city must be notified when the city tree replacement is
complete.
      5.   A cash bond in the amount listed on the annual fee ordinance must be
posted as a guarantee that the city tree will be replaced. If, after the
timeframe provided in section
7-7-6.B.3, the city has not been notified that the city tree was replaced, the
bond shall be deemed forfeited and the money shall be placed in the tree bank.
      6.   If there is no suitable location for a replacement city tree in the
vicinity of the removed or damaged city tree, a fee-in-lieu of replacement must
be paid to the city in the amount set forth in the annual fee ordinance. All
fee-in-lieu of replacement funds will be placed in the tree bank.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-8: STOP WORK ORDER:
   When the city determines that development or other actions are being taken
in violation of this chapter, the city may issue a stop work order prohibiting
further development or other actions. No stop work order issued pursuant to
this section may be lifted or removed by the city unless the applicant has
complied with this chapter and paid the reinspection fee listed in the annual
fee ordinance.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-9: PENALTY:
   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter is
subject to a fine as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. Each city tree cut
down, destroyed, damaged, removed or moved constitutes a separate offense. In
addition to a fine, if a city tree is removed or damaged in manner that
requires, in the determination of the public works director or their designee,
the removal of the city tree in violation of this chapter, the city tree must
either be replaced in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or the
replacement value of the city tree, as set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-10: EMERGENCY EXCEPTION:
   If, because of emergency weather or other casualty conditions, city staff is
not able to remove a city tree that is endangering health, safety or property
and requires immediate removal, verbal authorization may be given by the city
for the tree removal by an applicant without obtaining a written permit. Such
verbal authorization shall later be confirmed in writing by the city.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-11: APPEALS FOR VARIANCE:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city in the enforcement of
any terms or provisions of this chapter may, within 10 working days after the
date of the decision, appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of
appeal with the city clerk at least three weeks before the regularly scheduled
city council meeting at which the appellant would like the appeal to be heard.
The notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the decision and the reasons or
grounds for the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final and no
petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be available. Confirmation of
hearing by the city council shall be provided by the city clerk to the
appellant and notice of the hearing shall be provided to other interested
parties, if known.
   B.   No variances in the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter will be approved by the city council unless it finds:
      1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described
in the written notice of appeal, such that the strict application of the code
would deprive the appellant of the reasonable use of the appellant's property
(properties).
      2.   That for reasons fully set forth in the written notice of appeal,
the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the
appellant's property (properties) and that the variance, as recommended for
approval by the board, is the minimum variance that will accomplish this
purpose.
      3.   That the result of granting of the variance will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of standards set forth within this code and in
harmony with this section and will not be injurious to adjacent property or
otherwise detrimental to public welfare.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
7-7-12: RESERVED CIVIL REMEDIES:
   In addition to any other remedies provided by in this chapter, the city has
the following remedies available for violations of this chapter or any permit
condition promulgated under this chapter.
   A.   The city may institute a civil action through administrative
adjudication or in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and
to recover damages for any injury caused by the removal or damage of city trees
in contravention of the terms of this chapter.
   B.   The city may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this chapter,
enjoin any violation, and seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable injury
to the city trees or properties encompassed by the terms of this section.
   C.   Any other available remedies in law or equity.
(Ord. O2025-26, 5-19-2025)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Adoption Of The Building Code
8-1-2: Amendments To The Building Code
8-1-1: ADOPTION OF THE BUILDING CODE:
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the
International Building Code, 2021 Edition, together with any and all Appendices
thereto, is hereby adopted, and by this reference, incorporated as if fully set
forth herein with the exception of such portions as are expressly deleted or
amended by
8-1-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction. The word "Add" following a provision of this
Section means that such provision is thereby added to and made part of the IBC
2021 as though fully set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IBC 2021 to read as provided and
that such provision is added to and made a part of this Code as though fully
set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IBC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the IBC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections and appendices of the code adopted
in Section
8-1-1 are hereby amended as follows, which amendments supersede the
requirements of the provisions of such code:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to insert or refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or their duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall
be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Plumbing Code, as may be amended from
time to time by the State of Illinois."
      Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert Building Division
      Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit
         Building:
            Building exemption 1. Amend to read as follows: One-story detached
accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar
uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 50 square feet.
            Building exemption 2 (fences): Amend to read as follows: Delete and
replace as follows: Repair or replacement of existing permitted gates, and
existing fences not exceeding 30% of the existing linear length, provided
repairs or replacement is fabricated with materials of the same style and
dimensions.
            Building exemption 6. (sidewalks and driveways): Delete in its
entirety.
      Section 107.1.1 Fire District Plan Review. Add new Section 107.1.1 as
follows:
         Not less than three sets of plans for attached dwelling units,
institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings shall be provided to the
Warrenville Fire Protection District for review and comments. Within seven (7)
business days of receipt of the same, the Warrenville Fire Protection District
shall examine said plans to determine whether they comply with the applicable
provisions of the International Building Code® and amendments provided in
8-1-2 of the City of Warrenville Municipal Code. If the submitted plans comply
with aforementioned codes and amendments, then the Fire Prevention Bureau shall
endorse said plans accordingly and deliver the same to the Building Division.
If submitted plans do not meet the provisions of aforementioned codes, then the
plans shall be returned to the applicant with a memorandum identifying the
specific deficiencies and code section(s) cited. The Building Division reserves
the right not to issue any building permit for attached dwelling units,
institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings unless or until the plans
for the same have been approved by the Warrenville Fire Protection District.
All applicable fees for reviews and inspections assessed by the Warrenville
Fire Protection District shall be paid by the applicant directly to the
Warrenville Fire Protection District.
      Section 113 Board of Appeals. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the Chief Code Official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall be
the board of appeals.
         Section 113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
      Section 903.2 Where required (Automatic Sprinkler Systems).
         Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1: Amend condition #1 to read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2: Amend condition #1 to read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 2,500 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3: Amend condition #1 to read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4: Amend condition #1 to read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Add Section 903.2.1.8 Group B: Add a new Section 903.2.1.8, titled
“Group B,” as follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group B occupancy where one of the following conditions
exist:
            1.   Where a group B fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            2.   Where a group B fire area is located more than two (2) stories
above grade plane.
            3.   Where a group R fire area is located above a group B fire
area.
         Section 903.2.3 Group E: Amend #1 to read as follows:
            1.   Throughout all group E fire areas greater than 2,500 square
feet in area.
         Section 903.2.4 Group F (F-1 & F-2): Amend to read as follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing use group F occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
            1.   Where a group F fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            2.   Where a group F fire area is located more than 3 stories above
grade plane; or
            3.   Where the combined area of all use group F fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.6 Group I: Delete exceptions #1, 2, and 3.
         Section 903.2.7 Group M: Amend condition #1 and 3 to read as follows:
            1.   Where a Group M fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            3.   Where the combined area of all use group M fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.7.2 Group M upholstered furniture or mattresses. Amend
as follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a Group
M fire area where the area used for the storage, display and/or sale of
upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet.
         Section 903.2.9 Group S-1: Amend to read as follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
            1.   A group S-1 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            2.   A group S-1 fire area is located more than 2 stories above
grade plane, or
            3.   The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors,
including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            Section 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages: Amend #1 and 2 to read as
follows:
               1.   Buildings have two or more stories above grade plan,
including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding
5,000 square feet.
               2.   Buildings not more than one story above grade plan, with a
fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet.
            Section 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages: Amend #1 and 2
to read as follows:
               1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds
5,000 square feet.
               2.   Delete the exception.
      Subsection 1102.1 Design. Amend to read as follows:
         Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with the Illinois Accessibility Code, as such Code is
amended from time to time.
      Section 1301.1.1 Criteria. Amend to read as follows:
         Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Illinois Energy Conservation Code, as such Code is amended from time to time.
      Section 1612.1 General. Amend to read as follows:
         Within flood hazard areas as established by DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, as adopted pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title
8 of this Code, as amended, all new construction of buildings, structures and
portions of buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and
restoration of substantial damage to buildings and structures, shall be
designed and constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood
loads. For buildings that are located in more than one flood hazard area, the
provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area shall apply.
      Section 1612.2 Design and construction. Amend to read as follows:
         The design and construction of buildings and structures located in
flood hazard areas, including coastal flood hazard areas and coastal A zones,
shall be in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7 and ASCE 24. Where conflicts
occur between the design required by the IBC and the DuPage County Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance, adopted pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title 8 of this
Code, as amended, the most stringent and restrictive regulation shall apply.
      Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert: "DuPage
County, Illinois and Incorporated Areas" for name of jurisdiction and "December
16, 2004" for the date of issuance.
      Section 1612.3.1 Design flood elevation. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      Section 1612.3.2 Determination of impacts (flood elevations). Delete this
section in its entirety.
      Section 1612.4 Flood hazard documentation. Amend to read as follows:
         The following documentation shall be prepared and sealed by a
registered design professional and submitted to the building official:
         1.   For construction in flood hazard areas other than coastal high
hazard areas or coastal A zones:
            1.1.   An elevation certificate documenting the lowest floor,
including the basement, as required by the lowest floor elevation inspection in
Section 110.3.3 and for the final inspection in Section 110.3.12.1.
            1.2.   For fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation
where provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do
not meet the minimum requirements in Section 2.7.2.1 of ASCE 24, construction
documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with Section 2.7.2.2 of
ASCE 24.
            1.3.   For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings, construction
documents shall include a statement that the dry floodproofing is designed in
accordance with ASCE 24 and shall include the flood emergency plan specified in
Chapter 6 of ASCE 24.
         [The remainder of 1612.4 is deleted.]
      Section 1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems. Delete this section
in its entirety.
      Section 1809.12 Timber footings. Delete this section in its entirety.
      Chapter 29 Plumbing systems. Delete this chapter in its entirety, the
provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall govern the erection,
installation, alteration, repairs, relocations, replacement, addition to, use
or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems.
      Section 3001.1.1 Illinois Elevator Safety and Regulation Act. Add a new
Section 3001.1.1, titled “Illinois Elevator Safety and Regulation Act,” to read
as follows:
         The Illinois Elevator Safety and Regulation Act, 225 ILCS 312/1 et
seq., and the regulations and requirements established by the Office of the
State Fire Marshal pursuant thereto, shall supersede the provisions of this
Chapter 30. Where there is a conflict between the regulations established
pursuant to the Illinois Elevator Safety and Regulation Act and Chapter 30 of
the IBC, the, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
      3301.3 Construction site sign. Add a new Section 3301.3 titled,
“Construction Site Sign,” as follows:
         A temporary construction sign shall be posted not closer than one foot
behind the property line where a new building is being constructed. The sign
shall not exceed six square feet in area, nor five feet in height. The sign
shall display the construction company name and telephone number, and the site
address with at least three-inch letters and numbers. In addition, the sign
shall also display the Building Permit.
      3301.4 Site Protection required. Add a new Section 3301.4, titled “Site
Protection Required,” as follows:
         All demolition and construction, which involve trenching, excavation,
and any other types of construction as deemed necessary by the Chief Code
Official shall have fencing installed around the entire perimeter of the
construction site. All fencing shall be not less than four-foot high chain link
fence attached to driven posts, or installed on pedestals or stands fortified
to resist wind loads. Fencing shall be installed at the start of any excavation
or demolition, and be maintained and shall be removed when the structure(s) are
completed and secured.
      3301.5 Waste Container. Add a new Section 33-1.5, titled “Waste
Container,” as follows:
         All demolition, new construction, room additions and remodeling
projects must have a dumpster or containers on site which are adequate in size
for the containment and disposal of all job site refuse.
      3301.6 Temporary access drive. Add a new Section 3301.6, titled
“Temporary Access Drive,” as follows:
         A temporary access drive is required from the start of any excavation
or demolition until prior to final grading. The access drive shall be placed
anywhere vehicles drive upon the construction site or parkway. The access drive
shall be constructed of a material such as gravel or woodchips that will
provide a sufficient barrier to prevent soil from embedding into vehicle tires.
In addition, the access drive shall provide a safe, clear and unobstructed
pathway from the public property to the structure under construction in order
to allow access for inspections.
      Section 3305.1 Toilet facilities required. Amend to read as follows:
         Sanitary facilities shall be provided during construction, remodeling
or demolition activities in accordance with ANSI Z4.3.
      Adopt Appendix F Rodent Proofing
      Adopt Appendix I Patio Covers
      Adopt Appendix K Administrative Provisions (Electrical)
         K111.1. Amendments to the electrical code. Add a new Section K111.1,
titled “Amendments to the electrical code,” as follows:
            The amendments to the Electrical Code set forth in Section
8-8-2 of this Code, as amended, shall be also amend and apply to Appendix K.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 2
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Adoption Of Mechanical Code
8-2-2: Amendments To The Mechanical Code
8-2-1: ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE:
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems,
the International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, together with any and all
Appendices thereto (IMC 2021), is hereby adopted, and by this reference,
incorporated as if fully set forth herein with the exception of such portions
as are expressly deleted or amended by
8-2-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the IMC 2021 as though fully set
forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IMC 2021 to read as provided and
that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though fully
set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IMC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the IMC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections of the IMC 2021 are hereby amended
and revised as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Plumbing Code” or the
“ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois
Plumbing Code, as may be amended from time to time by the State of Illinois.
See, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 980.
      Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert: Building Division.
      Section 114 Means of Appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 114.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the Chief Code Official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall be
the board of appeals.
         Section 114.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 3
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Adoption Of The Fuel Gas Code
8-3-2: Amendments To The Fuel Gas Code
8-3-1: ADOPTION OF THE FUEL GAS CODE:
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of use or maintenance
of fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances, the International Fuel Gas Code,
2021 Edition, together with any and all Appendices thereto (IFGC 2021), is
hereby adopted, and by this reference, incorporated as if fully set forth
herein with the exception of such portions as are expressly deleted or amended
by
8-3-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the IFGC 2021 as though fully
set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IFGC 2021 to read as provided
and that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though
fully set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IFGC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the IFGC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections and appendices of the IFGC 2021 are
hereby added, inserted, deleted, and/or modified as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Plumbing Code” or the
“ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois
Plumbing Code, as may be amended from time to time by the State of Illinois."
See, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 980.
      Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert: Building Division
      Section 113 Means of Appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 113 Means of Appeal.
         Section 113.1 General. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall
hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Chief Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code.
         Section 113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The Plan Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements
of this code.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 4
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Adoption Of The Existing Building Code
8-4-2: Amendments To The Existing Building Code
8-4-1: ADOPTION OF THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations regulating and governing
the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of
existing building, including historic buildings, the International Existing
Building Code, 2021 Edition, together with any and all Appendices thereto (IBEC
2021), is hereby adopted, and by this reference, incorporated as if fully set
forth herein with the exception of such portions as are expressly deleted or
amended by
8-3-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the IBEC 2021 as though fully
set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IBEC 2021 to read as provided
and that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though
fully set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IBEC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the IBEC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections of the IBEC 2021 are hereby amended
and revised as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Plumbing Code" or the
"ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois
Plumbing Code, as may be amended from time to time by the State of Illinois."
See, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 980.
      Section 102.6 Conflicts with Stormwater Management Ordinance. Add a new
Section 102.6, titled "Conflicts with Stormwater Management Ordinance," as
follows:
         When there is a conflict between provisions of IBEC 2021 and the
DuPage County Stormwater Floodplain Ordinance, as adopted pursuant to Chapter
13 of Title 8 of this Code, as amended, the provisions of the DuPage County
Stormwater Floodplain Ordinance shall be applied and control.
      Section 103.1 Creation of code compliance agency. Insert: Building
Division
      Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Delete exemption #1.
      Section 114 Means of Appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 114 Means of Appeal
         Section 114.1 General. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall
hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code.
         Section 114.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The Plan Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements
of this code.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Adoption Of The Plumbing Code
8-5-2: Amendments To The Plumbing Code
8-5-1: ADOPTION OF THE PLUMBING CODE:
For the purpose of establishing a set of minimum standards, specifications,
rules and regulations for plumbing installations, alterations and repairs
deemed to be those necessary for the proper establishment of minimum
requirements to assure reasonable safety to life and property, the Illinois
Plumbing Code, as established and published by the Illinois Department of
Public Health, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890, as may be amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted, and by this reference, incorporated as if fully set
forth herein with the exception of such portions as are expressly deleted or
amended by
8-5-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE:
Reserved. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 6
ENERGY CODES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Adoption Of Energy Code
8-6-2: Amendments To The Energy Code
8-6-3: Adoption Of The International Solar Energy Provisions
8-6-4: Amendments To The International Solar Energy Provisions
8-6-1: ADOPTION OF ENERGY CODE:
The City of Warrenville acknowledges and affirms that the Illinois Energy
Efficient Building Act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3125/1 et seq., and the
Illinois Energy Conservation Code adopted thereunder, 71 Illinois
administrative code 600.100 et seq., apply within the City of Warrenville. The
Illinois Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and published pursuant to 71
Illinois Administrative Code 600 et seq., is hereby adopted by this reference,
incorporated as if fully set forth herein with the exception of such portions
as are expressly deleted or amended by
8-6-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE ENERGY CODE:
Reserved. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-6-3: ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS:
The 2021 International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., and amended by the State of Illinois, shall
be, and the same is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City
of Warrenville in the State of Illinois, 2021 edition of the International
Solar Energy Provisions®, including appendix U: Solar-Ready Provisions -
Detached One- and Two-Family Dwellings, Multiple Single-Family Dwellings
(Townhouses), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., shall be,
and the same is hereby adopted as the Solar Energy Code of the City of
Warrenville in the State of Illinois, regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of solar energy
systems as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said 2021 edition of the International Solar
Energy Provisions® are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. O2019-04, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-6-4: AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the International Solar Energy
Provisions 2021 as though fully set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the International Solar Energy
Provisions 2021 to read as provided and that such provision is added to and
made a part of this code as though fully set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the International Solar Energy
Provisions 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the International Solar Energy Provisions 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections and appendices of the International
Solar Energy Provisions 2021 are hereby added, inserted, deleted, and/or
modified as follows:
      Section CS 107 Means of Appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section CS 107 Means of Appeal.
            Section CS 107 Means of Appeal. The City of Warrenville Plan
Commission shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations
made by the Chief Code Official relative to the application and interpretation
of this code.
            Section CS 107.2 Limitations on authority. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The Plan Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements
of this code.
(Ord. O2019-04, 2-19-2019; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 7
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
8-7-1: Adoption Of The Fire Code
8-7-2: Amendments To The Fire Code
8-7-1: ADOPTION OF THE FIRE CODE:
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations regulating and governing
the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises, the International Fire Code, 2021 Edition, together
with any and all Appendices thereto (IFC 2021), is hereby adopted, and by this
reference, incorporated as if fully set forth herein with the exception of such
portions as are expressly deleted or amended by
8-7-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRE CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the IFC 2021 as though fully set
forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IFC 2021 to read as provided and
that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though fully
set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IFC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout IFC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections of the IFC 2021 are hereby amended
and revised as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Plumbing Code" or the
"ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois
Plumbing Code, as may be amended from time to time by the State of Illinois."
See, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 980.
      Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert Building Division
      Section 104.1.1 Enforcement. Add a new Section 104.1.1, titled
"Enforcement," as follows:
         The enforcement of this Code by the Warrenville Fire Protection
District within the municipal boundaries of the City of Warrenville shall be
conducted in conformance with the provisions of the Intergovernmental Agreement
between the City of Warrenville and the Warrenville Fire Protection District.
      Section 105.1.2 Types of Permits. Amend to read as follows:
         There shall be three types of permits as follows:
         1.   Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to
conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section
105.5 for either:
            1.1   A prescribed period.
            1.2   Until renewed or revoked.
         2.   Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant
to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
Section 105.6.
         3.   Special permit. A special permit issued by the Warrenville Fire
Protection District is required for any of the following:
            3.1   The storage of blasting agents;
            3.2   The manufacture and storage of fireworks;
            3.3   The construction, operation, and use of outside above ground
storage tanks used in the storage of flammable liquids;
            3.4   The construction, operation, and use of new bulk plants for
flammable or combustible liquids;
            3.5   The construction, operation, and use of bulk storage of
liquefied gases.
      Section 106.1.1 Fire District Plan Review. Add a new Section 106.1.1,
titled "Fire District Plan Review," as follows:
         Not less than three copies of the plans of all attached dwelling
units, institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings shall be provided to
the Warrenville Fire Protection District. Within seven business days of receipt
of the same, the Fire Protection District shall examine said plans to determine
whether they comply with the applicable fire protection standards of the bureau
of fire prevention. If said plans do meet said standards, then the Fire Chief
shall endorse said plans accordingly and deliver the same to the Building
Division. If said plans do not meet said standards, then the plans shall be
returned to the applicant with a memorandum of the specific deficiencies noted.
The Building Division reserves the right not to issue any building permit for
attached dwelling units, institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings
unless or until the plans for the same have been approved by the Warrenville
Fire Protection District.
      Section 108.5 Annual inspections. Add a new Section 108.5, titled "Annual
Inspections," as follows:
         The Warrenville Fire Protection District is hereby authorized to
conduct annual inspections of all commercial, industrial, multi-family, school,
and church structures and property within the city in accordance with the
Inter-Governmental Agreement between the City of Warrenville and the
Warrenville Fire Protection District.
      Section 111 Board of appeals. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 111 Means of Appeal.
            Section 111.1 General. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission
shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by
the Chief Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code.
            Section 111.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The Plan Commission shall have no authority to waive requirements
of this code.
      Section 114.8 Emergency conditions. Add a new Section 114.8, titled
"Emergency Conditions," as follows:
         In case there shall be, in the opinion of the chief of the Warrenville
Fire Protection District, actual and immediate danger to life and property from
the hazards of fire and explosions arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous
to life or property in the use or occupancy of building or premises, the chief
of the Warrenville Fire Protection District may employ such labor and
machinery, equipment and devices and cause the necessary work to be done to
render said occupants or property temporarily safe, whether the procedure
prescribed in this section has been instituted or not. The Warrenville Fire
Protection District shall cause proper action to be instituted against the
owner of the premises for the recovery costs incurred by the Warrenville Fire
Protection District in the performance of the emergency work. The Warrenville
Fire Protection District shall hold the City harmless from any such actions and
shall assume full responsibility therefor.
      Section 202 Definitions. FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. Delete this entry and
replace as follows. FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Chief Code Official appointed by
the City of Warrenville and charged with the administration and enforcement of
the fire and building codes adopted by the City of Warrenville.
      Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for standpipe systems. Delete references to 100
feet and replace with 50 feet.
      Section 901.7.4 Preplanned impairment program (Fire Alarm Service). Amend
to add:
         9.   Service personnel shall be available to initiate restoration of
service following alarm or trouble, within twenty four (24) hours after
notification by the property owner. Full cooperation shall be extended to the
local contracting party by the installing company.
      Section 903.2 Where required (Automatic Sprinkler System). Amend as set
forth below:
         Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1: Amend condition #1 to read:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2: Amend #1 read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 2,500 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3: Amend #1 read as follows:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4: Amend #1 to read:
            1.   The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Add Section 903.2.1.8 Group B:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group B occupancy where one of the following conditions
exist:
            1.   Where a group B fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            2.   Where a group B fire area is located more than two (2) stories
above grade plane.
            3.   Where a group R fire area is located above a group B fire
area.
         Section 903.2.3 Group E: Amend #1 to read as follows:
            1.   Throughout all group E fire areas greater than 2,500 square
feet in area.
         Section 903.2.4 Group F (F-1 & F-2): Amend #1, 2, and 3 to read as
follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing use group F occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
            1.   Where a group F fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
               2.   Where a group F fire area is located more than 3 stories
above grade plane; or
            3.   Where the combined area of all use group F fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.6 Group I: Delete exceptions #1. 2. and 3.
         Section 903.2.7 Group M: Change #1 and 3 to read as follows:
            1.   Where a group M fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            3.   Where the combined area of all use group M fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.7.2 Group M upholstered furniture or mattresses. Add a
new Section 903.2.7.2, titled "Group M upholstered furniture or mattresses," as
follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a Group
M fire area where the area used for the storage, display and/or sale of
upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet.
         Section 903.2.9 Group S-1: Change #1, 2, and 3 to read as follows:
            An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
            1.   A group S-1 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
            2.   A group S-1 fire area is located more than 2 stories above
grade plane, or
            3.   The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors,
including any mezzanines, exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages: Change #1 and 2 to read as follows:
            1.   Buildings have two or more stories above grade plan, including
basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square
feet.
            2.   Buildings not more than one story above grade plan, with a
fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet.
         Section 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages: Change #1 and 2
to read as follows:
            1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds
5,000 square feet.
            2.   Delete the exception.
      Section 907.8.5 Responsibility for Installing and Maintaining Alarms
(Residential Occupancies). Add a new Section 907.8.5, titled "Responsibility
for Installing and Maintaining Alarms (Residential Occupancies," as follows:
         It is the responsibility of the owner of a residential dwelling to
supply and install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to
test and to provide general maintenance for the alarms within the tenant's
dwelling unit or rooming unit and to notify the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The
owner is responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written
information regarding alarm testing and maintenance.
         The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
      Section 3308.1.1 Storage of Blasting Agents Prohibited. Add a new Section
3308.1.1, titled "Storage of Blasting Agents Prohibited," as follows:
         Storage of blasting agents is prohibited within the corporate limits
of the Warrenville Fire Protection District except by special permit issued by
the Chief of the Warrenville Fire Protection District.
         The manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited within the
corporate limits of the Warrenville Fire Protection District except by special
permit issued by the Chief of the Warrenville Fire Protection District.
         Exception: Storage of black powder for individual, private use in a
black powder rifle shall be allowed without special permit.
      Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks, exceptions. Delete exceptions and replace as
follows:
         Exception: By special permit issued by the Fire Chief of the
Warrenville Fire Protection District.
      Section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility for Fireworks. Amend to delete
$100,000 and replace with $1,000,000.
      Adopt Appendix F Hazard Ranking
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
8-8-1: Adoption Of Electrical Code
8-8-2: Amendments To The Electrical Code
8-8-3: Electrical Contractor - License Required
8-8-4: Reserved
8-8-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
The 2020 edition of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, shall be, and the same is hereby adopted
as the Electrical Code of the City of Warrenville in the State of Illinois,
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equipment as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said 2020 edition of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section 8-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd.
Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the 2020 edition of NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code as though fully set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the 2020 edition of NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code to read as provided and that such provision is added
to and made a part of this code as though fully set forth at the referenced
number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the 2020 edition of NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout 2020 edition of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections of the 2020 edition of NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code are hereby amended and revised as follows:
      Article 110.12 (D) EMT Required. Add a new Article 110.12 (D) as follows:
         In new or remodeled residential construction with access to wall or
ceiling cavities, conductors shall be installed completely in EMT.
         Exception: short lengths of flexible metal conduit where approved by
the Chief Code Official.
      Article 110.12 (E) Low Voltage Wiring in Raceway. Add a new Article
110.12 (E) as follows:
         All exterior low voltage wiring for commercial HVAC equipment shall be
installed in an approved raceway.
      Article 110.12 (F) Unused Wiring. Add a new Section 110.12 (F) as
follows:
         All unused wiring, including low voltage, shall be removed back to the
source of power or last utilized electrical device on the circuit.
      Table 210.21 (B)(3) Receptacle Ratings. Delete "15 or 20" in Receptacle
Rating column and replace with "20".
      Article 230.43 Wiring Methods. Delete methods (1) through (20) and
replace as follows:
         Service entrance conductors are to be installed in rigid metal
conduit, intermediate metal conduit, or PVC. PVC allowed for underground use
only and must comply with article 352.10(G) as amended in 8-8-2 of the
Warrenville Municipal Code.
      Article 230.70(A)(1) Service Equipment Disconnect. Delete this section
and replace it as follows:
         The service disconnecting means shall be installed in a readily
accessible location at the utility meter or at a point not more than five feet
from the utility meter.
      Article 230.85: Delete this section, and replace with Reference section
230.70 (A)(1).
      Article 250.87 Grounding conductor underground raceways. Add a new
Article 250.87 as follows:
         Raceways installed in or under a slab or underground, with the
exception of service entrance raceways, shall require a separate equipment
grounding conductor.
      Article 300.13(C) Device Connection. Add a new Article 300.12(C) as
follows:
         Conductors terminated at receptacles or switches shall be under the
screw of the device per the manufacturer's directions. Use of pressure
connectors (backstabbing) shall not be permitted.
      Article 310.3 (A) Minimum Conductor Size. Add a new Article 310.3(A) as
follows:
         All commercial and industrial work shall use minimum #12 AWG
conductors.
         Exception: control wiring.
      Article 310.3 (B) Conductor Material. Amend to read as follows:
         All conductors for wiring shall be copper. Use of aluminum and copper
clad conductors for wiring are prohibited.
      Article 314.23(B)(1) Mounting Boxes to Structural Framing. Delete portion
stating "or they shall pass through the interior within 6mm (1/4 in.) of the
back or ends of the enclosure". And insert: All enclosures mounted to framing
members shall be equipped with approved brackets for mounting to framing
members.
      Article 320 Armored Cable Type AC. Delete this article.
      Article 322 Flat Cable Assemblies Type FC. Delete this article.
      Article 324 Flat Conductor Cable Type FCC. Delete this article.
      Article 326 Integrated Gas Spacer Cable Type IGS. Delete this article.
      Article 330.10(A) Type MC Uses Permitted. Delete and replace as follows:
Metal-Clad Cable Type MC cable is only to be used with lay-in type fixtures and
recessed lighting fixtures in lengths not to exceed 6 feet of the total
raceway.
      Article 334 Nonmetallic Sheathed Cable Types NM, NMC. Delete this
article.
      Article 338 Service Entrance Cable Types SE and USE. Delete this article.
      Article 348.12 Flexible Metal Conduit, Uses Not Permitted. Add: (8)
Outdoors
      Article 352.10(G) PVC Underground Installations. Delete sentence "See
300.5 and 300.50" and replace as follows: PVC shall not be permitted to emerge
from concrete, earth, or other solid surface. Any portion of the raceway
emerging from concrete or earth shall be installed in ridged metal conduit to a
point not less than 18 inches above and below the emergence.
      Article 356 Liquid Tight Flexible Nonmetallic Conduit. Delete this
article.
      Article 358.10(B) Type EMT. Delete in its entirety.
      Article 358.12 Uses Not Permitted. Amend as follows:
         (1)   Where, during installation or afterward, it will be subject to
severe physical damage.
         (2)   Where protected from corrosion solely by enamel.
         (3)   In cinder concrete or cinder fill where subject to permanent
moisture unless protected on all sides by a layer of noncinder concrete at
least 50 mm (2 in.) thick or unless the tubing is at least 450 mm (18 in.)
under the fill.
         (4)   In any hazardous (classified) location except as permitted by
other articles in this Code.
         (5)   For the support of luminaires or other equipment except conduit
bodies no larger than the largest trade size of the tubing.
         (6)   Where practicable, dissimilar metals in contact anywhere in the
system shall be avoided to eliminate the possibility of galvanic action.
         (7)   Type EMT. In concrete or in direct contact with earth or
exterior installations.
      Article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing Type ENT. Deleted, use of
electrical nonmetallic tubing is not permitted.
      Article 382 Nonmetallic Extensions. Delete this article.
      Article 388 Surface Nonmetallic Raceways. Delete this article.
      Article 394 Concealed Knob and Tubing Wiring. Delete this article.
      Article 396 Messenger Supported Wiring. Delete this article.
      Article 398 Open Wiring on Insulators. Delete this article.
      Article 408.54.1 Use of Tandem type overcurrent devices. Add a new
Article 408.54.1 as follows:
         Where tandem, duplex, or similar overcurrent devices are used in a
service panel, proof shall be provided to the Chief Code Official that circuits
are properly balanced. Proof shall be provided in a written form using a panel
schedule, by a registered or licensed electrician.
      Article 604.10 Manufactured Wiring Systems. Delete exceptions,
manufactured wiring shall not be allowed in any concealed location as defined
in Article 100 or outdoor locations.
      Article 604.100(3) Flexible Cord. Delete entire section
      Article 605.6 Lighting Accessories. Add following subsection after (C);
(D) Task Lighting. Task lighting for office furnishing shall be individually
fused.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-8-3: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR - LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Definitions:
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR: Means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of installing or altering by contract or otherwise, electrical
equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power,
not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and
signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed
for or by public utilities, including common carrier, which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission for use in their operation as
public utilities; but the term electrical contractor does not include employees
by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER INSTALLER: Means persons or entities that install,
maintain, or repair electric vehicle charging stations.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: For purposes of this section means any
facility or equipment that is used to charge a battery or other energy storage
device of an electric vehicle.
INSTALL, INSTALLING OR INSTALLATION: For purposes of this section means the
major activities and actions required to connect, in accordance with applicable
building and electrical codes, the conductors, connectors and all associated
fittings, devices, power outlets or apparatuses mounted at the premises that
are directly involved in delivering energy from the premises' electrical wiring
to the electric vehicle charging station.
   B.   License; Registration Required:
      1.   All contracted electrical work must be performed by a licensed
electrical contractor. Within the corporate limits of the City, it shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in the business of "electrical contractor" as
defined in this section without first being licensed as an electrical
contractor. Electrical contractors performing work within the City must have a
valid license obtained by passing a written electrical examination offered by
an approved municipality or national contractor/trades journeyman or higher
electrician certification by the International Code Council.
      2.   Electric vehicle charger installers must be registered with the
Illinois commerce commission.
   C.   False Statements Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
provide false statements or documentation as part of a building permit
application regarding the electrical contractor license. In addition to any
other penalties set forth in this section, if, after examination by the Chief
Code Official, information or documents provided as part of a building permit
application are found to be untrue, the application for building permit shall
immediately become null and void.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section will be
subject to the fine provided in Section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
Each day of violation constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018; Ord. O2021-42, 11-15-
2021; Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023; Ord. O2025-21, 4-21-2025)
8-8-4: RESERVED:
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
8-9-1: Adoption Of The Residential Building Code
8-9-2: Amendments To The Residential Building Code
8-9-1: ADOPTION OF THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE:
The 2021 edition of the International Residential Code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Residential Building
Code of the City of Warrenville in the State of Illinois, for regulating and
governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two
family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories in height with separate means of egress and for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2021 edition
of the International Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
8-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction.
      The word "Add" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision is thereby added to and made part of the IRC 2021 as though fully set
forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the IRC 2021 to read as provided and
that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though fully
set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" following a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the IRC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the IRC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections and appendices of the IRC 2021 are
hereby added, inserted, deleted, and/or modified as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall
be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Plumbing Code, as may be amended from
time to time by the State of Illinois."
      Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Amend as follows:
         Building:
         Building exemption 1. Delete and replace as follows: One-story
detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and
similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 50 square feet.
         Building exemption 2. Delete and replace as follows: Repair or
replacement of existing legally permitted gates, and fences not exceeding 30%
of the existing linear length, provided repairs or replacement is fabricated
with materials of the same style and dimensions.
         Building exemption 5. Delete (sidewalks and driveways)
         Building exemption 10. Delete. (decks)
      Section 105.5 Expiration. Delete and replace as follows:
         Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for
a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Building permits
shall expire if permitted work is not completed within one year after date of
permit issuance, except when an extension as provided in this section is
granted.
         The Chief Code Official is authorized to grant an extension upon
written request from the permit holder. The written request shall demonstrate
the justifiable cause for the requested extension. Justifiable causes may
include delays due to weather, labor strikes, supply shortages, or similar
reasons. Such extension may be granted for a period not to exceed 180 days.
Request for each extension may require a fee to cover the costs of
administration and additional inspections but shall not be greater than 25
percent of the original building permit fee. Not more than two extensions may
be granted by the Chief Code Official.
      Section 106.1 Fire Plan Review. Amend to add an additional paragraph as
follows:
         Not less than two sets of fire suppression plans for attached dwelling
units shall be provided to the Warrenville Fire Protection District to
determine whether submitted plans comply with the requirements R313.1 and
R313.1.1 as amended herein. If the submitted plans comply with aforementioned
codes, then the Fire Prevention Bureau or third party reviewing service shall
endorse said plans accordingly and deliver the same to the Building Division.
If submitted plans do not meet the provisions of aforementioned codes, then the
plans shall be returned to the applicant with a memorandum identifying the
specific deficiencies and code section(s) cited. All applicable fees for
reviews and inspections assessed by the Warrenville Fire Protection District or
third party service shall be paid by the applicant directly to the reviewing
provider.
      Section 109.1.1.1 Spot Survey. Add a new Section 109.1.1.1, titled "Spot
Survey," as follows:
         Upon completion of the foundation walls and any structural elements
which are necessarily part of the construction of the foundation walls, and
before proceeding with further construction, the applicant shall file a survey
prepared, signed, and sealed by an Illinois professional land surveyor, showing
the location of the structure and the elevation of the top of the foundation
walls at all four corners, or the average top of foundation for which a permit
has been issued.
      Section 110.4 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Amend to add to the
following to the end of this section:
         Reasons for issuing a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
limited to lot improvements required by this title that cannot be performed due
to winter weather conditions. The required improvements shall be completed no
later than June 1 following that winter. Adequate security to guarantee the
completion of the improvements shall remain in force.
         Fees and deposits for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
paid in accordance fee schedule in Title 8, Chapter 20, Section 1 of the
Warrenville Municipal Code.
      Section 112 Board of Appeals. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace as follows:
         Section 112 Means of Appeal.
            Section 112.1 General. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission
shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by
the Chief Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this
code.
            Section 112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction
is proposed. The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall have no authority to
waive requirements of this code.
      SECTION 115 CONSTRUCTION SITE REQUIREMENTS. A new Section 115, titled
"Construction Requirements," is added as follows:
         Section 115.1 Construction site sign. A temporary construction sign
shall be posted not closer than one foot behind the property line where a new
building is being constructed. The sign shall not exceed six square feet in
area, nor five feet in height. The sign shall display the construction company
name and telephone number, and the site address with at least three-inch
letters and numbers. The sign shall also display the Building Permit.
         Section 115.2 Site Protection required. All demolition or construction
that involves trenching, excavation, or similar work shall have fencing
installed around the entire perimeter of the site as deemed necessary by the
Chief Code Official. All fencing shall be not less than four-foot high chain
link fence attached to driven posts, or installed on pedestals or stands
fortified to resist wind loads. Fencing shall be installed at the start of any
excavation or demolition, and be maintained. Fencing shall not be removed until
the structure(s) are completed and secured and hazards no longer exist on the
site.
         Section 115.3 Waste Container. All demolition, new construction, room
additions and remodeling projects must have a dumpster or container on site
which is adequate in size for the containment and disposal of all job site
refuse.
         Section 115.4 Temporary access drive. A temporary access drive is
required from the start of any excavation or demolition until prior to final
grading. The access drive shall be placed anywhere vehicles drive upon the
construction site or parkway. The access drive shall be constructed of a
material such as gravel or woodchips that will provide a sufficient barrier to
prevent soil from embedding into vehicle tires. In addition, the access drive
shall provide a safe, clear and unobstructed pathway from the public property
to the site under construction in order to allow access for inspections.
         Section 115.5 Toilet facilities required. Not less than one (1) toilet
facility in conformance with ANSI Z4.3 shall be provided on construction sites
where indoor toilet facilities are not available.
      Table 301.2 (1) Climatic and geographic design criteria. Amend to read as
follows:
         Ground Snow Load =   25lbs/sq ft
         Wind Design:
            Speed = 115
         Topographic Effects = No
         Special Wind Region = No
         Windborne Debris Zone = None
         Seismic Design Category = A
         Subject to Damage From:
         Weathering = severe
         Frost Line Depth = 42 inches
         Termite = moderate to heavy
         Ice Barrier Underlayment Required = Yes
         Flood Hazards = See Note
         Air Freezing Index = 2000
         Mean Annual Temp = 52 degrees F
         Manual J Design Criteria
         Elevation = 732
         Altitude Correction Factor = None
         Coincident wet bulb = 74 degrees F
         Indoor winter design dry-bulb temperature = 72 degrees F
         Outdoor winter design dry-bulb temperature = -4 degrees F
         Heating temperature difference = 72
         Latitude = 41.8
         Daily range = M
         Indoor summer design relative humidity = 50%
         Summer design gains =
         Indoor summer design dry-bulb temperature = 75 degrees F
         Outdoor summer design dry-bulb temperature = 89 degrees F
         Cooling temperature difference = 14 degrees
      Add Flood hazard note: Contact City Engineer for specific lot flood
hazard
      Section 313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic sprinkler systems.
Amend to read as follows:
         An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in
one- and two-family dwellings.
         Exceptions:
         1.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required for additions, alterations or accessory structures to existing
buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler
system.
         2.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required for new construction when all of the following apply:
            a.   Underside of all interior stairs within two-family dwelling
units are protected with at least one half inch (0.5") of taped and mudded
gypsum board or equivalent. Not required for single family dwelling units.
            b.   Each one- and two-family dwelling unit has at least two (2)
means of egress.
            c.   The dwelling units are separated by a minimum two (2) hour
assembly.
      Section 402.1 Wood Foundations. Amend to read as follows:
         Wood foundation walls are not allowed in any new construction.
      Section 403.2 Footings for wood foundations. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      Section 404.1.5.3 Pier and curtain wall foundations. Delete and replace
with the following:
         Concrete pier foundations are only allowed for open porches and screen
rooms which are covered by roof structures attached to the principal building.
Provided that design for any such structure must be signed, sealed, and
certified by a licensed Illinois architect or structural engineer as being
sufficient to meet or exceed all applicable loading requirements of this code.
         Concrete pier footing and curtain wall foundation systems are allowed
for conversion of open porches and screen rooms into habitable spaces. Provided
that design for any such structure must be signed, sealed, and certified by a
licensed Illinois architect or structural engineer as being sufficient to meet
or exceed all applicable loading requirements of this code.
      Section 404.2 Wood foundation walls. Delete this section in its entirety.
      Section 405.2 Wood foundations. Delete this section in its entirety.
      Section 406.3 Damp-proofing for wood foundations. Delete this section in
its entirety.
      Table 507.4 Deck Posts. Add note: Regardless of species or tributary
area, the maximum height for a 4x4 post is four feet (4').
      Section 507.4.1 Deck post to deck footing connection. Amend to read as
follows:
         Where posts bear on concrete footings in accordance with Section R403
and Figure R507.3, lateral restraint shall be provided by manufactured
connectors. Other footing systems shall be permitted.
         Exception: Where expansive, compressible, shifting or other
questionable soils are present, surrounding soils shall not be relied on for
lateral support.
      Chapter 26 through 32 Plumbing: Delete these chapters in their entirety.
Plumbing materials and systems shall comply with the most recent published
edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code and Chapter 5 of Title 8 of the
City of Warrenville Municipal Code.
      Section 3303.1.4 Piping. Delete last sentence and add:
         New subsurface drainage (sump pump) systems and existing systems which
are undergoing expansion shall be connected to a 3" (minimum) subsurface,
privately owned and maintained pipe which either discharges into an approved
storm sewer system or storm water management detention/retention facility. When
the City Engineer determines such a storm sewer or detention/retention facility
is not adjacent or reasonably accessible to an individual lot, the City
Engineer may allow the subsurface drainage system to discharge into a drainage
swale or other location intended to minimize the negative impacts of the sump
pump discharge on both the property discharging the water and adjacent
properties.
      Part VIII Electrical. Deleted, reference 8-8-1 and 8-8-2 of the City of
Warrenville Municipal Code for specific electrical codes.
      Adopt Appendix AF Radon Control Methods
         AF101.2 Conflicts. Add a new Section AF101.2, titled "Conflicts," as
follows:
            Where conflicts occur between provisions of Appendix AF and the
Illinois Joint Committee on Administrative Rules (JCAR) Mitigation Standard for
New Residential Construction, the JCAR provisions shall take precedence over
the provisions of Appendix AF.
         AF 103.13 Installation of active mitigation systems. Add a new Section
AF 103.13, titled "Installation of active mitigation systems," as follows:
            The installation of an active mitigation system shall only be
performed by a licensed radon contractor in accordance with the Illinois Joint
Committee on Administrative Rules (JCAR) Mitigation Standard for New
Residential Construction. The installation of radon resistant construction may
be performed by a residential building contractor or his or her subcontractors
or a radon contractor during new residential construction. Only a radon
contractor may install a radon vent fan or upgrade a passive new construction
pipe to an active mitigation system.
      Adopt Appendix AJ Existing Buildings
      Adopt Appendix AK Sound Transmission
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 10
POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
8-10-1: Adoption Of The Pool And Spa Code
8-10-2: Amendments To The Pool And Spa Code
8-10-1: ADOPTION OF THE POOL AND SPA CODE:
The 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by the City of Warrenville
for the regulation of swimming pools and spas as herein provided. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2021
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC 2021) are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section
8-10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-
2023)
8-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE POOL AND SPA CODE:
   A.   Rules of Construction. The word "Add" preceding a provision of this
Section means that such provision is thereby added to and made part of the
ISPSC 2021 as though fully set forth at the referenced section.
      The word "Amend" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends the referenced section of the ISPSC 2021 to read as provided
and that such provision is added to and made a part of this code as though
fully set forth at the referenced number.
      The word "Delete" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision deletes the referenced section from the ISPSC 2021.
      The word "Passim" preceding a provision of this Section means that such
provision amends any reference of such phrase found at various places
throughout the ISPSC 2021.
   B.   Amendments. The following sections and appendices of the ISPSC 2021 are
hereby added, inserted, deleted, and/or modified as follows:
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word
"jurisdiction" appears, they shall be deemed to refer to the City of
Warrenville, Illinois.
      Passim. Wherever the phrase "building official" appears, it shall be
deemed to refer to the City of Warrenville Chief Code Official, or his/her duly
designated agent or agents.
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC)" appears, it shall be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Energy
Conservation Code (IECC), as may be amended from time to time by the State of
Illinois."
      Passim. Wherever any reference to "ICC Plumbing Code" appears, it shall
be replaced with the phrase "Illinois Plumbing Code, as may be amended from
time to time by the State of Illinois."
      Except as referenced in the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
for residential swimming pools, chapters 4, 5, and 6 shall be deleted. All
references to public use pools shall be referred to and enforced by statutes of
Illinois title 77: Public Health chapter 1: Department Of Public Health
subchapter n: Recreational Facilities part 820 Swimming Facility Code.
      Section 102.7.2. Applicability of the Illinois State Plumbing Code. Add a
new Section 102.7.2 as follows:
         Where the international plumbing code is referenced in this code, the
provisions of the Illinois state plumbing code shall be referenced as the
minimum requirements. Where the Illinois state plumbing code provisions do not
apply to the references of the international plumbing code, the requirements in
part VII of the most recent version of the international residential code
adopted by the city of Warrenville shall then apply.
      Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Insert Building Division
      Section 105.1.1. Permit Exemption. Add a new Section 105.1.1 as follows:
         Permits shall not be required for any above ground swimming pools less
than 24 inches in depth of water capacity and not exceeding 250 square feet
provided they do not have a pump, filtration system, heater or other need for
power. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any pool to be installed or used in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any of the ordinances of the city
of Warrenville.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2023-01, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 11
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 1
(Rep. by Ord. 807, 7-16-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 for Subdivision regulations.
CHAPTER 12
LAND DEDICATION FOR PUBLIC USE
SECTION:
8-12-1: Dedication Of Land Or Cash Contribution
8-12-2: Required As A Condition To Annexation
8-12-3: Subdivision Control Ordinance Compliance
8-12-4: Annexation Application Fee
8-12-5: Intergovernmental Agreement
8-12-1: DEDICATION OF LAND OR CASH CONTRIBUTION:
As a condition of the City Council's approval of a final plat of subdivision,
or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer
shall be required to dedicate land for park, recreation, library or Municipal
purposes or land and/or site improvements for school sites, to serve the
immediate and future needs of the projected net increase in population
generated by the subdivision or development, or cash contributions in lieu of
actual land or site improvement dedication, or a combination of both, at the
option of the City. No Municipal official shall affix his or her signature to
an approved final plat of subdivision or a final plat of a planned unit
development until the required land dedication has been made. Cash
contributions shall be required to be paid at time of individual building
permit issuance on a prorated basis, based on the number of bedrooms provided
for in the dwelling unit for which the building permit is sought.
If said building permit represents an increase to the original unit estimate
required under subsection E of this section, additional cash contributions
shall also be required at the time of individual building permit issuance. Land
dedication and cash contribution requirements shall be calculated using the
following criteria and formulas:
   A.   Criteria For Requiring Park, Recreational Or Municipal Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one
thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
      POPULATION RATIO CLASSIFICATION TABLE
 
Type Of Recreation Area  Size Range                  Minimum Acres Per 1,000
                                                     People
Play lot                 Minimum 8,000 square feet   n/a
School-park neighborhood Minimum park of 5 acres     2.28
playground
Neighborhood park        Minimum of 3.5 acres        1.8
Districtwide park or     Minimum of 4 acres up to 30 2.28
play field               acres
Community wide           Minimum of 12 acres up to   3.64
recreation park          30 acres
                         Total:                      10 acres of land per 1,000
                                                     people
 
      2.   Location: The Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the City Council
shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park site adjoining all
elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered a
requirement, or Municipal installation of equivalent value located elsewhere
within the City. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is more desirable. In large developments, these sites can be
located throughout the development according to established standards for park
area distances.
      3.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When
subdividers or developers provide their own open spaces for recreation areas
and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. Depending upon the size of the development, a portion of
the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may
at the option of the City Council be provided in the form of "private" open
space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be
determined by the City Council, based upon the needs of the projected residents
and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply
a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment, by the developer as part of his
obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, must be approved by the City, and before any credit
is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must
guarantee that those private recreation areas will be permanently maintained
for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private
swimming clubs are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private
recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park
land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned
unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
   B.   Criteria For Library Land Donations:
      1.   Cash Donation: In lieu of land, a cash donation of one hundred
twenty seven dollars ($127.00) for each projected new person shall be required
for library purposes.
      2.   Location: The Comprehensive Library Location Plan as adopted by the
library district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A central
location which will serve the entire development and adjacent areas is
desirable.
   C.   Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication:
      1.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to
be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land and/or site improvements required to be dedicated for
school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining
the ratio of: a) estimated children to be served in each such school
classification over the b) maximum recommended number of students to be served
in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying such
ratio to the c) said minimum recommended number of acres for a school site for
each such school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be
the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to
serve the estimated increased number of children in each such school
classification.
      2.   School Classification And Size Of School Site: School
classifications and size of school sites within the City shall be determined in
accordance with the following criteria:
 
School             Maximum Number   Minimum Number Of
Classification     Of Students For  Acres Of Land For
By Grades          Each Such School Each School Site
                   Classification   Of Such Classification
Elementary schools 600 students     11 acres
(Grades K - 5)
Middle schools     900 students     19 acres
(Grades 6 - 8)
High schools       2,300 students   48 acres
(Grades 9 - 12)
 
      3.   Location: The standards adopted by the school district shall be used
as a guideline in locating sites.
   D.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Municipal And School
Sites: Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical, or when the available land is inappropriate for park, recreational
or Municipal purposes or a school site, the City shall require the subdivider
or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication
required. The cash contributions in lieu of park, recreation, or Municipal land
dedication shall be held in trust by the City, solely for the acquisition and
improvement of land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or
development or for the improvement of other existing land which already serves
such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be held in
trust by the City, solely for the use in the acquisition of land and/or site
improvements for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or development, or for the improvement of any
existing school land or site improvements thereto which already serves such
needs. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of school site dedication
is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within seven (7) years from
the date of receipt, the principal amount thereof, without interest, shall be
refunded to the developer who made such contribution.
      1.   Fair Market Value:
         a.   The cash contributions in lieu of land dedication shall be based
upon the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park, recreation,
Municipal, library and school sites.
         b.   It is recognized that the present fair market value of such
improved land in and surrounding the City may fluctuate from time to time.
         c.   The City hereby determines that the current "fair market value"
of such improved land is one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per
acre in the City and adjacent surrounding territory. Said value shall be
utilized for the purposes of this section, except as hereinafter provided.
         d.   The developer may submit an acceptable professional independent
appraisal showing the current fair market value of such improved land per acre,
or other evidence thereof, in the areas of his development. The final
determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be
made by the City Council based upon such information submitted by the
subdivider or developer, and from other sources which may be submitted to the
City Council by the school district or others.
      2.   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There are situations in
subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land dedication
and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions arise
when:
         a.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park, recreation, Municipal or school site. That portion of the
land within the subdivision falling within the park, recreation, Municipal or
school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash
contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that
would have been required to be dedicated;
         b.   A major part of the local park, recreation, Municipal or school
site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from
the development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required
by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
   E.   Density Formula: The following table of population density is generally
indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new
construction, and shall be used in calculating the amount of required
dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof, unless a
written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer. Said
calculations shall initially be based on a written estimate of the number of
new efficiency, one, two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) bedroom units
that will be constructed in the subdivision or development (herein referred to
as the "original unit estimate"). The original unit estimate shall be prepared
by the developer or subdivider and must be approved by the Director of
Community and Economic Development as being a reasonable estimate of the type
of new construction anticipated in a specific subdivision or development. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2020-23, 5-18-2020)
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                  Elementary Middle   Total      High
        Preschool Grades K - Grades 6 Grades K - School               Total Per
Type Of 0 - 4     5          - 8      8          Grades 9 - Adult     Dwelling
Unit    Yrs.      5 - 10     11 - 13  5 - 13     12         18 Yrs. + Unit
                  Yrs.       Yrs.     Yrs.       14 - 17
                                                 Yrs.
                         Elementary Middle   Total    High
               Preschool Grades K - Grades 6 Grades K School   Adult   Total
Type Of Unit   0 - 4     5          - 8      - 8      Grades 9 18 Yrs. Per
               Yrs.      5 - 10     11 - 13  5 - 13   - 12     +       Dwelling
                         Yrs.       Yrs.     Yrs.     14 - 17          Unit
                                                      Yrs.
Detached single-family:
   2 bedroom0.120     0.411      0.138    0.549    0.222    1.856   2.746
   3 bedroom0.268     0.486      0.153    0.639    0.135    1.913   2.955
   4 bedroom0.371     0.702      0.259    0.961    0.242    1.985   3.559
   5 bedroom0.386     0.590      0.236    0.826    0.242    2.191   3.645
Attached single-family:
   2 bedroom0.206     0.084      0.057    0.141    0.030    1.318   1.697
   3 bedroom0.214     0.104      0.039    0.143    0.050    1.966   2.374
   4 bedroom0.183     0.271      0.106    0.377    0.105    2.102   2.767
   5 bedroom--        --         --       --       --       --      --
Apartments:
   Efficienc--        --         --       --       --       1.400   1.400
   1 bedroom0.058     0.032      0.012    0.044    0.013    1.653   1.768
   2 bedroom0.129     0.064      0.031    0.095    0.038    1.744   2.007
   3 bedroom0.199     0.115      0.073    0.188    0.083    2.055   2.525
 
Note:
1.      No yield data were generated due to lack of population or no (or very
few) residential units in the sample.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population listed herein, he shall submit his own
demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated
from the subdivision or planned unit development, and, in that event, final
determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be
made by the City Council, based upon such demographic information submitted by
the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to
the City Council by the school district or others. It is recognized that
population density, age distribution, and local conditions change over the
years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of
fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and
amendment if necessary.
   F.   Reservation Of Additional Land: Where the Comprehensive Plan or the
current standards of the City call for a larger amount of park and recreational
land or library or school sites in a particular subdivision or planned unit
development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond
the developer's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the
City or other public body designated by the City; provided, that such
acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final
plat.
   G.   Combining With Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned
unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space, a library
site or a school site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce
usable park, recreation or Municipal areas, library sites or school sites
without hardship on a particular developer.
   H.   Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site, as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not
differ greatly from surrounding land.
   I.   Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for
full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or
acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included
within the definition of "improved" sites may be deleted due to the delay time
between dedication of any such school site and construction of school
facilities thereon. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-12-2: REQUIRED AS A CONDITION TO ANNEXATION:
The dedication of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by this
chapter shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to
the City and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any preannexation
agreement governing such land. The dedication of land or cash contributions in
lieu thereof shall be made in the manner provided in section 8-12-1 of this
chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-12-3: SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE:
All improvements generated by this chapter through agreements between the City
and the affected subdivider or developer must be executed in full compliance
with the provisions set forth in the City subdivision ordinance, regarding
subdivision control. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-12-4: ANNEXATION APPLICATION FEE:
   All petitions for annexation shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The applicant shall also be responsible
for any and all other City fees which may be applicable to annexation, zoning
or development of the subject property. In the event that the City’s actual
administrative costs in processing the annexation petition exceed the fee set
forth in the annual fee ordinance, the applicant shall be responsible for the
payment of the actual costs prior to approval of the annexation petition.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
8-12-5: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
   A.   Agreement Required: The affected park districts, public library
districts, and school districts shall be required, as a condition of receiving
the dedications or contributions required by this chapter, to enter into a
binding, written intergovernmental agreement with the City, acceptable in form
and content to the City Administrator and City Attorney, providing for the
indemnification and holding harmless of the City from any and all claims,
losses, suits, causes of action, liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses
(collectively, "claims") that may be asserted at any time against the City or
the respective district in connection with: 1) the City's enactment of this
chapter to the extent applicable or related to the respective district; and 2)
the administration or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter to the
extent applicable or related to the respective district, including, without
limitation, the assessment, collection or payment of the amounts required under
this chapter for the benefit of the respective district. The agreement shall
also provide that City may, at its option, undertake the defense of any such
claim, and the City's costs and expenses related thereto, including attorneys'
fees, shall be immediately reimbursed by the respective district, and that the
respective district shall be responsible for all of its own costs and expenses
in connection with any such claim.
   B.   Implied Conditions: Unless otherwise specifically provided, the
provisions of this section shall be an implied condition of every
intergovernmental agreement entered into pursuant to this section.
   C.   Administration: The City Administrator or his designee is authorized
and directed to administer the transfer of dedications or contributions
required under this chapter to the respective district upon approval and
execution of the agreement required by this section by both the City and the
affected district. (Ord. O2018-30, 7-16-2018)
CHAPTER 13
STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-13-1: Adoption Of Countywide Stormwater And Floodplain Ordinance
8-13-2: Administration
8-13-3: Fees
8-13-4: Detention/Retention Pond Outlot Requirements
8-13-5: Detention Facility Design Criteria
8-13-6: Parking Lot Detention
8-13-7: Retention Facility Design Criteria
8-13-8: Shallow Wet Bottom Retention Facility Design Criteria
8-13-9: Oversight Committee
8-13-10: Stormwater Management Easement Provisions
8-13-11: Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee Program
8-13-12: Penalty
8-13-13: Postconstruction Best Management Practices (PCBMP) Fee In Lieu Program
8-13-14: Adoption Of General Certifications
8-13-1: ADOPTION OF COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE:
   A.   Except as hereinafter provided, that certain document titled "DuPage
County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance", effective May 14, 2019,
(the "County ordinance"), a copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, shall be and is hereby adopted as the ordinance for the City regulating
stormwater management, Best Management Practices (BMPs), erosion control, and
floodplain matters within the City; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance, as amended herein, on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set
forth in this section.
   B.   The following sections of the DuPage County Countywide stormwater and
floodplain ordinance, as effective within the corporate boundaries of the City,
are hereby amended as follows:
      1.   Section 15-55 is amended to add a new subsection E thereto, which
subsection shall hereafter be and read as follows:
15-55.E. Where new stormwater facilities are installed on private property
pursuant to a stormwater management certification (hereinafter referred to as
the certification) issued by the city of Warrenville and as required by this
ordinance and said stormwater facilities are not located in a clearly dedicated
stormwater management easement area or subject to a home owners' association
declaration of covenants satisfying the requirements of 15-55.E.1 through 15-
55.E.4 below, the administrator shall have the authority to require owner of
said private property to execute and submit to the city of Warrenville a
declaration of stormwater facility maintenance agreement and covenant in the
form periodically approved by the Warrenville city council. The executed and
submitted stormwater facility maintenance agreement and covenant shall:
15-55.E.1. Document the owner's responsibility to manage, operate, and maintain
any and every portion of the stormwater facilities required under the
certification in accordance with the provisions of the stormwater facility
maintenance agreement and covenant, this ordinance, and as may be reflected on
the approved as-built drawing(s).
15-55.E.2. Run with the property and shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the owner of the property, the owner's successors, assigns and
grantees, and all parties claiming by, through, and under them.
15-55.E.3. Grant the city the right to enter the property to inspect, and
evaluate the performance of, the stormwater facilities, and, in the event the
city determines, in its sole and absolute discretion, that prior maintenance of
the stormwater facilities is not performed at any time, the city, after ten
(10) days prior written notice to the owner, may, but shall not be obligated
to, enter upon the property for the purpose of performing maintenance work on
and to the stormwater facilities.
15-55.E.4. Allow the city to charge the owner an amount sufficient to defray
the entire cost of any work performed pursuant to 15.55.E.3 of this section,
including administrative costs, either before or after such cost is incurred,
and if the amount so charged is not paid by the owner following a demand in
writing by the city for such payment, such charge, together with interest and
costs of collection, shall become a lien upon the property and the city shall
have the right to collect such charge, with interest and costs, and to enforce
such lien as in foreclosure proceedings as permitted by law.
15-55.E.5. Allow the city to enforce the stormwater facility maintenance
agreement and covenant and recover its attorney's fees and costs in any
enforcement action where it is the prevailing party.
15-55.E.6. Become a permanent record in the file maintained by the city of
Warrenville on the property.
15-55.E.7. Be recorded, at the expense of the owner, against the property in
the office of the DuPage County recorder of deeds prior to the city of
Warrenville issuing a full, unconditional, certificate of occupancy permit for
the property.
(Ord. O2018-53, 11-19-2018)
      2.   Section 15-114 is amended to add a new subsection I thereto, which
subsection shall hereafter be and read as follows:
15-114.I. The applicant shall be responsible for all out of pocket costs
incurred by the city for the appeal process including, but not limited to
publication for legal notice, court reporter, transcript, printing, recording
fees and outside city consultants unless the applicant's appeal is upheld by
the oversight committee, in which case the fees for publication of legal
notice, printing, recording and outside city consultants shall be refunded to
the applicant.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2019-35, 7-1-2019)
8-13-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Administrator, or his designee, shall have the authority to administer
this chapter within the corporate boundaries of the City. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-
2017)
8-13-3: FEES:
   The fees for review, issuance and inspection of the stormwater management
certification and recording of required declaration of stormwater facility
maintenance agreement and covenant for approved developments shall be as
follows:
   A.   Application Fee: An application fee shall be charged as set forth in
the annual fee ordinance.
   B.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee shall be charged as set forth in the
annual fee ordinance.
   C.   Recording Fee: An additional fee, set forth in the annual fee
ordinance, shall be charged when the City’s stormwater management certification
requires a declaration of stormwater facility maintenance agreement and
covenant to be recorded against the applicant’s property. The fee shall be paid
prior to City issuance of the stormwater management certification.
   D.   Additional Fees: Payments shall be made from the application fee for
City services for the review of the document, issuance of the certification and
inspection of installation of the stormwater facilities based on time spent by
staff multiplied by the employee actual hourly rate or consultant’s hourly
rate. Consultants may add a charge for overhead and professional fee. An
additional charge shall be added to the staff or consultant charge for City
administrative and executive services as set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
In the event the amount of the application or inspection fee is exhausted by
such charges, the City, at its discretion, may require the payment of
additional monies for such services.
   E.   Additional Application And Inspection Fees For Development That
Involves Wetland Issues: In order for the City to: 1) review and approve
stormwater management certification applications for development that involves
wetland issues and 2) inspect the installation and establishment of projects
involving wetland issues, the City is required by the DuPage County Countywide
stormwater and floodplain ordinance to utilize the services of special
environmental consultants (i.e., environmental scientists and soil scientists).
Since each development that involves wetland issues has unique circumstances
and challenges and such developments can, by their nature, vary greatly in
complexity, the City has determined that it would not be fair or equitable to
establish a standard flat application and inspection fee for stormwater
certifications that involve wetland issues.
   The applicant/developer shall reimburse the City for all environmental
consulting costs it incurs during the review, approval and inspection of
development that involves wetland issues. Said reimbursement shall be made
within thirty (30) days from the applicant’s/developer’s receipt of an invoice
for said costs from the City. The City’s invoice to the applicant/developer
shall add an additional charge as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. If the
applicant/developer does not pay said City invoices within thirty (30) days of
their receipt, the Director of Community and Economic Development shall be
authorized to: 1) draw on the applicant’s/developer’s letter of credit in the
amount of the unpaid invoice or 2) in cases where there is no letter of credit,
withhold the issuance or revoke previously issued construction and occupancy
permits associated with the development project.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-
2024)
8-13-4: DETENTION/RETENTION POND OUTLOT REQUIREMENTS:
All new detention/retention facilities that serve multiple lot developments
shall be located on a separate outlot that is owned and maintained by an
association created for such purpose unless the City Council approves another
arrangement based on specific unique circumstances or special conditions. Said
outlot shall encompass all required detention/retention pond improvements,
including, but not limited to, required detention/retention pond landscaping
and the detention/retention pond outfall structure. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-5: DETENTION FACILITY DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the other rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, open
stormwater detention facilities shall comply with the following design
criteria:
   A.   Bottom Slope: The bottom slope shall be two percent (2%) or steeper in
order to prevent wet areas which may kill the intended ground cover or promote
the growth of nuisance plant species.
   B.   Low Flow Pipes And/Or Paved Channels: Low flow pipes and/or paved
channels shall not be permitted. The ends of storm sewers draining runoff into
the detention pond shall be located at least fifty feet (50') away from the
pond outlet to ensure sufficient filtering of contaminants.
   C.   Side Slopes: Vegetated side slopes shall be four to one (4:1) or
flatter. Seeded slopes shall be protected with an approved erosion control mat
designed for that application.
   D.   Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall not be permitted on more than
fifty percent (50%) of the pond perimeter. Retaining walls shall be constructed
of modular blocks. Retaining walls 3.0 feet or taller shall be designed by a
registered structural engineer or a registered architect. Stepped walls count
as one wall system (e.g., a 2 foot lower wall plus a stepped 2 foot upper wall
equals a 4 foot wall). Safety fencing shall be provided along the top edge of
any retaining wall greater than 3.0 feet in height.
   E.   Bounce: The maximum bounce (high water level minus the outlet invert
elevation) on a detention pond shall be four feet (4').
   F.   Outfall Pipe: The outfall pipe from a detention pond shall be provided
with a flared end section and steel grating.
   G.   Perimeter Berm: For any detention pond at least partially enclosed by
an earthen berm, the top of the berm shall be at least one foot (1') higher
than the design high water level and at least two feet (2') wide.
   H.   Emergency Overflow Weir: An emergency overflow weir shall be provided
at an elevation above the design high water level, and not less than six inches
(6") below the top of berm. The overflow weir shall be armored from the top of
berm to the outside toe of slope. If the weir is armored with riprap or other
porous material, the subgrade under the riprap shall be equal to or above the
design high water level. The weir shall be wide enough to convey one cfs per
tributary acre. Weirs facing adjacent single-family residential properties or
public streets shall be incorporated into the landscape design for the facility
and shall be designed to minimize negative visual impacts by incorporating
landscape stone, grasscrete or an approved equal material in lieu of concrete
or standard riprap.
Requests for relief from the requirements of this section will be processed by
the Oversight Committee. A public hearing or a published legal notice is not
required for any such request unless the request also involves relief from the
requirements of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance. The applicant will be responsible for payment of any nonrefundable
application fees to appear before the Plan Commission/Oversight Committee.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-6: PARKING LOT DETENTION:
In addition to the other rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, if a
parking lot is used for stormwater detention, the maximum depth of water in the
parking lot (usually over the inlets) shall be one foot (1'). The parking lot
shall further comply with all applicable City rules, regulations and ordinances
applicable to parking lot areas. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-7: RETENTION FACILITY DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the other rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, wet
bottom stormwater retention facilities shall comply with the following design
criteria:
   A.   Perimeter Native Grass Plantings: The perimeter area of a retention
pond immediately above the normal water line shall be planted with a band of
native grass in accordance with the following specifications:
      1.   Minimum Planting Width: The native grass planting band shall be a
minimum width of ten feet (10') for small retention ponds with a surface area
of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet measured at the normal water
level, fifteen feet (15') for medium retention ponds with a surface area of
less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet measured at the normal water
level, and twenty feet (20') for large retention ponds with a surface area of
more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet measured at the normal water
level.
      2.   Design: A qualified landscape architect and/or ecologist shall be
required to either design or certify the design of these plantings.
      3.   Seed Versus Plugs: The use of plugs shall be encouraged in lieu of
seed. If seed is used, the letter of credit "maintenance" period for these
improvements shall be three (3) years instead of two (2) years and shall be in
the amount of twenty five percent (25%) versus ten percent (10%).
      4.   Inspection And Certification: In order to verify native planting
bands have been established properly and in compliance with the approved
design, an inspection shall be performed and a report created by a qualified
environmental consultant hired by the pond owner to verify the status of the
plantings and to outline a recommended future maintenance program.
   B.   Side Slopes: The side slopes of retention ponds shall be five to one
(5:1) or flatter, from the normal water level to the limits of the native
vegetation, and the side slopes shall be four to one (4:1) or flatter from the
limits of the native vegetation to one foot (1') above the high water level.
   C.   Safety Ledge: A ten foot (10') wide safety ledge shall be provided
three feet (3') below the normal water level. The safety ledge shall slope back
towards the shore at a five percent (5%) grade. The side slopes shall be four
to one (4:1) or flatter from the safety ledge to the normal water level and
three to one (3:1) or flatter from the bottom of the pond up to the safety
ledge.
   D.   Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall be permitted on no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the pond perimeter. Retaining walls shall be constructed
of modular blocks. Retaining walls 3.0 feet or taller are required to be
designed by a registered structural engineer or a registered architect and
shall include a safety fence. Stepped walls count as one wall system (e.g., a 2
foot lower wall plus a stepped 2 foot upper wall equals a 4 foot wall). Safety
fencing shall be provided along the top edge of any retaining wall greater than
3.0 feet in height.
   E.   Bounce: The maximum bounce (high water level minus normal water level)
on a retention pond shall be four feet (4').
   F.   Outfall Pipe: The outfall pipe from a retention pond shall have a
flared end section and steel grating.
   G.   Perimeter Berm: For any retention pond at least partially enclosed by
an earthen berm, the top of the berm shall be at least one foot (1') higher
than the design high water level and at least two feet (2') wide.
   H.   Emergency Overflow: An emergency overflow weir shall be provided at an
elevation above the design high water level, but at least six inches (6") below
the top of berm. The overflow weir shall be armored from the top of berm to the
outside toe of slope. If the weir is armored with riprap or other porous
material, the subgrade under the riprap shall be equal to or above the design
high water level. The weir shall be wide enough to convey one cfs per tributary
acre. Weirs facing adjacent single-family residential properties or public
streets shall be incorporated into the landscape design for the facility and
shall be designed to minimize negative visual impacts by incorporating
landscape stone, grasscrete or an approved equal material in lieu of poured
concrete or standard riprap.
Requests for relief from the requirements of this section will be processed by
the Oversight Committee. A public hearing or a published legal notice is not
required for any such request unless the request also involves relief from the
requirements of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance. The applicant will be responsible for payment of any nonrefundable
application fees to appear before the Plan Commission/Oversight Committee.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-8: SHALLOW WET BOTTOM RETENTION FACILITY DESIGN CRITERIA:
For shallow, wet bottom retention facilities, i.e., those stormwater retention
facilities where the bottom is planted with wetland vegetation and the normal
water depth is twelve inches (12") to eighteen inches (18"), in addition to the
design criteria set forth within section 8-13-7 of this chapter, the following
additional criteria shall apply:
   A.   Design: A qualified landscape architect and/or ecologist shall be
required to either design or certify the design of these plantings.
   B.   Letter Of Credit: The letter of credit "maintenance" period for these
improvements shall be three (3) years instead of two (2) years and shall be in
the amount of twenty percent (20%) versus ten percent (10%).
   C.   Inspection And Certification: In order to verify that the native
plantings have been established properly, an inspection shall be performed and
a report created by a qualified environmental consultant to verify the status
of the plantings and to outline a recommended future maintenance program.
Requests for relief from the requirements of this section will be processed by
the Oversight Committee. A public hearing or a published legal notice is not
required for any such request unless the request also involves relief from the
requirements of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance. The applicant will be responsible for payment of any nonrefundable
application fees to appear before the Plan Commission/Oversight Committee.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-9: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
   A.   The City of Warrenville Plan Commission shall serve as the Oversight
Committee with respect to administration of the Stormwater and Floodplain
Ordinance.
   B.   Any party aggrieved by an administrative order requirement, decision or
determination made pursuant to this chapter by an authorized administrative
official of the City or any person seeking a variance from the requirements of
said chapter may file a petition for review with the Oversight Committee.
   C.   The petition for review of an order or decision shall be filed with the
authorized administrative official within twenty (20) days of the date of the
order or decision being appealed. A petition for review in the nature of a
variance may be filed at any time. The petition shall contain:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the party filing the
petition, and
      2.   The location of the property affected, and
      3.   Identification of the provision of the ordinance governing the
decision being appealed or from which a variance is sought, and
      4.   A statement of the grounds on which the petition or variance request
is based, and
      5.   A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the petition is
based, and
      6.   A plot plan and verbal description of the use affected.
   D.   The Oversight Committee, after notice to the applicant, shall conduct a
public hearing on the petition. The applicant and other interested parties
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence in support of
the petition at the hearing. Upon the conclusion of the hearing the Oversight
Committee shall enter a written finding of facts and a decision regarding the
petition. Any party to the hearing may, within twenty (20) days, appeal to the
City Council for review of the decision. Upon timely application for an appeal,
the City Council shall review the hearing record and Oversight Committee
decision. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-
19-2017)
8-13-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENT PROVISIONS:
Before construction of any private stormwater detention or retention facility
is commenced, the owner shall grant to the City a stormwater management
easement, either by plat or grant of easement. The stormwater management
easement shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the City Attorney
and shall be substantially in the following form:
Stormwater Management Area Maintenance Provisions
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, and all future
holders of title (collectively, the "owner") to any portion of the property
which is the subject of this plat (the "property"), hereby covenants and agrees
with the city of Warrenville (the "city") as follows:
Owner shall maintain, operate and repair the portions of the property
identified on this plat as the "stormwater management easement area" and shall
maintain and manage all landscaping and plantings thereon at all times in a
manner consistent with the plans and specifications approved by the city (and
upon request, furnish proof of compliance therewith). The owner grants to the
city and its designees the right of access upon, over and across the property
to inspect the stormwater management easement area and to perform any
maintenance of said areas (and to store equipment necessary therefor) which the
owner has failed to perform, if such failure continues for thirty (30) days
after written notice from the city of such failure. The city may enter upon the
property and perform such work as should have been undertaken by owner without
notice to owner in an emergency (e.g., where personal injury or material damage
to property may be imminent). The owner shall be liable for the cost of any
maintenance so performed by the city and shall promptly reimburse the city for
such costs, with interest at statutory prejudgment rate calculated from the
date of expenditure. Upon recordation by the city of a claim for reimbursement,
the city shall have a forecloseable lien upon the property to secure
reimbursement.
In addition to other remedies provided for above, upon owner's failure to
maintain the stormwater management easement areas (after notice where required
as aforesaid), the city shall be entitled to all remedies at law or equity to
enforce this agreement, including all remedies for the abatement of a nuisance,
which remedies shall be cumulative and not exclusive. If a judgment is entered
against the owner, the owner shall pay all reasonable attorneys' fees and costs
of the city. The city shall not be liable to owner or any party claiming
through the owner for any damage caused by it in the performance of any
maintenance undertaken pursuant to this agreement, unless such damage is caused
by wanton or willful conduct. Failure to enforce a right granted hereunder
shall not be deemed a waiver of such right or any other rights hereunder. No
party shall be liable for failure to enforce the provisions hereof.
The owner reserves unto itself all rights not materially inconsistent with
these provisions, including the right to improve the property and to grant
easements and other rights and interests in and to said property.
The owners of any portion of the property shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the reimbursement of or payment to the city, as may be required
by the foregoing provisions. If title to all or any part of the property is
vested in a land trust, any beneficiaries thereof shall be personally liable
for all obligations imposed hereby on the "owner" of such property or portion
thereof so owned.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-11: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE VARIANCE FEE PROGRAM:
   A.   Where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of section 15-
72 of the Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, as now existing or
hereafter amended, is granted, payment into a Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee
Program shall be made prior to issuance of a stormwater management
certification as a condition of the variance. Payment of a site runoff storage
variance fee for the varied storage shall be made to the City and shall be
determined by applying the first applicable criterion as follows:
      1.   A fee calculated by multiplying the per acre-foot cost of the
closest off site storage facility times the varied storage where:
         a.   A design concept for the facility has been approved by the City
containing an estimate of the per acre-foot cost of constructing the storage,
including operation and maintenance costs; and
         b.   A formula has been developed to determine that any investment in
the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring of
lands, constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and
      2.   One hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per acre-foot of
detention volume.
   B.   Funds collected shall be accounted for in separate project or watershed
planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same community or watershed
planning areas as collected to enhance existing site runoff storage facilities
and related components, construct off site facilities and related components,
provide maintenance of stormwater facilities, or undertake other development
that provides a watershed benefit.
   C.   The City shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds
deposited in each project or watershed planning account and shall account for
each fund on a first in, first out basis.
   D.   Site runoff storage variance fees shall be refunded to the person who
paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with
subsection E of this section, whenever the City fails to encumber the fees
collected within ten (10) years of the date on which such fees are collected.
   E.   Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a
petition with the City within one year from the date on which such fees are
required to be encumbered. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), and every day on which a violation of this chapter shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-13: POSTCONSTRUCTION BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (PCBMP) FEE IN LIEU
PROGRAM:
   A.   With the approval of the City, and provided the conditions of section
15-63 of the County ordinance apply, the applicant may be allowed or required
to pay PCBMP fee in lieu payment. Payment into a PCBMP fee in lieu program
shall be made prior to the issuance of a stormwater management certification.
   B.   PCBMP fee in lieu payment shall be made to the appropriate fee in lieu
program that identifies reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain
similar PCBMPs for those areas of the development that remain without effective
water quality treatment.
   C.   If approved by the City, the payment rate due from an owner- developer
to the City for the payment of a fee in lieu of a PCBMP shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of net new impervious
area.
   D.   PCBMP funds collected shall be separately accounted for in watershed
planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same watershed planning
areas as collected solely to design, construct, and maintain water quality or
runoff volume reduction improvements. Funds may not be used to fulfill
obligations required by the ordinance.
   E.   The City shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds
deposited in each watershed planning account and shall account for each fund on
a first in, first out basis.
   F.   The City may prioritize and allocate funds on an annual basis within
each watershed planning area account.
   G.   All BMP fee in lieu payments shall be refunded to the person who paid
the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with section
15-97.B.6 of the County ordinance, when the City fails to encumber that
development's fees collected within ten (10) years of the date on which such
fees were collected.
   H.   Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a
petition with the City within one year from the date on which such fees are
required to be encumbered. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-13-14: ADOPTION OF GENERAL CERTIFICATIONS:
   A.   Those general certifications listed in subsection B of this section
with their respective effective dates, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the Office of the City Clerk, shall be and are hereby adopted as general
certifications for the City.
   B.   List of adopted general certifications:
      1.   Construction of accessory structures in a floodplain, effective
April 25, 2012;
      2.   Construction of boardwalks, effective April 25, 2012;
      3.   Construction of boat lifts and piers in a floodplain, buffer and/or
wetland, effective April 25, 2012;
      4.   Construction of a deck in a floodplain or buffer, effective April
25, 2012;
      5.   Demolition of structures in a floodplain, buffer, and/or wetland,
effective April 25, 2012;
      6.   Construction of posts, fencing, and guardrails in a floodplain or
buffer, effective April 25, 2012;
      7.   Construction of recreational facilities not located in a wetland,
effective April 25, 2012;
      8.   Construction of sidewalks, trails, patios, and driveways outside of
wetlands, effective April 25, 2012;
      9.   Construction of storm sewer outfalls and outlet channels located in
a floodway, floodplain, buffer, and/or wetland, effective April 25, 2012;
      10.   Construction of shoreline or stream bank stabilization measures,
effective April 25, 2012;
      11.   Construction of topsoil and sand restoration in a floodplain,
floodway or buffer, but not within a wetland, effective April 25, 2012; and
      12.   Construction of utilities, effective April 25, 2012. (Ord. O2017-
38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 14
SIGNS
SECTION:
8-14-1: Title
8-14-2: Purpose
8-14-3: Applicability
8-14-4: Filing Requirements And Procedures
8-14-5: General Sign Standards
8-14-6: Permitted Signs
8-14-7: Prohibited Signs
8-14-8: Administration And Enforcement
8-14-9: Definitions
8-14-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the SIGN ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF WARRENVILLE. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-2: PURPOSE:
Much valuable information is conveyed by certain business signs of local retail
and service establishments, to the mutual benefit of both the business
establishment and the public. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage
such signs wherever they are moderate in size and design and consistent with
the public safety and the welfare of surrounding areas, but to discourage signs
which distract the attention of the motorists or are otherwise hazardous, or
which are inconsistent with the suburban character of Warrenville. (Ord. O2017-
38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-3: APPLICABILITY:
Except for freestanding interstate highway signs on public property which are
regulated under
title 7, chapter 6 of this Code, from and after the effective date of this
chapter, the use of all signs and portions of signs erected, altered, with
respect to height, area, and additions to sign face, and relocated in the City
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing sign
not in conformance with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as
nonconforming.
The regulations of this chapter relate to the location of signs, by function
and type, within the zoning districts and shall be in addition to provisions of
the City Building and Electrical Codes applicable to the construction and
maintenance of signs. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-4: FILING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   General: No sign shall hereafter be erected, altered, have its face
changed, or relocated until the sign conforms with the provisions of this
chapter and a permit has been obtained from the Community Development
Department if it is identified in table 8-14-4A, "Allowed And Prohibited Sign
Types - Permit Requirements In All Zoning Districts", of this section as a sign
type that requires a permit.
Routine maintenance or replacement of parts designed to be changed which do not
require any permit shall not be considered an alteration; provided such change
does not increase the surface area, height, or cause any other structural
change.
No sign permit will be issued for additional signs on property where an
existing sign has been illegally installed.
   B.   Allowed And Prohibited Sign Types; Permit Requirements In All Zoning
Districts: Table 8-14-4A of this section summarizes what sign types are allowed
and prohibited within the corporate limits of the City. This table also
identifies what specific zoning district(s) each permitted sign type is allowed
in, whether a permit is required and what section of this chapter should be
reviewed for additional restrictions and/or requirements. All permitted sign
types shall comply with the standards outlined in sections 
8-14-5 and
8-14-6 of this chapter. Prohibited sign standards are outlined in section 8-14-
7 of this chapter.
   TABLE 8-14-4A:   ALLOWED AND PROHIBITED SIGN TYPES -
   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
                                      Permit Required
                      Zoning          (Y/N)            Code
Sign Type Prohibited1 Districts                           Section
                      Permitted In    PermaneTemporary Reference2
                                             Permit Required
                           Zoning            (Y/N)            Code
Sign Type      Prohibited1 Districts                             Section
                           Permitted In      PermaneTemporary Reference2

Address                    All            N                      8-14-6A1d
numerals
Attention
getting        X                                                 8-14-7A
devices
Awning sign                All            Y                      8-14-6B1g
                           nonresidential
Backstop sign              All                         Y         8-14-6B2g
Banner,                    All                         Y         8-14-6B2d
advertising                nonresidential
Banner,
vertical                   All                         N         8-14-6A2g
decorative
Bulletin board             All            N                      8-14-6A1h
Campaign sign              All                         N         8-14-6A2f
Canopy sign                All            Y                      8-14-6B1g
                           nonresidential
Community                  As approved by
events sign                the City       Y                      8-14-6B1k
                           Council
Construction               All                         Y         8-14-6B2c
sign
Employment
opportunity                All                         N         8-14-6A2i
sign
Feather flag               All                         Y         8-14-6B2d
banner sign                nonresidential
Flags                      All            N                      8-14-6A1c
Flashing sign  X                                                 8-14-7B
Garage sale                All                         N         8-14-6A2b
sign
Gasoline price             All            Y                      8-14-6B1i
sign                       nonresidential
Governmental               All            N                      8-14-6A1d
required sign
Governmental
safety/                    All            N            N         8-14-6A1b, A2e
directional
Grand opening              All                         Y         8-14-6B2a
sign                       nonresidential
Ground sign                See note 3     Y                      8-14-6B1a,
                                                                 B1b, B1c, B1d
Hanging sign               All            Y                      8-14-6B1h
                           nonresidential
Legal notice               All                         N         8-14-6A2e
Memorial sign              All            N                      8-14-6A1a
Message board4             See note 3     Y                      8-14-6B1a,
                                                                 B1b, B1c
Moving sign    X                                                 8-14-7B
Nameplate                  All            N                      8-14-6A1e
                           residential
Open house                 All                         N         8-14-6A2c
sign
Parking lot
regulation                 All            N                      8-14-6A1g
sign
Placard sign               B-2 and B-4                 Y         8-14-6B2e
Pole sign      X                                                 8-14-7H
Portable sign  X5                                                8-14-7I
Project
development                All            Y                      8-14-6B1e
entrance
monument
Real estate                All                         Y         8-14-6B2b
sign, large
Real estate                All                         N         8-14-6A2d
sign, small
Residential
building,                  All            N                      8-14-6A1e
identification             residential
sign
Restaurant                 All            Y                      8-14-6B1j
menu board                 nonresidential
Roof sign      X                                                 8-14-7F
Seasonal
decorations,               All                         N         8-14-6A2a
temporary
Small
convenience                All            N                      8-14-6A1f
sign
Special events
signs
exceeding 16
square feet                All                         Y         8-14-6B2f
and not
exceeding 32
square feet,
temporary
Special events
signs not
exceeding 16               All                         N         8-14-6A2h
square feet,
temporary
Time and/or                All
temperature                nonresidential Y                      8-14-6B1l
signs
Vehicle sign   X                                                 8-14-7J
Wall sign                  See note 3     Y                      8-14-6B1f
Wall sign,     X                                                 8-14-7G
painted
Window sign                All            N                      8-14-6A1i
                           nonresidential
 
Notes:
   1.    "X" indicates sign type is prohibited.
   2.    See the listed Sign Code section for detailed regulations pertaining
to a specific type of sign. The requirements and regulations outlined in
section
8-14-5 of this chapter apply to all signs. For definitions of each of the sign
types refer to section
 8-14-9 of this chapter.
   3.    Ground signs are allowed in all districts but only at nonresidential
establishments.
   4.    When incorporated into a ground sign for a nonresidential use.
   5.    Portable signs are prohibited except when advertising an approved
grand opening; see subsection
8-14-6B2a of this chapter.
   C.   Permit Process:
      1.   Application Requirements: Applications for sign permits shall be
filed with the Community Development Department upon forms provided by the City
and shall contain the following information:
         a.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
         b.   A plat of survey showing the location of the building, structure
or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected, the
location of the sign in relation to buildings or structures on the lot and on
adjacent lots and rights-of-way.
         c.   Two (2) drawings of the sign showing method of construction,
illumination, if any, attachment to the building or ground support, and showing
the proposed sign face with the design and lettering to be placed thereon
accurately representing in scale as to size, area, proportion and color.
         d.   The name of the person, firm, corporation or association owning
and erecting the sign.
         e.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require
to show full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws and
ordinances of the City.
      2.   Review Process: It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or
their representative, upon receipt of an application for a sign permit, to
examine plans, specifications, other data, and the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign. If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in
compliance with all regulations applicable thereto, the Zoning Administrator or
their representative shall issue a permit.
      3.   Sign Permit Fees: As outlined in section
8-14-8 of this chapter.
      4.   Permit Revocation: If the work authorized under the sign permit is
not completed within six (6) months after the issuance of said permit, the
permit shall become null and void. All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, are mere licenses
subject to revocation at any time by the majority of the City Council in the
event of violation of any of the terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-5: GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS:
All signs hereafter constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated or expanded
shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   Sign Area/Copy/Face:
      1.   The term "sign area" shall be the gross surface area of each sign
face with a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign
and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. Such
perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside
the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For
computing the area of any wall sign which consists of letters mounted on a
wall, the area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular
figure which can encompass all of the letters.
      2.   The term "sign copy" shall mean the physical sign message including
any words, letters, numbers, pictures, and symbols.
      3.   The term "sign face" shall mean the surface upon, against or through
which sign copy is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports,
architectural features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural thematic
or decorative trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface
upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a
reveal or border.
         a.   In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall
include the entire area of each sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon
which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, excluding only the open space
between separate panels or cabinets.
         b.   In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters
or graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular geometric
figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements
comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between separate groupings of
sign copy on the same building or structure.
         c.   In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   B.   Sign Height: The sign height shall be measured to the highest point of
the sign structure from the natural or approved finished grade level directly
below the sign or the centerline of the traveled way at a point perpendicular
to the location where the sign is to be placed, whichever is higher at the time
of sign installation. The intent of this subsection is to prevent permitted
ground sign height from being increased by installing a ground sign on a
manmade berm, landscape bed, or mound.
   C.   Setbacks: All signs, except as otherwise specifically permitted by the
provisions of this chapter, shall be set back not less than ten feet (10') from
any front, corner side, side and rear lot line, provided, however, that any
such sign shall not be located in the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in
this chapter, unless said sign is less than twenty four inches (24") in height.
   D.   Misrepresentation: No sign shall be permitted which contains knowingly
false information or knowingly misrepresents the product, service or commodity
to be offered, conducted or sold on the premises.
   E.   Traffic Safety: No sign shall be maintained at any location where by
reason of its position, size, shape or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure,
interfere with the view of or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal
or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead, confuse, or unsafely
obstruct the view of traffic.
   F.   Sign Area Limitation: The sign area of any sign shall not exceed a
maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per sign face.
   G.   Illumination:
      1.   Location/Design Of Light Source: Whenever an external artificial
light source is used to illuminate a sign, illumination shall be located,
shielded, and directed so as not to be directly visible from any public street
or residentially zoned property at grade level. All artificial illumination
shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed as it illuminates only
the sign face and to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
property or streets.
      2.   Level Of Illumination: In no event shall the illumination of any
sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed
fifty (50) foot-candles when measured with a standard light meter held
perpendicular to the sign face a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of
such sign face.
      3.   Signs Adjacent To Residential Areas: Any illuminated sign located on
a lot abutting or across the street from any residentially zoned property shall
not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.; except such sign may remain illuminated during such time
as the activity to which the sign pertains is engaged.
      4.   Transitional Office District: Signs permitted in the Transitional
Office District shall be internally illuminated, backlit or downlit by an
incandescent, solar, light emitting diode (LED), or compact fluorescent light
(CFL) light source equivalent to not more than seventy five (75) watts per each
six (6) square feet of signage.
   H.   Maintenance: The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which
said sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain such
signs subject to the following standards:
      1.   Signs shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition and good
working order, including illumination sources, at all times.
      2.   Signs shall be properly painted unless galvanized or otherwise
treated to prevent rust or deterioration.
      3.   Signs shall conform to maintenance provisions of the Building and
Electrical Codes as adopted by the City.
   I.   Cantera Sign Standards: The sign standards applicable within the
Cantera planned unit development area shall be those sign standards set forth
in the Cantera development control regulations. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-6: PERMITTED SIGNS:
   A.   Signs Allowed Without A Permit: The following permanent and temporary
signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Permanent Signs:
         a.   Memorial Signs And Tablets: Not to exceed twenty four (24) square
feet when displayed on public or private property.
         b.   Governmental Safety And Directional Signage: Permanent signs of a
duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar instructional
or regulatory signs relating to health, hazards, parking, swimming, dumping,
etc.
         c.   Flags: Governmental, political, civic, philanthropic, educational
or religious organization flags or flags bearing corporate logos are permitted
subject to the following:
            (1)   One United States of America and one corporate logo flag
which are no larger than fifty (50) square feet per face and do not extend
beyond the property line of the lot on which they are installed.
            (2)   All flags shall be mounted on flagpoles. The mounting of
flags on light standards or other poles not expressly made as flag standards
shall be prohibited.
         d.   Address Numerals And Other Governmental Required Signs: Signs
required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation,
provided that the content and size of the sign do not exceed the requirement of
such law, order, rule or regulation.
         e.   Residential Building Identification Signs/Nameplates: Not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area indicating the name and/or address of the
occupant and, where applicable, a professional status, but not indicating a
product or business unless it is a home occupation business permitted under the
Warrenville zoning ordinance. Such signs shall be affixed to the front wall of
the principal residential building.
         f.   Small Convenience Signs: Not exceeding three (3) square feet per
face, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public,
including signs identifying restrooms, freight entrances, parking areas,
parking lot directional signs and the like.
         g.   Parking Lot Regulation Sign: A sign not exceeding nine (9) square
feet per face which designates the conditions of use of a parking lot; such
signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements but shall be screened from
adjoining property.
         h.   Bulletin Boards: When no greater than twenty (20) square feet per
face, used solely to give information about and accessibility to a public,
charitable, educational or religious institution located on the lot.
         i.   Window Signs: Window signs shall be permitted in any
nonresidential district and shall denote only the name and address of the
business conducted on the premises and/or a product or products produced or
sold or service rendered therein. Neon signs, including perimeter lighting, and
moving (changeable copy) signs may be installed as window signs subject to the
following regulations:
            (1)   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the total window area
shall be occupied by neon signs.
            (2)   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area in
a door.
      2.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Temporary Seasonal Decorations: When displayed in connection with
a local festivity approved by the City Council or a national holiday. Such
decorations shall not be displayed more than forty five (45) days prior to or
thirty (30) days after such local festivity or national holiday.
         b.   Garage Sale Signs: Garage sale signs are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
            (1)   Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
            (2)   Signs may be placed off site on private property with the
consent of the owner of the property on which the sign is placed.
            (3)   One sign may be placed in the City right-of-way in front of
the house having the garage sale. In case of a subdivision wide garage sale,
one sign may be placed in the City right-of-way at the entrance to the
subdivision.
            (4)   Signs shall not be put up more than twenty four (24) hours
prior to the garage sale and must be removed upon the close of the garage sale.
            (5)   The name and phone number of the person responsible for
removing the sign shall be included on each sign.
            (6)   Signs placed off site on private property shall be set back
not less than one foot (1') from any lot line.
            (7)   Signs shall not be located in the "vision clearance triangle"
as defined in this chapter unless said signs are less than twenty four inches
(24") in height.
         c.   Open House Signs: Open house signs are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
            (1)   Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
            (2)   Signs may be placed off site on private property with the
consent of the owner of the property on which the sign is placed.
            (3)   One sign may be placed in the City right-of-way in front of
the house for sale.
            (4)   Signs shall not be put up more than forty eight (48) hours
prior to the open house and must be removed upon the close of the open house.
            (5)   The name and phone number of the person responsible for
removing the sign shall be included on each sign.
            (6)   Signs placed off site on private property shall be set back
not less than one foot (1') from any lot line, provided, however, that any such
sign shall not be located in the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in this
chapter unless said signs are less than twenty four inches (24") in height.
            (7)   Up to three (3) balloons may be attached to an open house
sign provided the balloons and strings holding the balloons are not made of
mylar/metallic materials and their height does not exceed seven feet (7') from
grade.
         d.   Small Real Estate Signs: Small real estate signs identifying
property for lease or sale are permitted subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
            (2)   One sign per lot or per principal structure may be placed on
site, except on a corner lot where one sign may face each street.
            (3)   One sign may be placed off site on private property with the
written permission of the owner of the property on which the sign is placed. No
other temporary signs shall be displayed concurrently with the signs allowed
herein.
            (4)   Only one off site sign may be placed on any private property
at any given time.
            (5)   Signs shall be removed within five (5) business days of the
closing sale or lease of the property advertised for sale or lease.
            (6)   Signs shall be set back not less than one foot (1') from any
lot line, provided, however, that any such sign shall not be located in the
"vision clearance triangle" as defined in this chapter, unless said signs are
less than twenty four inches (24") in height.
         e.   Legal Notices And Other Governmental Safety/Directional Signs:
Identification, informational, directional, traffic, or other temporary sign
erected or required by governmental authority under any law, statute or City
ordinance.
Temporary signs required by the Warrenville zoning ordinance shall be removed
by the applicant within seven (7) days after the conclusion of any zoning
related hearing and should the applicant fail to remove the sign, the applicant
shall either pay the City one hundred dollars ($100.00) as the cost of removal
or one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be deducted from any applicant funds or
deposit with the City as the cost of removal.
         f.   Campaign Signs: Campaign signs may be installed on private
property; provided, that such signs are set back not less than one foot (1')
from any lot line, and further provided that any such sign shall not be located
in the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in this chapter unless said signs
are less than twenty four inches (24") in height. Campaign signs installed on
residential property shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per face.
Campaign signs shall be exempt from any time limit regulations.
         g.   Vertical Decorative Banners: Vertical banners, when ornamental
rather than informational in nature, are permitted provided that:
            (1)   Banners are secured by metal braces or frames running the
width of the sign at the top and the bottom.
            (2)   Frames are secured to permanently mounted standards, such as
a light pole.
            (3)   Banners carry no information on merchandise or price.
         h.   Special Event Signs: Special event signs may be displayed in
conjunction with any community and/or charitable event associated with or
benefiting Warrenville residents and/or a Warrenville community/charitable
organization or governmental entity subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Not more than one such sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage of an individual property at any given time.
            (2)   Such sign(s) shall not be placed in a right-of-way and shall
comply with the general setback standards of this chapter.
            (3)   Such sign(s) may be placed off site on private property with
the written permission of the owner of the property on which the sign is
placed.
            (4)   Such sign(s) may be displayed for up to twenty one (21) days
prior to the advertised event and shall be removed by the end of the day after
the event.
            (5)   Such sign(s) shall be attached to a building wall or securely
anchored.
            (6)   Such sign(s) shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per
face.
            (7)   The maximum height of such sign(s) shall not exceed seven
feet (7').
            (8)   No other temporary signs shall be displayed concurrently with
the signs allowed herein.
         i.   Employment Opportunity Signs: Employment opportunity signs may be
displayed by any business legally operating in the City of Warrenville subject
to the following regulations:
            (1)   Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
            (2)   Not more than one such sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage of the individual private property where the employment opportunity is
available.
            (3)   Not more than two (2) such signs may be placed off site on
private property with the written permission of the owner of the property on
which the sign is placed. Only one off site sign may be placed on any private
property at any given time.
            (4)   Signs shall be set back not less than one foot (1') from any
lot line, provided, however, that any such sign shall not be located in the
"vision clearance triangle", as defined in this chapter, unless said signs are
less than twenty four inches (24") in height.
            (5)   Such sign(s) shall not be displayed more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days during any thirty (30) day period.
   B.   Signs Requiring A Permit: The following permanent and temporary signs
are subject to the permit requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Permanent Signs:
         a.   Ground Sign; Single Use Building And Lot In Nonresidential Zoning
District: A single freestanding nonresidential establishment located on its own
nonresidential zoned lot shall be allowed one ground sign per street frontage
subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Sign Area: Fifty (50) square feet per face. If a message
board is incorporated into the design of the sign, an additional thirty two
(32) square feet of message board area per face shall be allowed.
            (2)   Sign Height: Maximum of seven feet (7') in height from grade
unless a message board is incorporated into the design of the sign, in which
case the maximum height of such sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') from
grade.
         b.   Ground Sign; Nonresidential Establishment In Residential Zoning
District: A single freestanding nonresidential establishment located on its own
residentially zoned lot shall be allowed one ground sign per street frontage
subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Sign Area: Maximum of fifty (50) square feet per face,
including a message board not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet.
            (2)   Sign Height: Maximum of eight feet (8').
            (3)   Electronic Message Board: If an electronic message board is
incorporated into the design, it shall use monochrome nonfluorescent color
lights and shall have a dark background.
            (4)   Illumination: Illumination level of a sign shall not exceed
five (5) foot-candles between hours of dusk and dawn when measured with a
standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face a distance equal to
the narrowest dimension of such sign face.
         c.   Ground Sign; Multiple-Tenant Building: A multiple-tenant
nonresidential building shall be allowed one ground sign per street frontage
subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Sign Area: Fifty (50) square feet per face plus ten (10)
additional square feet of sign area per face for each separate tenant up to a
maximum of ten (10) tenants. If a message board is incorporated into the design
of the sign, an additional thirty two (32) square feet of message board area
per face shall also be allowed.
            (2)   Sign Height: Maximum of twelve feet (12') in height from
grade for a multiple-tenant building with up to five (5) tenants and fifteen
feet (15') in height for multiple-tenant buildings with six (6) or more
tenants. If a message board is incorporated into the design of the sign, an
additional three feet (3') of sign height shall also be allowed.
         d.   Ground Sign; Transitional Office District: A transitional office
building shall be allowed one double faced ground sign with a sign face of not
more than six (6) square feet, a sign height of no more than four feet (4'),
and a setback from all property lines of no less than ten feet (10').
         e.   Project Development Entrance Monuments: For subdivision
developments over two (2) acres in size, sixty (60) square feet of sign area
per face and seven feet (7') in height shall be allowed. A project development
entrance sign shall be a ground sign, may be illuminated, and shall be removed
upon the completion of the development unless it has been approved by the Plan
Commission as a permanent and integral part of the subdivision development.
Such signs shall be constructed of brick, stone, sandblasted cedar or other
similar materials compatible with the materials used on the exterior building
walls of structures in the development.
         f.   Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
            (1)   Any nonresidential establishment may install a sign or signs
on the wall(s) of a principal building facing a dedicated street, the area of
which shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) square feet for every linear foot
of wall frontage facing a dedicated street, however, not to exceed one hundred
twenty five (125) square feet.
            (2)   Additional wall signs may be added on frontage where public
access is provided. The total square feet of all wall signs may not exceed the
allowable square footage for the wall frontage facing a dedicated street.
            (3)   Where more than one establishment occupies a building, each
establishment will be allocated sign area based on amount of linear wall
frontage it controls.
            (4)   Wall signs may not project more than twelve inches (12")
beyond the wall surface.
            (5)   Notwithstanding subsections B1f(1) through B1f(4) of this
section, wall signs for an office use in the Transitional Office District shall
be confined to one wall sign with a maximum sign area of six (6) square feet
and not projecting more than twelve inches (12") beyond the wall surface.
         g.   Awning Or Canopy Signs: Letters or logo may be painted or
otherwise affixed to the face of any permitted awning or canopy adjacent to a
dedicated street subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Such signs shall be measured the same as wall signs. No more
than twenty percent (20%) of an awning or canopy face shall be covered with
such signs.
            (2)   Letters or logo shall not project above, below or beyond the
physical dimensions of the awning or canopy.
            (3)   Letters or logo shall not be larger from top to bottom than
eighteen inches (18").
            (4)   Letters or logo shall denote only the name and address of the
business conducted on the premises and/or a product or products produced or
sold or service rendered therein.
            (5)   Awning or canopy signs shall maintain a free clearance to
grade of at least seven feet (7').
         h.   Hanging Signs: One sign per business may be suspended below an
awning or canopy subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Horizontal dimension of such signs shall not exceed the depth
of the awning or canopy.
            (2)   The vertical dimension shall not exceed twelve inches (12").
            (3)   Hanging signs shall maintain a free clearance to grade of at
least seven feet (7').
         i.   Gasoline Price Signs: No more than one per street frontage with a
maximum sign area of twenty (20) square feet per face. Such signs shall be
incorporated into the design and made an integral part of the ground sign
permitted under subsections B1a, B1b, B1c, and B1d of this section. The
permitted sign area shall be in addition to the ground sign area permitted
under subsections B1a, B1b, B1c and B1d of this section.
         j.   Menu Boards: Two (2) menu boards, unless otherwise approved by a
special use permit for a drive-through facility, each of which shall not exceed
forty five (45) square feet in area, shall be permitted for each restaurant
business having an approved drive- through window. Each of said permitted menu
boards shall be either:
            (1)   Ground mounted, not exceeding seven feet (7') in height, or
            (2)   Wall mounted below the eaves line.
         k.   Community Events Sign: Community events sign(s) owned by the City
shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter, including
regulations pertaining to maximum sign area and height and minimum setbacks and
may be installed off site and/or within the public right-of-way. Such sign(s)
may be erected only after the design, location and use policy for each sign
shall have been approved by the City Council.
         l.   Time And Temperature Signs: Time and/or temperature display signs
shall be permitted in all nonresidential districts subject to the following
conditions:
            (1)   The time and/or temperature display shall be subject to the
maximum size and height regulations for ground/wall mounted signs.
            (2)   If the same display face is used for alternating time and
temperature readings, the frequency of changing the display shall be no more
than once every five (5) seconds.
         m.   Message Board Sign: A message board sign may be incorporated into
a ground sign subject to the following regulations, in addition to all other
applicable regulations in this chapter:
            (1)   Display Duration: Except for time and temperature signs, any
electronic message shall remain fixed within the display area for a minimum of
ten (10) seconds.
            (2)   Message Display And Transition: A message board display shall
not contain a display that is animated, flashing, scrolling or otherwise
moving. Messages must instantaneously change without transitions or off time.
      2.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Grand Opening Signs: Grand opening signs shall be permitted in
any zoning district, subject to the following conditions and limitations,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary otherwise set forth in this chapter:
            (1)   Grand Opening: The following instances shall constitute a
"grand opening": the opening of a new business, not previously located on the
premises; the opening of a model home in a residential subdivision consisting
of not less than six (6) dwelling units; the reopening of an established
business that has been severely damaged by catastrophe and has been closed for
at least sixty (60) consecutive days for renovation; a change in the business
name; a change in the business ownership; or a "grand reopening" or
"anniversary event" of an existing business that has been operating on the
premises for at least five (5) consecutive years, provided that "grand
reopening" or "anniversary event" signs shall not be allowed during any period
which is less than five (5) years from the period during which a grand opening,
reopening or anniversary event sign has previously been displayed.
            (2)   Grand Opening Sign: A "grand opening sign" shall mean a sign
which advertises a grand opening on the premises where the sign is located.
            (3)   Grand Opening Period: The "grand opening period" shall mean
the six (6) month period immediately after the opening of a new business or the
reopening of a business, or opening of a model home in a residential
subdivision as set forth in this subsection B2.
            (4)   Permit Period: Grand opening signs shall be permitted for a
maximum period of twenty one (21) days during the grand opening period, which
days shall be consecutive (the "permit period").
            (5)   Permit Fee: A seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee shall apply
for each grand opening sign permit. The permit shall be obtained no less than
forty eight (48) hours before the permit period commences.
            (6)   Permitted Signs: The following grand opening signs shall be
permitted:
               (A) One cold air inflatable device, such as a balloon, provided
that:
                  (i) Only one such device shall be allowed per lot, provided
one such sign shall be allowed per residential subdivision;
                  (ii) The applicant for the permit shall pay a deposit of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City as a condition precedent to the issuance
of the temporary sign permit. In the event the inflatable device is not removed
within the time period provided for in the permit, the deposit shall be
forfeited by the applicant;
                  (iii) The top of the device shall not be more than forty feet
(40') from grade level;
                  (iv) The device shall be set back at least twenty five feet
(25') from the public right-of-way;
                  (v) Any advertising/signs attached to such device shall not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area; and (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
                  (vi) Safety measures prescribed by the Director of Community
and Economic Development shall be followed. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd.
Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
   (B)   One portable sign.
   (C)   One temporary grand opening sign; provided, however, the temporary
grand opening sign shall not reduce the number of temporary signs otherwise
permitted in this chapter.
            (7)   When Permitted: Grand opening signs shall be permitted only
during the permit period.
            (8)   Prohibited Signs: Unless otherwise specifically permitted,
the prohibited signs enumerated in this chapter shall not be used.
            (9)   Searchlights: Searchlights are permitted during the permit
period, provided that said lights may only be operated between dusk and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight or closing, whichever is earlier.
            (10)   Removal: Within twenty four (24) hours after the expiration
of the grand opening permit, all grand opening signs and lighting shall be
removed from the premises by the permittee.
         b.   Large Real Estate Signs: Where more than six (6) dwelling units
(or lots for dwelling purposes), located in the same subdivision, are offered
for sale or rental by the same party, or where more than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of a commercial or industrial building or lot is
offered for sale or rent, there shall be permitted one non-illuminated sign
facing each public street providing access to the property being offered. Each
such sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet per face, eight feet
(8') in height from grade, and must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of
the property being offered. Signs shall be removed when less than six (6) units
or two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet remain for sale or lease.
         c.   Construction Signs: In connection with the construction of six
(6) or more dwelling units or the construction or remodeling of a building of
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more there shall be permitted
one non-illuminated sign not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet per face
indicating the names of any or all of the owners and future occupants and of
the architects, engineers, and contractors engaged in the construction.
Construction signs shall be removed at the time a permanent sign is installed
or a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.
         d.   Advertising Banners: Businesses in nonresidential districts may
display advertising banner signs provided that such signs are displayed in
conformance with the following restrictions and requirements:
            (1)   Types Of Advertising Banners And Method Of Installation:
               (A) Mounted abutting and flush to the building wall and secured
at all four (4) corners, or
               (B) Anchored on posts, or
               (C) Feather flags.
            (2)   Size And Height: Advertising banner size shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet. Advertising banners anchored on posts shall not exceed
seven feet (7') in height. Feather flags shall not exceed eleven feet (11') in
height.
            (3)   Location: Advertising banners anchored on posts and feather
flags shall be set back not less than ten feet (10') from all property lines,
provided, however, that any such sign shall not be located in the "vision
clearance triangle" as defined in this chapter, unless said signs are less than
twenty four inches (24") in height.
            (4)   Number: Each business shall be entitled to one wall mounted
advertising banner at any given time. Not more than one advertising banner
anchored on posts or one feather flag advertising banner may be displayed on
any street frontage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than one
advertising banner may be displayed on a single business lot or a single
frontage lot, and no more than two (2) advertising banners may be displayed for
any business on a multi-tenant lot with two (2) street frontages at any one
time.
            (5)   Display Time: Advertising banners may be displayed for
fourteen (14) days at a time, up to six (6) times per year. Feather flags may
be displayed for fourteen (14) days at a time, up to four (4) times per year.
            (6)   Construction: All advertising banners shall be constructed of
a durable all weather surface with hemmed edges and metal grommets where
applicable.
            (7)   Permits: A separate temporary sign permit shall be obtained
from the Community Development Department for each individual advertising
banner sign.
            (8)   Illumination: Advertising banner signs shall not have any
source of internal or external illumination.
         e.   Placard Signs: Businesses in commercial zoning districts may
display placard signs provided that such signs are displayed in conformance
with the following restrictions and requirements:
            (1)   Size And Height: The sign portion of the placard sign shall
be no larger than nine (9) square feet per face and no more than forty two
inches (42") in height from grade.
            (2)   Illumination: Placard signs shall not have any source of
internal or external illumination.
            (3)   Hours And Days Of Display: Placard signs shall only be
displayed between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. Monday through Saturday. Placard signs shall be placed inside the
principal structure each night and when not in use.
            (4)   Construction: All placard signs shall be weatherproof and
either professionally painted/printed or shall make use of stenciling or die
cut lettering. Graphics produced with markers or spray paint shall not be
permitted. All placard signs shall be either manufactured from a rigid material
such as plywood or mounted in a rigid self-supporting metal or approved equal
frame. All placard signs shall be securely anchored so as to prevent the sign
from being moved by the wind.
            (5)   Location: Placard signs shall be set back not less than two
feet (2') from all property lines. Placard signs shall not be located within
the vision clearance triangle at the street and drive intersections and as
defined in this chapter. Placard signs shall not be permitted in the public
right-of-way.
            (6)   Number: Each lot is permitted one placard sign for each one
hundred fifty feet (150') or portion thereof of street frontage, rounded to the
higher number. On corner lots, the "street" frontage along one street shall not
be transferred to the second street frontage to permit additional signs along
the second street frontage. A minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') must
be maintained between each placard sign. Individual businesses are only
permitted one placard sign per street frontage.
            (7)   Permits: A separate temporary sign permit shall be obtained
from the Community Development Department for each individual placard sign.
Permits shall be issued in three (3) to fourteen (14) day increments; thirty
(30) day increments; or a one year increment. The owner of the property shall
consent to the installation of proposed placard signs prior to a sign permit
being issued by the City.
         f.   Special Event Signs: Special event signs may be displayed in
conjunction with any community and/or charitable event associated with or
benefiting Warrenville residents and/or a Warrenville community/charitable
organization or governmental entity subject to the following regulations:
            (1)   Not more than one such sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage of an individual property at any given time.
            (2)   Such sign(s) shall not be placed in a right-of-way and shall
comply with the general setback standards of this chapter.
            (3)   Such sign(s) may be placed off site on private property with
the written permission of the owner of the property on which the sign is
placed.
            (4)   Such sign(s) may be displayed four (4) times each year for
not more than twenty one (21) days at a time.
            (5)   Such sign(s) shall be attached to a building wall or securely
anchored.
            (6)   Such sign(s) shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet per
face.
            (7)   The maximum height of such sign(s) shall not exceed seven
feet (7').
            (8)   No other temporary signs shall be displayed concurrently with
the signs allowed herein.
         g.   Backstop Signs: Backstop signs constructed of a durable all
weather surface material with hemmed edges and metal grommets and attached to
baseball field backstop may be displayed subject to the following requirements:
            (1)   A single field backstop may only display three (3) signs at
any given time.
            (2)   Backstop signs are mounted abutting and flush to the backstop
wall and secured at all four (4) corners.
            (3)   Backstop sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet
per face.
            (4)   Backstop signs may be displayed April 1 through November 30.
         h.   Subdivision Marketing Signs: New residential subdivisions
consisting of not less than six (6) dwelling units may display temporary signs
related to the marketing of subdivision, provided that such signs are displayed
in conformance with the following restrictions and requirements:
            (1)   Types, Size And Height Of Marketing Signs:
               (A) Feather flags not exceeding nine feet (9') in height and
twenty four (24) square feet per face; and
               (B) Anchored on posts signs not exceeding five feet (5') in
height and nine (9) square feet per face.
            (2)   Location: Marketing signs shall be set back not less than two
feet (2') from all property lines, and any such sign shall not be located in
the "vision clearance triangle", as defined in this chapter. Marketing signs
shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way.
            (3)   Number: Each new residential subdivision is permitted one
subdivision marketing sign for each two hundred feet (200') or portion thereof
of street frontage, rounded to the higher number. A minimum distance of fifty
feet (50') must be maintained between each sign.
            (4)   Display Time: Subdivision marketing signs shall be removed
when less than twenty five percent (25%) of the dwelling units within a
subdivision remain for sale or lease.
            (5)   Construction: All subdivision marketing signs shall be
constructed of durable, all weather surface materials.
            (6)   Permits: A separate temporary sign permit shall be obtained
from the Community Development Department for each individual subdivision
marketing sign.
            (7)   Illumination: Subdivision marketing signs shall not have any
source of internal or external illumination. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-7: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs shall be prohibited:
   A.   Attention Getting Devices: No pennants, streamers, festooned lights,
nor any sign which is designed to be moved by the wind, shall be permitted,
except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Flashing Or Moving Signs: No flashing signs, rotating or moving signs,
animated signs, signs with moving lights, or signs creating the illusion of
movement shall be permitted except as provided in this chapter. A sign whereon
the current time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting shall
not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the lighting changes are limited to the
numerals indicating the time and/or temperature.
   C.   Reserved.
   D.   Signs On Vacant Property: No sign shall be located on vacant property
except real estate signs relating to the sale of said vacant property, and
other temporary signs specifically permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Signs On Trees Or Utility Poles: No signs shall be attached to a tree
or utility pole whether on public or private property.
   F.   Roof Signs: No part of any sign shall be maintained on the roof, or in
the air space over the roof, of any building or structure.
   G.   Painted Wall Signs: Any signs which are applied with paint or similar
substance on a face of a structural wall shall be prohibited.
   H.   Pole Signs: No signs shall be mounted on a pole or other supports so
that the bottom edge of the face of the sign is seven feet (7') or more from
grade.
   I.   Portable Signs: Signs designed to be transported to various locations
are not permitted, including, but not limited to, signs on wheels, signs with
trailer hitches, and portable signs with internally illuminated message boards.
   J.   Vehicle Signs: No signs, banners, pennants, streamers, or other
removable, attention attracting devices shall be mounted on vehicles, except
for vehicles utilized in parades. This restriction is not intended to prohibit
up to twelve (12) square feet of magnetic or other temporary signage from being
displayed on a business vehicle used for both personal and business use.
Vehicles bearing permanently affixed signs shall not be parked on the right-of-
way, public property, or private property where the apparent purpose is to
advertise a product or service or to direct attention to a business or activity
located on the same or another property and not being used for the purpose of
transporting persons or materials. All vehicles displaying permanently affixed
signs shall be currently licensed, operable, parked on the property of the
business owning or leasing the vehicle, and away from adjacent street right-of-
way, so as to minimize the effects of additional signage on the property,
except for vehicles actively in transport, or in the specific act of receiving
or delivering merchandise or rendering a service. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-14-8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   General: The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Abandoned Signs: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
temporary sign installed for a period of thirty (30) days or more, or any sign
which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be
deemed to have been abandoned and shall be removed.
Permanent signs applicable to a business suspended because of a change in
ownership or management of such business shall be deemed abandoned if the
property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. An abandoned
sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of
the premises.
   C.   Removal Of Signs: Removal indicates reduction to grade. Any sign found
to be improperly maintained, abandoned or otherwise in violation of this
chapter which is not removed or repaired within thirty (30) days of written
notice of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may be removed or
repaired at the order of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
   D.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Amortization: Pursuant to this chapter, the City has determined the
amortization of nonconforming signs will promote the health, safety, welfare,
and economy of the City. All nonconforming signs shall be removed or made
conforming to the requirements of this chapter within ten (10) years of the
effective date of this amendment unless the sign is damaged, in need of repair
or a change in the name of business occurs. An ownership only change may occur
without requiring total compliance for a nonconforming sign.
      2.   Repairs: Nonconforming signs shall not be structurally enhanced or
modified so as to prolong the life of the sign, or shall not be moved in whole
or in part to another location, unless the sign is made to conform to the
regulations of this chapter. Normal maintenance of legal nonconforming signs
shall be allowed.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoration to a safe condition of a sign in accordance with an order of a
public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who
declares such a sign to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe
condition, provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the
various provisions of this chapter prohibiting the repair or restoration of
partially damaged or destroyed structures.
      3.   Elimination Of Nonconforming Pole And Wall Signs: Nonconforming pole
signs must be brought into conformance at the time of an application for site
plan approval; nonconforming wall signs must be brought into conformance in the
event of a change in use.
      4.   Termination Of Nonconforming Signs:
         a.   Termination By Abandonment: Any nonconforming sign, the use of
which is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, shall be presumed
abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished. Any period of such
discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages or
acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user,
shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for
purposes of this chapter.
         b.   Termination By Change Of Business: Any nonconforming sign
advertising or relating to a business on the premises on which it is located
shall be terminated upon any change in the nature of the business; provided,
however, such termination shall not be required if there is no change in the
name or manner in which the business is conducted and such change, ownership or
control does not require the modification or alteration of any existing sign.
         c.   Termination By Damage Or Destruction: Any nonconforming sign
damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of thirty five percent (35%)
of its replacement cost shall not be restored but shall be terminated.
         d.   Termination At End Of Ten Year Period: Nonconforming sign shall
be brought into conformance within ten (10) years of the effective date hereof,
or such signs shall be subject to removal upon the order of the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designated representative.
         e.   Exceptions: The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
the thirty four inch (34") diameter antique Chevrolet clock and the four foot
nine inch (4'9") high, six foot (6') long Chevrolet sign attached to the face
of the building located at 28W 265 Warrenville Road. This clock and sign were
originally installed in the mid to late 1930s. Due to their historical
significance, this clock and sign are hereby deemed legal nonconforming and
exempt from the amortization requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Permit Fees: The fee to be charged for permits for the construction or
erection of any sign requiring a permit shall be as follows:
      1.   Nonilluminated signs: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Temporary signs:
         a.   Large real estate and construction signs: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
         b.   Banners: Twenty five dollars ($25.00), except that the permit fee
for feather flags shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
         c.   Placard signs:
            (1)   Three (3) to fourteen (14) day increments: Twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
            (2)   Thirty (30) day increments: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
            (3)   One year increments: Four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
      3.   Grand opening signs: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      4.   Illuminated signs: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
   F.   Appeals:
      1.   Scope And Commencement Of Appeals: An appeal from the decision of
the Zoning Administrator made in interpreting this chapter may be taken to the
Zoning Board of Appeals by any person aggrieved by said decision or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the City. Such appeal shall be taken
within thirty five (35) days of the ruling by the Zoning Administrator, by
filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds
thereof, and by filing said appeal and a copy of said notice of appeal with the
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals all the
papers constituting the records upon which he made the decision from which
appeal has been taken. The notice of appeal and the appeal itself shall be
filed in such number of copies, be in such form and contain such information as
the Board may provide from time to time by general rule.
      2.   Action On Appeals: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed unless the Zoning Administrator certifies
to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with
him that, by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
proceedings shall not be stayed without a restraining order, which may be
granted by the City Council or by a court of record upon application following
notice to the Zoning Administrator, and upon due cause shown. The Board shall
select a reasonable time and place for the public hearing on the appeal, shall
give due notice thereof to the parties having a known interest therein and
shall render a written recommendation without unreasonable delay. Upon
conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make a recommendation to the City
Council with respect to the appeal. The City Council shall review the record
and the recommendation and shall make a final, binding decision with respect to
the appeal. The Council may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may
modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to that end the
Council shall have all the powers necessary to implement such decision.
      3.   Fees On Appeal/Variations: If any appeal should be taken from the
decision of the Zoning Administrator or if a variation is requested from the
literal application of the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall be
charged the cost of required newspaper publication of the notice of hearing,
public hearing fees, and transcript charges. In addition, when a variation is
requested, the applicant shall be responsible for notifying in writing by
certified mail all adjacent landowners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of
the subject property of the requested variation. Said written notice shall be
sent not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the scheduled date of the public hearing. The applicant shall be required to
post a notification sign in the front yard of the subject property stating the
type of appeal or variation requested, the scheduled date, time and location of
the hearing.
   G.   Variations:
      1.   Authorization: The City Council, after a hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals, may authorize such variations as are hereinafter set forth
from the terms of this chapter in harmony with their purpose and intent as will
not be contrary to the public interest. Variations may be authorized only when
based on findings of fact pursuant to the standards set out in subsection C of
this section, that owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical
difficulties or particular hardship.
      2.   Application For Variation: An application for a variation shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall forward a copy to the Secretary
of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The application shall contain the following
information as well as such additional information as may be prescribed by rule
of the Zoning Board:
         a.   The particular requirements of the chapter which prevent the
proposed construction;
         b.   The characteristics of the subject property which prevent
compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
         c.   The extent of the variations which would be necessary to permit
the proposed construction; and
         d.   The practical difficulty or particular hardship which would
result if said particular requirements of the chapter were applied to the
proposed construction.
      3.   Proceedings Before The Zoning Board Of Appeals: Upon receipt of an
application in proper form, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public
hearing thereon. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall examine the proposal for
variation in accordance with the following standards:
         a.   The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to
the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship which
will result if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which
is not generally applicable to signs within the district.
         b.   The alleged hardship has not been directly created by any person
having a proprietary interest in the premises.
         c.   The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood.
         d.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, increase the danger of fire or endanger the
public safety.
         e.   The proposed variation will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
         f.   The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent
of this chapter.
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make a recommendation to the
City Council with respect to the variation, which recommendation shall include
preliminary findings of fact specifying the reasons for making the variation
and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans which have been made part of
the application or which were introduced at the public hearing as evidence.
Such exhibits shall remain part of the permanent record. The terms of relief
recommended shall be specifically set forth in conclusions or statements
separate from the findings of fact.
      4.   Action By The City Council: The City Council shall review the
record, the preliminary findings, and the recommendation and shall make a
final, binding decision with respect to the variation. The Council may accept
or reject, in whole or in part, or may modify the recommendation and findings
of the Board, and may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
construction and design as may be necessary or appropriate to comply with the
foregoing standards and to protect adjacent property and property values, and
to that end the Council shall have all the powers necessary to implement such
decision.
   H.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter except
for the placard sign provisions identified in subsection
8-14-6B2e of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. Any person who violates any provision of subsection 8-14-6B2e
of this chapter shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00). Any person who
violates any provision of subsection
 8-14-6B2e of this chapter a second time shall, upon conviction, be fined
seventy five dollars ($75.00). Any person who violates any provision of
subsection
8-14-6B2e of this chapter a third time shall, upon conviction, be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall have their temporary placard sign permit
privileges revoked for a one year period. Every day that a violation of this
chapter shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee shall be primarily responsible for issuing
violation notices for signs not conforming with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2020-34, 9-21-2020)
8-14-9: DEFINITIONS:
The following general definitions shall apply for the purpose of this chapter:
   ATTENTION GETTING DEVICES: Any pennant, banners, propeller, spinner,
streamer, string of lights, searchlight, balloon, or similar device or
ornamentation.
   AWNING: An overhead cover that is temporary in nature and that projects from
the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from
the elements.
   AWNING SIGN: A permanent sign affixed to or painted on an awning.
   BACKSTOP SIGN: A temporary sign constructed of a durable all weather surface
material with hemmed edges and metal grommets and attached to baseball field
backstop walls, which is used to advertise special community events and/or to
recognize field, event or organization sponsors.
   BANNER: A temporary sign made of cloth or a similar durable all weather
material used for a specific time period to advertise a short term special or
sale.
   BULLETIN BOARD: A permanent sign with a changeable copy area designed to
give information about, and accessibility to, a public, charitable, educational
or religious institution located on the lot.
   BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to an
entertainment offered, on premises where the sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
   CAMPAIGN SIGN: Temporary signs announcing candidates seeking public office
or expressing political issues for which an election will be held.
   CANOPY: Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving its
support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected
structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the
elements.
   CANOPY SIGN: A permanent sign affixed to or painted on a canopy.
   COMMUNITY SERVICE ORGANIZATION: An entity, no part of the income of which is
distributable to its members, directors, or officers and whose principal
purpose is to provide services, financial assistance, or personnel for the
benefit of the residents of the City of Warrenville.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign used to advertise the company or
companies involved in the construction of a specific structure or announcing a
future occupant at a particular location.
   EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY SIGN: A temporary sign displayed on private property
for the purpose of advertising employment opportunities available in the City
of Warrenville.
   ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and
including the painting of wall signs.
   FEATHER FLAG BANNER SIGN: A temporary banner sign installed on a single post
and manufactured of lightweight material designed to move with the wind.
   FLASHING SIGNS: Signs with moving lights, changing graphics, animation,
moving or rotating elements or devices which otherwise create the illusion of
movement.
   GARAGE SALE SIGN: A temporary sign used to advertise the sale of secondhand
merchandise from the garage or driveway of a residence.
   GASOLINE PRICE SIGN: A sign advertising price of gasoline for sale on the
same lot where the sign is located.
   GOVERNMENTAL REQUIRED SIGNS: Permanent signs required by law or governmental
order, rule or regulation such as handicapped parking and exit signs.
   GOVERNMENTAL SAFETY/DIRECTIONAL SIGNAGE: Permanent or temporary signs
installed under the authority of a duly constituted governmental body to
regulate traffic, parking, swimming, dumping, etc.
   GRADE, FINISHED: The final City approved elevation of the ground surface
after development. Such elevation shall not include increased elevations
associated with any manmade berm, landscape bed, or mound that has been created
for the primary purpose of elevating the height of a ground sign.
   GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state,
before manmade alterations.
   GRAND OPENING SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the opening of a new
business not previously located on the premises, or the reopening of an
established business which has been severely damaged by catastrophe and has
been closed for at least sixty (60) consecutive days for renovation.
   GROUND SIGN: A sign self-supported by posts or other supports independent of
any building or structure.
   HANGING SIGN: A "business sign" suspended below an awning or canopy.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs
or an outline illuminated internally or externally by electric lights or
luminous tubes.
   LEGAL NOTICE: A temporary sign installed to notify the general public of the
date, time, and location of a public hearing scheduled to review a zoning or
related request.
   LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion
of a lot extends into an abutting street or alley the lot line shall be deemed
to be established at the existing street or alley right-of-way line.
   LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: Any street line that is not a front lot line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: A. The only street line bordering a lot, or
   B.   Otherwise, if the lot is a through lot, every street line, or
   C.   Otherwise, if the lot is a corner lot:
      1.   The shortest street line.
      2.   Otherwise, if more than one street line is the shortest:
a. The lot line designated as the front lot line on a plat of dedication or
plat of subdivision.
b. Otherwise, the lot line designated as the front lot line by the Zoning
Administrator, or
   D.   Otherwise, if the lot is fully or partially landlocked, the lot line
that faces the access to the lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line which is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
   MEMORIAL SIGN: A permanent sign memorializing the life of an individual
person or a historic event.
   MESSAGE BOARD: A sign face designed to readily accept individual changeable
copy letters or to utilize electronic means of changing copy and typically used
to convey information about a sale, promotion, or special event being offered
by the business advertising on such sign.
   MOVING SIGN: Any sign, all or part of which moves, rotates or gives the
illusion of movement.
   OFF SITE ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign which directs attention to any promotion,
business, commodity, service, enterprise or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at a location other than the lot on which the sign is located; or a
sign which directs attention to a business that is no longer conducted or to a
product that is no longer sold on the lot on which the sign is located.
   OPEN HOUSE SIGN: A temporary sign typically used in conjunction with a small
real estate sign to inform prospective buyers that a specific structure is open
and available for public inspection.
   PARKING LOT REGULATION SIGN: A permanent sign used to convey the conditions
of use of a parking lot.
   PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign which is not a temporary sign, and which is
designed to be in compliance with articles 16, 18, 19 and 21 of the BOCA
National Building Code/1993.
   PLACARD SIGN: A temporary sign made of cardboard, lightweight plastic, or
similar material, mounted out of doors and intended to be used during a sale,
promotion, or special event.
   POLE SIGN: A sign mounted on a pole or other support in a manner where the
bottom edge of the face of the sign is seven feet (7') or more from grade.
   PORTABLE SIGN: A sign, with or without changeable copy, readily capable of
being moved from one location to another location and commonly attached to a
trailer.
   PROJECT DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCE MONUMENT SIGN: A ground sign used to improve,
identify, designate, label, or demarcate the main entrance into a subdivision
development two (2) acres in size or larger.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising a property for sale or for
lease.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN/NAMEPLATE: A sign on the front wall
of a residential building indicating the name and/or address of each occupant,
professional status and/or name of permitted home occupation business.
   RESTAURANT MENU BOARD: A permanent sign typically used to display and
identify those products sold within a restaurant to drive- through customers.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon a building or structure which extends over
the roofline of a building.
   SEASONAL DECORATIONS: Decorations customarily displayed on a national,
state, local or religious holiday. This shall not include any type of signage
either prohibited by this chapter or requiring a permit under this chapter.
   SIGN: A display, emblem, device or structure used to identify or advertise a
business, product, service, event, institution, organization, location or
individual.
   SMALL CONVENIENCE SIGN: A sign displayed on private property for the
convenience of the general public, including signs identifying restrooms,
freight entrances, parking areas, parking lot directional signs and the like.
   SPECIAL EVENTS SIGN: A temporary sign displayed for special community or
charitable events sponsored by a governmental entity, religious institution,
school, and/or other not for profit or community service organization.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign or advertising display constructed of
weatherproofed material, with or without a frame, which shall not be displayed
for more than thirty (30) days.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no significant part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicles.
   USE: The purpose or activity for which land or structures thereon are
designed, arranged, or intended or for which they are occupied or maintained.
   USE, PERMITTED: A use allowable generally within a zoning district without a
special use permit.
   VEHICLE SIGN: A sign either temporarily or permanently affixed to a vehicle
that is not being used for the purpose of transporting persons or materials, is
not in the specific act of receiving or delivering merchandise or rendering a
service, and is parked in a manner and location where the apparent purpose is
to advertise a product or service, or to direct attention to a business or
activity located on the same or another property.
   VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: A triangular area located at the at grade
intersection of streets, railroads, driveways, or any combination thereof,
formed by the centerlines of driving lanes on the streets and driveways or the
center of the railroad tracks with the length of these two (2) legs defined by
the table and illustration provided in section 10.B.7 of the zoning ordinance
of the City, and by a straight line between the ends of these two (2) legs.
   WALL FRONT: The wall of a building which is nearest to, and most nearly
parallel to, the front lot line of the lot on which the building is located.
   WALL SIGN: A sign attached to a wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes merely the supporting structure, or in which the
wall forms the background surface.
   WINDOW SIGN: Any permanent sign painted, goldleafed or attached onto the
glass area or installed behind a window or in a showcase intended for viewing
through the window from outside of the premises. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 15
ADDRESS NUMBERING SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-15-1: County Numbering System Adopted
8-15-2: Assignment Of Numbers
8-15-1: COUNTY NUMBERING SYSTEM ADOPTED:
The established numbering system of DuPage County is hereby adopted as the
official numbering system of the City. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-15-2: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
Numbers will be assigned by the Director of Community and Economic Development
or his/her designee. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
CHAPTER 16
FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES
SECTION:
8-16-1: Definitions
8-16-2: Discrimination In Real Estate Transactions Prohibited
8-16-3: Complaint Procedures
8-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning respectively assigned to them:
   FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
18 years) being domiciled with:
   A.   A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals; or
   B.   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protections afforded by this chapter against discrimination on the basis of
familial status apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS: Any improved or unimproved real property, or part
thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
   LEASE: Sub-lease, assignment, and rent (or rental) and includes any contract
to do any of the foregoing.
   LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans
or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying
loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or
a security interest in real property, but shall not include any religious
institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization
operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization.
   NATIONAL ORIGIN: National origin and ancestors.
   OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title
to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property.
   PURCHASE: Any contract to purchase.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN: A person, whether licensed or not, who, for
or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases,
exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out as
engaged in these.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The sale, exchange, rental or lease of real
property and also includes the brokering or appraising of residential real
property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
   A.   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling; or
   B.   Secured by residential real estate.
   REAL PROPERTY: Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
   SALE: Any contract to sell, exchange or convey, transfer or assign legal or
equitable title to or beneficial interest in real property.
   SOLICITATION: Any conduct designed or intended to induce the owner of any
real property to sell, rent, exchange, convey, transfer or list for sale or
rental such real property. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-16-2: DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No owner, lessee, or sublessee of real property, real estate broker or
salesman, lender, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any of the
foregoing, shall discriminate against any person because of that person's race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical
or mental handicap, familial status, or unfavorable discharge from military
service with respect to any real estate transaction.
   B.   Any act of discrimination in a real estate transaction shall be
considered an unfair housing practice, including but not limited to the
following:
      1.   Refusal to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or
discriminate in making available such a transaction.
      2.   Altering the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate
transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith.
      3.   Refusal to receive or failure to transmit a bona fide offer to
engage in a real estate transaction from a person.
      4.   Refusal to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
      5.   Representing to a person that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or failure
to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or refusal to permit him
or her to inspect real property.
      6.   Printing, circulating, posting, mailing, publishing or causing to be
published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or using a form
of application for a real estate transaction, or making a record in inquiry in
connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which expresses any
limitation founded upon, or indicating, directly or indirectly an intent to
engage in unlawful discrimination.
      7.   Offering, soliciting, accepting, using or retaining a listing of
real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on
the basis of familial status in a real estate transaction is intended.
      8.   Soliciting for sale, leasing, listing or purchasing any residential
real estate within the City on the grounds of loss of value due to the present
or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
age, sex, marital status, familial status, or handicap.
      9.   Distributing or causing to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in this City
to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective
changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex,
marital status, familial status or handicap of residents in the vicinity of the
property involved.
      10.   Intentionally creating alarm, among residents of any community, by
transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether
or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of
residential real estate in this City to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property
involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status, familial status or
handicap.
      11.   Discriminating or participating in discrimination in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repairs or maintenance of any real property in
the City. For the purpose of this subsection, discrimination in lending shall
include:
         a.   Refusal to make loans; or
         b.   Differentiation in the type of loans, including interest rates,
charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan; or
         c.   Influencing appraisals in connection with loans; or
         d.   Delaying processing loan applications. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-16-3: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
   A.   The City shall act as a local source for assistance and information for
persons who have complaints related to unfair housing practices.
   B.   The City shall provide assistance and information to any such person,
which shall include but is not limited to:
      1.   The rights and remedies available to a person who has been
discriminated against by virtue of an unfair housing practice;
      2.   The types of discrimination which are considered to be unfair
housing practices;
      3.   The names, addresses and phone numbers of County, State and Federal
agencies where such person may file formal complaints; and
      4.   Such other relevant information or assistance as the City may have
available to assist such person.
   C.   The City Administrator shall be responsible for coordinating and
directing the City's fair housing procedures. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 17
HOURS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-17-1: Restrictions
8-17-1: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Outdoor Building Construction: It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct any outdoor construction of buildings or structures or to operate any
construction equipment between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. Monday through Friday. Such activity shall be prohibited
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
Saturday and Sunday and Federal holidays. Exceptions to this prohibition may be
allowed by the City Administrator in the event of emergency situations or with
respect to work conducted by public agencies to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
   B.   Lawn Maintenance: It shall be unlawful to operate any powered lawn,
tree or landscaping equipment within three hundred feet (300') of any
residential property between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. Monday through Friday and between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday and Federal holidays.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 18
ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGE AND DETECTION
SECTION:
8-18-1: Definitions And Interpretation
8-18-2: Minimum Requirements
8-18-3: Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges
8-18-4: Prohibition Of Illicit Connections
8-18-5: Industrial Activity Discharges
8-18-6: Notification Of Spills
8-18-7: Enforcement; Violations
8-18-8: Notice To Correct Violations; Administrator May Take Action
8-18-9: Emergency Cease And Desist Orders
8-18-10: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
8-18-11: Fines
8-18-12: Remedies Not Exclusive
8-18-13: Right To Appeal
8-18-14: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
8-18-15: Most Restrictive Provisions Apply
8-18-1: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings set forth herein, except where otherwise specifically
indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by
common dictionary definition.
   ADMINISTRATOR: The Director of Community and Economic Development or his
designee shall be the Stormwater Management Ordinance Administrator of the City
of Warrenville.
   BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly
aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes
manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground
portions of the structure.
   CITY: The City of Warrenville.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC
section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   COMMITTEE: The Oversight Committee of the City of Warrenville, which shall
be comprised of the Mayor and City Council.
   COMMUNITY: The City of Warrenville.
   COUNTY: The County of DuPage, Illinois.
   DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
   FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a
particular purpose.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material which may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION: Either of the following:
      1.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community, or
      2.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in section
8-18-3 of this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater
permits as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
   LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two (2)
or more points.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, Municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used
for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA)
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
   NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt in the tributary
drainage basin.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois Environmental Protection Agency notice of
intent for new or renewal of general permit ILR 40 for discharges from small
Municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4).
   PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any
other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns
of such entity.
   pH NEUTRAL: Having a pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
   PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage
County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.
   POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas.
   RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a
tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that basin.
   SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually
conveyed by sewers.
   SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as
from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers.
   SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems,
Municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
   STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure"
includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads,
sidewalks, and concrete patios.
   WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by
a wastewater treatment facility.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United
States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal
waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United
States". Generally, "waters of the United States" include the following:
      1.   All interstate waters;
      2.   Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
      3.   Tributaries of the above;
      4.   Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
      5.   Wetlands adjacent to all the above. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd.
Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
      2.   Words used in the singular number include the plural number, and
words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
      3.   The words "shall", "will" and "must" are mandatory, not permissive.
   C.   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative
of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws,
codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any
subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions
of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict
with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations,
and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their
fullest application. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from
any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the City, unless
explicitly exempted by subsection
8-18-3C of this chapter, including any amendments or revisions thereto. The
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and
general welfare and the environment of the residents of the City, and to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and enabling legislation. Where the
conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive
or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable
statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most
restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements shall apply. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-3: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow
others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the
storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in
subsection C of this section.
   B.   The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system
shall be prohibited:
      1.   Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or
snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4.
      2.   Discharges containing litter or debris.
      3.   Discharges from an illicit connection.
   C.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect on water
quality as determined by the Administrator:
      1.   Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater
management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all
applicable regulations. This may include, but is not limited to, water line
flushing, storm sewer cleaning, and dechlorinated and pH neutral discharges
from potable water reservoirs.
      2.   Discharges caused by firefighting and emergency services activities.
      3.   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic and/or hazardous
materials have not occurred, unless all toxic and/or hazardous materials have
been removed.
      4.   Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any
nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or
IEPA.
      5.   Diverted stream flows.
      6.   Uncontaminated groundwater.
      7.   Discharges of uncontaminated, dechlorinated and pH neutral water
from swimming pools, foundation drains, sump pumps, air conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn
watering, landscape irrigation, flows from riparian habitats, natural springs
and wetlands, gardening and building and pavement washing when detergents are
not used.
      8.   Discharges from individual residential car washing, and car washing
associated with fundraising for community and charitable organizations.
      9.   Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity
shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification
to the City at least two (2) full business days prior to the test date.
      10.   Other discharges approved by the City as being substantially like
any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-
2017)
8-18-4: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
   A.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
   B.   A person shall be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a
line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
   C.   Connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the
sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City and the appropriate sanitary
treatment facility.
   D.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4, shall
be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the City requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of
the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer
system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the City. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-5: INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
   A.   Any person operating a facility subject to an industrial activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI)
to the City at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent
to the IEPA, as applicable.
   B.   The copy of the notice of intent shall be delivered to the City either
in person or by mailing it to: (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
City of Warrenville
Director of Community and Economic Development
3S258 Manning Avenue
Warrenville, IL 60555
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
   C.   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the City. (Ord. O2017-38,
6-19-2017)
8-18-6: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
   A.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for
emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected
release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
      1.   In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify the appropriate emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services and in accordance with Illinois
Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
      2.   In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the IEPA and the City in person or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail
no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall
be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the IEPA, and the City
within three (3) business days of the phone notice.
      3.   If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an onsite written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5)
years.
   B.   Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in
subsection A of this section shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable
fines set forth in section
8-18-11 of this chapter.
   C.   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-7: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The Administrator shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   A person violates this chapter when that person:
      1.   Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this
chapter; or
      2.   Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any
provision of this chapter or of any order or notice issued by the
Administrator; or
      3.   Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this
chapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the
control of such person; or
      4.   Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act
expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter, or to maintain or
continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this
chapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first
person. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-8: NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS; ADMINISTRATOR MAY TAKE ACTION:
   A.   The Administrator may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to
take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or to
cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this chapter.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and
order to comply shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      1.   The Administrator shall determine the form and content of any
notices issued under this chapter.
      2.   The Administrator, in his discretion, may issue a warning of
violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If a person fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of a warning, the Administrator may, thereafter, issue a notice of
violation. Prior notice shall not be required in the case of an emergency, as
determined by the Administrator, in his reasonable discretion.
   B.   If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section,
the Administrator may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any
legal proceeding authorized by this chapter, under the law or equity, necessary
to enforce any provision of this chapter and/or to protect public health and
safety. Any legal action brought under this chapter shall be in the name of the
City of Warrenville. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-9: EMERGENCY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
   A.   When the City finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that
the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the
MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States which reasonably
appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, the City may issue an emergency order
to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the violator to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   B.   Any person notified of an emergency order under this section shall
immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the
event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
emergency order, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United
States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
Municipal utility services. The City may allow the person to recommence its
discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the City within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the emergency
order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-10: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a threat to public health and safety
and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.
   B.   Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the
Administrator may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the
nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
      1.   In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the
Administrator, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the
Administrator may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or
equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said
situation. The Administrator may take such action without having to first issue
a notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent
for, such premises where the nuisance is located, or waiting for such person(s)
to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the Administrator.
      2.   In all other cases, the Administrator may notify, in writing, the
person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the
nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such
nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or
refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Administrator may
direct that appropriate proceedings commence to compel the abatement, or
removal, of such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this
chapter and/or authorizing the City to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance.
The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other
remedies provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the City for any costs
incurred by the City or County to effect such abatement, or removal, including
reasonable attorney fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-11: FINES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) each day, or any portion of a day, during which such violation is
committed, continued, or permitted, and every day on which a violation of this
chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-12: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
   A.   In addition to the penalties otherwise provided in this chapter, any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The City shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for a reconsideration and
hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
City. In emergency situations, the City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons,
or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to public health and safety.
   B.   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedy available under this chapter or under any applicable Federal, State or
local law and shall include injunctive relief. These remedies do not supersede
or limit any and all other penalties provided by law. The Administrator may
seek, at his discretion, cumulative remedies. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-13: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
   A.   Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the
Administrator. The Administrator may delegate the hearing of appeals to the
Oversight Committee of the City of Warrenville in the manner provided for
below.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the
Administrator, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this
chapter may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the
Administrator shall be made within seven (7) days of the decision contested,
excepting an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine
or penalty in which cases an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes
thirty (30) days past due.
      1.   The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved
notifies the Administrator, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of
the Administrator. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating
the following:
         a.   Identifying the decision of the Administrator which such person
is appealing and how this chapter has been misread, misinterpreted, or
misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes
the Administrator to have relied upon.
         b.   The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of the
person making the request, which contact information shall be used for giving
notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all
written materials which he or she intends to rely upon in support of the
request.
      2.   The Administrator may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief
sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner
provided in this section.
      3.   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by
the Administrator in accordance with this section, the Administrator shall set
a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than fourteen (14)
days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date that the Administrator
receives such notice of appeal unless the Administrator and party requesting
the hearing agree to a different schedule. The Administrator shall notify the
person making the appeal of the date of such hearing.
      4.   At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in person or
be represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision
concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person
making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based.
   C.   The Oversight Committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or
affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the Administrator made
pursuant to this chapter upon appeal brought by the person aggrieved within
seven (7) days after the date of the Administrator's decision. The review by
the Oversight Committee shall be based upon the record presented to the
Administrator. The Oversight Committee shall not act in a manner that would
violate or in any way conflict with any Federal or State standard or
requirement. The Oversight Committee may adopt such additional rules and
procedures as it deems appropriate for performing such matters. (Ord. O2017-38,
6-19-2017)
8-18-14: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7)
days of the decision of the Administrator or committee upholding the decision
of the Administrator, then representatives of the City are authorized to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the City from commencing a
legal action seeking emergency relief. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-18-15: MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative
of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws,
codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any
subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions
of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict
with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations,
and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their
fullest application.
   B.   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this
chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is
more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall control.
   C.   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards. Therefore, this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 19
VACANT BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-19-1: Declaration Of Policy
8-19-2: Other Ordinances
8-19-3: Definitions
8-19-4: Vacant Building Determination
8-19-5: Registration Of Vacant Buildings
8-19-6: Vacant Building Plan
8-19-7: Vacant Building Inspections
8-19-8: Certification Of Compliance
8-19-9: Time Restrictions; Boarding Vacant Buildings
8-19-10: Appeals
8-19-11: Enforcement And Penalties
8-19-12: Other Enforcement
8-19-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by enactment of this chapter which:
   A.   Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation
of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this
chapter;
   B.   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings; and
   C.   Provides for administration, enforcement of property regulations,
including prevention and abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of
penalties.
This chapter shall be construed liberally to affect its purposes. (Ord. O2017-
38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations that prescribe
standards other than those provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the
most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
   BOARDED BUILDING: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be
temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors that were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some
material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from
the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
   BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering
any occupancy.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure that is
dangerous, in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty
construction; unsecure; vacant and the doors, windows, or other openings are
boarded up or secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the
design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type;
damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse
or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of Community and Economic Development or the
Director's designee.
   HABITABLE: Interior building spaces that comply with the general standards,
plumbing facilities and fixture requirements, mechanical and electrical
requirements, and fire safety requirements of the City of Warrenville Property
Maintenance Code.
   OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
State, County, or Municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structure thereon.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE: A. The physical condition, or uses of any building,
structure or premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this Code; or
   B.   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises, structure,
building or appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations,
and unsafe fences or structures; or
   C.   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
   D.   Any building designated by the Director as unfit for human habitation
or use; or
   E.   Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure so as to endanger life, limb or property; or
   F.   Any building or premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with
rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
   G.   Any building or structure defined as a "dangerous building" herein.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the Director pursuant to authority
granted to him by section 104 of the International Building Code and section
104 of the International Residential Code adopted by this title. In determining
whether a building is "unoccupied", the Director may consider these factors,
among others:
   A.   A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business
activity has ceased.
   B.   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied
space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall be
considered.
   C.   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and
value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
   D.   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or
natural gas.
   E.   The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent" or
similar signage.
   F.   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected Code violations.
   VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
   A.   Unoccupied and subject of a mortgage foreclosure action; or
   B.   Unoccupied and unsecured; or
   C.   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or
   D.   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
   E.   Unoccupied and designated unfit for human occupancy by the Director
pursuant to applicable provisions of this Code; or
   F.   Unoccupied and has multiple Code violations; or
   G.   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; or
   H.   Condemned by the Director and unlawfully occupied; or
   I.   Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty (180) days and during which time
the Director has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same
have not been corrected in a Code compliant manner; or
   J.   Unoccupied for over two (2) years.
But not including: Unoccupied buildings which are actively undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
8-19-4: VACANT BUILDING DETERMINATION:
   A.   General: Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this
chapter, the Director shall evaluate all buildings in the City he believes to
be unoccupied on the effective date of this chapter and make a determination
for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning
of this chapter. For buildings the Director determines to be "vacant
buildings", s/he shall, within seven (7) days of making such determination,
send a written notice of determination with the factual findings to the last
taxpayer of record listed on the most recent DuPage County tax roll. Said
notice of determination shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested.
Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter.
   B.   Notice Contents: The notice of determination shall contain a statement
of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant
building, a copy of the registration form the owner is required to file
pursuant to section
8-19-5 of this chapter and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the
determination. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-5: REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS:
   A.   General: The owner or mortgage lender who has acquired title to a
vacant building shall register the building with the Director, on a form
provided by the Director and pay the required nonprorated vacant building
registration and initial inspection fee. The form shall include, as a minimum,
the name, street address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner; the
case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the
building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, e-mail
address, and telephone number of all persons and financial institutions/lenders
with any legal financial interest in the building or the premises. The form
shall require the owner to identify a natural person twenty one (21) years of
age or older who maintains a permanent address in DuPage County, Illinois, to
accept service on behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the Director
sends pursuant to this chapter or service of process in any proceeding
commenced to enforce any provision of this chapter, and file with the Director
on the registration form, the name, street address, e-mail address, telephone
number, of said person. A street address is required. A post office box is not
an acceptable address.
The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance of notice
by posting", consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent,
pursuant to this chapter, by posting on the building if the owner fails to
renew the registration, if required, or maintain as current with the Director
the information required regarding the person designated to accept notice and
service of process.
The obligation to register vacant buildings shall extend to mortgage lenders
that have obtained title to unoccupied buildings through a mortgage foreclosure
action. Mortgage lenders shall register unoccupied buildings with the Director
within fifteen (15) days of obtaining title to same.
Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it preclude any of the
actions the City is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in
this Code.
   B.   Renewal And Amended Registration Requirements: The owner of a vacant
building shall renew the vacant building registration each year no later than
the anniversary date of the first registration filing; and file an amended
registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information
contained in the annual registration. A new registration is required for any
change in ownership whatsoever.
   C.   Fees: The initial vacant building registration and inspection fee shall
be one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00). The annual renewal registration
fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). There is no charge to update the
owner's registration information. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-6: VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
   A.   Contents Of Plan: At the time a building is registered as required
herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain
the following as a minimum:
      1.   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured or covered by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings
being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by
methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed. The
owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the
building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy.
      2.   For buildings and/or premises which are determined by the Director
as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section
8-19-3 of this chapter, then the vacant building/premises plan shall contain a
plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
      3.   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the Director.
      4.   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, the owner
shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
      5.   A plan of action to maintain the building and/or premises thereof in
conformance with this chapter.
      6.   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date that
the building will be made both habitable and either: a) occupied or b) offered
for occupancy or c) offered for sale. The time schedule shall include date(s)
of commencement and completion of all actions required to achieve habitability.
In the case of a vacant boarded building, no plan which fails to provide for
compliance with this chapter or, which will not, as reasonably determined by
the Director, achieve such compliance within three (3) months shall be
approved.
In the case of a vacant, unboarded building, the exterior of which is Code
compliant, no plan which fails to provide for compliance with this chapter or,
which will not, as reasonably determined by the Director, achieve such
compliance within two (2) years shall be approved; provided, however, the
Director may approve an extension of the time during which the building will be
unoccupied beyond two (2) years to a date certain, but then only based upon
clear and documented evidence of good cause shown by the owner, as determined
by the Director in the Director's reasonable discretion.
   B.   Premises; Building Exterior: All premises upon which vacant buildings
are located, and the building exteriors, shall at all times be maintained in
compliance with this Code. In addition, in the event of snow, the owner of a
vacant commercial building shall maintain a plowed path, not less than thirty
feet (30') wide, from the adjacent street to the building's main entrance (or
front door) and to any fire district connection located on the side of the
building.
   C.   Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be maintained in conformance
with City property maintenance and zoning ordinances.
   D.   Ground Floor Windows: All ground floor windows facing street frontage,
including, but not limited to, all display windows in unoccupied or vacant
commercial buildings, shall be kept in a well maintained condition. All ground
floor windows facing street frontage, except display windows in unoccupied or
vacant commercial buildings, shall be covered on the interior side in a
professionally finished manner with an opaque window covering material
manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Director.
   E.   Fire Alarm And Sprinkler Systems: All vacant commercial buildings must
maintain in working order all fire alarm and fire sprinkler systems, maintain
the heat on and set at a minimum of forty two degrees (42°), keep current all
building access keys in the knox box, and post roof/truss indicators on the
exterior of the building.
   F.   Review And Approval Of Plan: The Director shall review and approve the
proposed vacant building plan if it satisfies the standards below. The Director
shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his or her approval or
denial of the proposed vacant building plan. In considering the appropriateness
of a vacant building plan, the Director shall include the following in his or
her consideration. All denial notices issued by the Director shall identify the
reason(s) the proposed vacant building plan is not consistent with the
following standards:
      1.   The purposes of this chapter and intent of the City Council to
minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
      2.   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining
property.
      3.   The length of time the building has been vacant.
      4.   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
      5.   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or
ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.
   G.   Failure To Obtain Or Comply With Approved Vacant Building Plan: Failure
to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration
form, failure to submit a revised plan within fifteen (15) days of the date of
the Director's written denial of a proposed plan, or failure to comply with the
approved plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the owner
of the building to penalties as provided in this chapter and to any remedies
the City may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in this Code,
including, but not limited to, an action to compel correction of Health or Fire
Code violations. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-7: VACANT BUILDING INSPECTIONS:
   A.   General: The City shall conduct a Code compliance inspection of the
interior of the vacant building. Such inspection will determine the extent of
compliance with City Property Maintenance and Fire Codes. The City shall send
the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days. Periodic
reinspections shall take place, as necessary, until Code compliance is
achieved. Timely Code compliance is required.
   B.   Fees: The one hundred seventy five dollar ($175.00) initial
registration and inspection fee shall cover the initial compliance inspection
and one reinspection. The City will charge the owner a seventy five dollar
($75.00) reinspection fee for the second and any additional reinspections
necessary to confirm compliance has been achieved. The owner shall pay the
reinspection fee to the City within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill for
the same. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-8: CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE:
A certificate of compliance with this vacant buildings chapter issued by the
Director and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this chapter are
required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-
2017)
8-19-9: TIME RESTRICTIONS; BOARDING VACANT BUILDINGS:
It is the policy of the City that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent
unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a
public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than three (3)
months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the
Director. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-10: APPEALS:
The manner of appeal of the Director's determination or decision under this
chapter shall be found in section
6-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
The enforcement and penalties for violation(s) of any provision of this chapter
shall be found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The City may enforce this chapter within its administrative
adjudication system or through the court system. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
8-19-12: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the City to
demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this chapter, this Code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 20
FEES AND PENALTIES REGARDING CHAPTERS 1 - 10; BONDS
SECTION:
8-20-1: Fees
8-20-2: Payment Of County Impact Fees
8-20-3: Penalties
8-20-4: Bond Required, Building Permit Issuance
8-20-1: FEES:
   A.   Plan Review Fees: All plan review fees shall be non-refundable.
      1.   Single Family Residential: When the term “single family residential”
is used, it shall refer to the construction, alteration, repair or enlargement
of detached single family residences, duplexes, and their related structures.
      The plan review fee is set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
      2.   Attached Single Family/Multiple Family And Commercial: When the term
“attached single family/multiple family” is used, it shall refer to the
construction, repair or enlargement of attached single family residences
containing more than two (2) dwelling units, townhomes, condominiums,
apartments and their related structures.
      When the term “commercial” is used, it shall refer to the construction,
repair or enlargement of commercial, office, industrial, warehouse and
institutional buildings and their related structures.
      The plan review fee is set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
      3.   Preliminary Commercial Plan Review Fees: When requested in writing
by a potential building permit applicant, the City will perform a preliminary
review of incomplete commercial construction drawing for a fee as set forth in
the annual fee ordinance. Preliminary plan reviews will not be performed unless
the City receives a written commitment from the individual or firm requesting
the preliminary plan review that they will promptly reimburse the City for its
review fee costs. The City’s written preliminary plan review report will not be
provided to the potential building permit applicant until the City is
reimbursed for the staff time spent performing the preliminary review.
   B.   Building Fees: Unless otherwise specified, building fees shall be as
set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The total valuation of a proposed
structure shall be calculated by multiplying the total square feet of
construction (based on exterior dimensions) by the per square feet value of
construction outlined in the annual fee ordinance.
   The total valuation of attached single family/multiple family, and
commercial related construction used in the annual fee ordinance shall be
determined using the following schedule:
 
Type Of Construction                                                           Value Of
                                                                               Construction
                                                                               The mean
                                                                               square foot
                                                                               value of
                                                                               construction
                                                                               in the Chicago
New completely finished attached single family/multiple family, and commercial metro region
construction and additions (based on exterior dimensions of outside walls of   as established
all usable space)                                                              by the most
                                                                               recently
                                                                               published RS
                                                                               Means
                                                                               Construction
                                                                               Cost Data
                                                                               handbook
                                                                               1/2 of the
                                                                               mean square
                                                                               foot value of
                                                                               construction
                                                                               in the Chicago
                                                                               metro region
Shell and core commercial construction (based on exterior dimensions of        as established
outside walls of all usable space)                                             by the most
                                                                               recently
                                                                               published RS
                                                                               Means
                                                                               Construction
                                                                               Cost Data
                                                                               handbook
                                                                               1/2 of the
                                                                               mean square
                                                                               foot value of
                                                                               construction
                                                                               in the Chicago
                                                                               metro region
Interior “build-out” of unfinished shell and core commercial construction  as established
(based on exterior dimensions of outside walls of all usable space)            by the most
                                                                               recently
                                                                               published RS
                                                                               Means
                                                                               Construction
                                                                               Cost Data
                                                                               handbook
Accessory structures                                                           $25.00/square
                                                                               foot
                                                                               Based on cost
                                                                               of
Remodeling of existing occupied space                                          construction
                                                                               (documentation
                                                                               required)
 
   C.   Plumbing Fees: Plumbing fees shall be as set forth in the annual fee
ordinance.
   D.   Electrical Fees: Electrical fees shall be as set forth in the annual
fee ordinance.
   E.   Miscellaneous Permit Fees: The fees for miscellaneous permits are as
set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   Permits for work commenced without a permit: Where it is found that any
excavation, filling, construction, alteration, expansion, removal or demolition
has commenced without the prior securing of required permits, the basic permit
fee shall be double the normal fee.
   “Quick start” foundation only building permit: When specifically authorized
by the Warrenville City Council, the building official may issue a “quick
start” foundation only building permit prior to the issuance of a full building
permit. Said quick start foundation only building permit shall authorize
excavation and concrete work directly related to the installation of a building
foundation. Until a full building permit is issued, any work performed under a
quick start foundation only building permit shall be performed at the sole risk
of the building permit applicant. The issuance of a quick start foundation only
building permit shall in no way imply or guaranty City of Warrenville approval
of a full building permit. The fee for a quick start foundation only building
permit shall be assessed as a 15% surcharge to the estimated building fee
portion of the full building permit.
   F.   Reinspection Fees: If an inspection has been scheduled and, in the
opinion of the building official after arrival on the inspection site, the job
is not ready or has not progressed to a point where an inspection can be made
properly or access is not possible to perform the inspection, a re-inspection
fee may be charged as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. No further
inspection shall be made until such time as the re-inspection fee has been
paid.
   G.   Elevator Inspection Fees: The fees for elevator inspections are as set
forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   H.   Certificate Of Occupancy Fees: The fees for certificates of occupancy
are as set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   I.   Bonds: Cash performance bonds shall be required based on the schedule
set forth in the annual fee ordinance, refundable upon compliance with all
applicable City of Warrenville ordinances.
   J.   Miscellaneous:
      1.   Non-Collectable Funds: If it is later determined that any funds paid
to obtain a permit are not collectable, said permit may be rescinded and any
work under construction shall be stopped by the building official until all
funds are collected and a processing fee as set forth in the annual fee
ordinance is paid to the Building Division. Re-collected funds and processing
fees shall be paid by cashier’s check, certified check, money order or cash.
      2.   Permit Refunds: Available only when no work has been started. Refund
amount is equal to total permit fee less plan review fee less the office
processing fee set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
      3.   Bond Refunds: After the construction, alteration, removal or
demolition at the building site has been completed, and, a certificate of
occupancy (if applicable) has been issued, any holder of a permit may apply to
the building official for a return of any unused portion of a cash bond or
other security deposit. The building official shall direct the City Finance
Director to refund to the holder of the permit any unused portion of the cash
bond or other security deposit, without interest. Provided, however, that, for
each year after the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion has
been issued and the cash bond or other security deposit remains unclaimed, an
administrative fee shall be charged by the City in an amount equal to twenty
percent (20%) of the original amount of the unclaimed cash bond or other
security deposit.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
8-20-2: PAYMENT OF COUNTY IMPACT FEES:
Prior to obtaining a building permit or occupancy permit, the applicant shall
provide evidence that he has paid the required County impact fee. (Ord. O2017-
38, 6-19-2017)
8-20-3: PENALTIES:
Any person not in compliance with the provisions of this title shall be
considered in violation of such title and shall be fined in an amount as set
forth in the Annual Fee Ordinance for each offense. In addition, each day shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd.
Ord. O2024-52, 11-18-2024)
8-20-4: BOND REQUIRED, BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to provide a measure of
guarantee and assurance that work for which the City has issued a permit will
be expeditiously and satisfactorily completed without undue expense to the
City.
   B.   Implementation: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a cash bond
shall be deposited with the City Clerk. Bond requirements shall be according to
the schedule herewith or in such other amount as may be specified in writing by
the chief Code official.
Building bonds shall be as outlined in the City of Warrenville building permit
fee and building bond schedule as now existing or hereinafter amended and
available at the City of Warrenville Community Development Department.
   C.   Grading Guarantee Bond: If at the time a certificate of occupancy is
requested the final "as-built" grading survey or the final grading inspection
has not been approved by the City or if grass and/or sod has not been
established on the subject property, there shall be deposited with the City
cash or other security, which shall be known as the grading guarantee bond, in
the amount as hereinafter set forth:
 
Single-family residential additions and accessory structures  $ 300.00
New single-family residential construction (per lot)          1,200.00
All other nonsingle-family additions and accessory structures 1,000.00
All other nonsingle-family new construction (per lot)         2,500.00
 
This deposit shall be in addition to any project performance bond or letter of
credit previously established with regard to the property.
The purpose of this grading guarantee bond shall be to assure that a minimum of
four inches (4") of topsoil has been spread over the entire lot, a final "as-
built" grading survey has been submitted to and approved by the City for the
individual lot and the City has inspected and approved the final grading and
verified grass or sod has been established on the individual lot.
The City shall return the amount of the cash bond or release the amount of
security as soon as a final "as-built" grading survey has been submitted to and
approved by the City and the City has inspected and approved the final grading
and verified grass or sod has been established on the individual lot.
The amount of the grading guarantee bond shall be held or remain available for
the benefit of the City for a period of one year unless the City shall notify
the person depositing the grading guarantee bond of the specific defect
existing in the drainage of the lot.
In the event that the defect is not corrected, after reasonable notice the City
may utilize the funds to correct the defect. Provided, however, that the
utilization of this grading guarantee bond shall not prevent the City from
taking other action against the person responsible for the defect in drainage.
The grading guarantee bond shall not be released by the City until the entire
area immediately affected by the drainage characteristics of the individual lot
shall have also been found to comply with the ordinances of the City relating
to drainage.
The grading guarantee bond amounts set forth hereinabove or hereinafter amended
shall be incorporated into the City of Warrenville Building Fee and Bond
Schedule available at the City of Warrenville Community Development Department.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
   D.   Site Improvement Delay Deposit:
      1.   A temporary delay in the completion of any site improvement required
by this Code, the zoning ordinance, or the landscape ordinance and typically
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy may be granted by
the Director of Community and Economic Development in the event a builder or
contractor is unable to complete such improvement due to inclement weather or
upon other good cause shown. When a temporary delay is so authorized by the
City Administrator, there shall be deposited with the City a cash payment in an
amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the site improvements
for which said temporary delay is granted. Said cash deposit shall be known as
the site improvement delay deposit. The site improvement delay deposit shall be
in addition to any project performance security or letter of credit previously
established with regard to the property. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord.
O2018-10, 3-19-2018)
      2.   The site improvement delay deposit is intended to be made in
conjunction with the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, and no
unconditional certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until all
site improvements secured by the deposit have been completed, inspected and
approved by the applicable entity or department and requires an agreement of
the property owner as set forth in this section.
      3.   In order to reimburse the City for the administrative costs incurred
in connection with site improvement delay deposits, the contractor/owner shall
pay to the City an amount equal to one- half percent (0.5%) per week of the
amount of the deposit but in no event less than twenty dollars ($20.00) per
week for each week that all of the site improvements have not been completed
and approved. The City may require the payment of this amount from the
contractor or retain this fee from any monies on deposit to be refunded. (Ord.
O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
      4.   As a condition of the approval of the temporary certificate of
occupancy and the provision for any site improvement delay deposit, the
Director of Community and Economic Development may require the builder/
developer/owner provide signed, executed contracts for any unfinished but
required improvements.
      5.   Upon satisfactory completion of all site improvements secured by the
site improvement delay deposit, the Director of Community and Economic
Development shall release to the owner/contractor making the deposit the amount
of the deposit less any and all fees and expenses for inspections, etc., then
due and owing to the City. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2018-10, 3-19-
2018)
   E.   Charges Against Bond: Charges against the bond may be made for:
      1.   Work not done or improperly done by the contractor or builder as it
may affect the public area adjacent to or affected by said construction.
      2.   Reinspection fees necessitated by failure to meet prescribed
inspection or Code requirements.
      3.   Fees charged by consulting engineers or other qualified agencies or
individuals to investigate methods, materials or construction practices which
may be justifiably questioned by the chief Code official.
      4.   Any other costs incurred by the City in relation to the subject
construction.
   F.   Bond Default: Charges against said bond shall cause the bond to be in
default and permits issued under said bond shall be void and suspended until
the face value of the bond shall be reinstated.
   G.   Refund: Claim for refund may be made of the City Clerk upon
presentation of a certificate of final acceptance issued by the Building
Department and/or the Street Department and adjusted according to subsection B
of this section in the event of multiple permits. (Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 21
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION:
8-21-1: Zoning Certification And Code Compliance Letters
8-21-1: ZONING CERTIFICATION AND CODE COMPLIANCE LETTERS:
   A fee as set forth in the annual fee ordinance will be charged per request
for the preparation of zoning certification and/or Code compliance letters for
individual properties located within the City; provided, however, such fee
shall not be applicable to owner occupied, single-family residential
properties.
(Ord. O2017-38, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024)
TITLE 9
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
CHAPTER 1
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Department Established
9-1-2: Appointments
9-1-3: Compensation
9-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
   A.   There is hereby established a code hearing department, the function of
which is to expedite the adjudication of code and ordinance violations in the
manner set out in state statutes and as referenced in this title.
   B.   The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the city from using
other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of its codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
The city administrator is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the
hearing officer and other positions set forth in this title and such other
positions as may be necessary or desirable for the efficient operation of the
code hearing department. One person may hold and fulfill the requirements of
one or more of said positions. Hearing officers shall meet the requirements of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-4(c) and shall have successfully
completed a formal training program which includes the following:
   A.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which he/she will conduct;
   B.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations he/she will
adjudicate;
   C.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
   D.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and
issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Compensation to be paid for the positions established within this chapter shall
be as determined by the city council. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING,
PARKING AND COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Purpose
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Traffic Compliance Administration
9-2-4: Procedures
9-2-5: Final Notice
9-2-6: Notice Of Final Determination
9-2-7: Final Determination Of Liability
9-2-8: Petition To Set Aside Determination Of Liability
9-2-9: Reserved
9-2-10: Fines; Penalties
9-2-11: Reserved
9-2-12: Enforcement Of Judgment
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for fair and efficient
enforcement of city vehicular standing, parking, and condition of vehicle
regulation violation(s) as may be allowed by law, through an administrative
adjudication of such violation(s) within the geographic boundaries of the city
and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and procedures for
collection of unpaid fines and penalties pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the
motor vehicle code 1 . (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   COMPLIANCE VIOLATION: A violation of a city regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a
municipal vehicle tax license.
   NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATION: A. A violation of any vehicular standing or
parking ordinance or regulation of the city, or
   B.   A compliance violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-2-3: TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATION:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall provide for a traffic compliance
administrator with the power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set
forth to:
   A.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s).
   B.   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as
may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   C.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
   D.   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying
that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability issued in accordance with this chapter and with 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
   E.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
   F.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through collection agencies or by
directing the city attorney to file complaints in the circuit court seeking
judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment
remedies available by law. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012; amd. Ord. O2022-47, 12-5-
2022)
9-2-4: PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall be in accordance with the following
procedures. Final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of impending impoundment
and collections shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth
below:
   A.   Nonmoving Traffic Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations notice(s) ("nonmoving traffic violation notice
(s)") shall be issued by the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain
information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility
as is hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Authorization: All full time, part time, and auxiliary police and
community service officers, as well as other specifically appointed
individuals, shall have the authority to issue nonmoving traffic violation
notices.
   C.   Detection Of Nonmoving Traffic Violations: Any individual authorized
herein to issue violation notices and who detects a nonmoving traffic violation
of any section of any applicable city ordinance, shall issue a notice of
nonmoving traffic violation thereof and shall make service thereof as
hereinafter set forth.
   D.   Contents Of Nonmoving Traffic Violation Notice: The nonmoving traffic
violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated.
      3.   Either the vehicle make and state registration number or the license
number of the vehicle.
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment
prior to the hearing date.
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      6.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
   E.   Service: Service of violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person
issuing such notice by:
      1.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked or noncomplying vehicle, or
      2.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
   F.   Certification: The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice(s) shall be
certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service, or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
   G.   Record Of Notice: The original or a digital file of the violations
notice(s) shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator and kept as
a record in the ordinary course of business.
   H.   Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violations notice(s) issued,
signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be
prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts shown on the notice.
   I.   Admissibility: The violations notice(s) or a copy(ies) shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
   J.   Hearing Date: The traffic compliance administrator shall schedule a
date for the hearing and shall provide written notice of the hearing date to
the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle who has requested the hearing.
   K.   Final Notice: If the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle either
fails to attend the hearing or fails to pay the fine, the traffic compliance
administrator shall send a final parking/code violation notice to the
registered owner or lessee of the vehicle as provided in section
9-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012; amd. Ord. O2022-47, 12-5-2022)
9-2-5: FINAL NOTICE:
Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to
attend the hearing as set forth in the vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations notice(s), or pay the fine, a final notice:
   A.   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle"
at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state.
   B.   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
   C.   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   D.   Service of the final notice sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   E.   The final notice sent in accordance herewith shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information:
      1.   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations notice(s).
      2.   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
      3.   Vehicle make and state registration or license number.
      4.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
      5.   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status,
other than paid in full.
      6.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
      7.   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty
or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time
and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations liability for the "cited"
violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated, which final
determination shall constitute a debt due and owing the city. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012; amd. Ord. O2022-47, 12-5-2022)
9-2-6: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
   A.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations liability shall be sent following an
appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to
appear by the violator by the final hearing date upon conclusion of any review,
as is hereinafter set forth herein, and the notice shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information and warnings:
      1.   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the city.
      2.   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing
the city within the time specified may result in the city's use of a collection
agency or the city's filing a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid
fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012; amd. Ord. O2022-47, 12-5-2022)
9-2-7: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations liability shall:
   A.   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust the administrative petition procedure set forth in section
9-2-12 of this chapter, or
   B.   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the final
administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violations on the date
and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the
hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall become final:
      1.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
      2.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-2-8: PETITION TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations liability may be filed by a person owing an
unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and
grounds hereinafter set forth:
   A.   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the traffic compliance administrator within, but not
later than, fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability is
made.
   B.   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petitions
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.
   C.   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      1.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations notice(s) were issued.
      2.   The person's having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violations in question.
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   D.   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall:
      1.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the
determination of liability has been set aside.
      2.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place, for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside, as appropriate.
      3.   Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of
liability.
      4.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s)
are deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-2-9: RESERVED:
9-2-10: FINES; PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations shall be as set forth in
the codes and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-2-11: RESERVED:
9-2-12: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, penalty, or part of any fine or any penalty remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies
under this chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall
be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected in accordance
with applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition
of that violation.
   B.   Enforcement of judgments and appeals entered pursuant to this chapter
will be enforced as set forth in section 9-4-7 of the city code. (Ord. 2742, 9-
17-2012; amd. Ord. O2024-37, 9-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING AND
HOUSING VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Purpose
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-3: Procedures
9-3-4: Default
9-3-5: Evidence At Hearing
9-3-6: Retaliatory Action Against Occupants Prohibited
9-3-7: Defenses To Code Violations
9-3-8: Decision
9-3-9: Fines And Sanctions
9-3-10: Enforcement And Appeals Of Judgment
9-3-11: Sanctions Applicable To Owner, Property
9-3-12: Federal Government Contracts/Maintenance Of Property/Penalties
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for fair and efficient
enforcement of construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
sanitation and other health and safety code violations as may be allowed by
law, through an administrative adjudication of violation(s) of city ordinances
within the geographic boundaries of the city and a schedule of uniform fines
and penalties and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and
penalties. The city hereby adopts division 31.1 of article 11 of the Illinois
municipal code 1 . (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   BUILDING OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure.
   CITY INSPECTOR: A city employee whose duties include the inspection or
examination of structures or property in the city to determine if code
violations exist. The city inspector is not a member of the code hearing
department that is established pursuant to chapter 1 of this title.
   CODE: Any city ordinance, law, housing, building code or other ordinance
that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to
structures within the city, including, without limitation, those contained in
title 8 of this code.
   CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT: The department established pursuant to chapter 1 of
this title to administer adjudication proceedings.
   HEARING OFFICER: That person appointed to the position of hearing officer
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title.
   OWNER: The building owner, the legal or beneficial owner of the real
property, or the legal or beneficial owner of the business license doing
business within a structure. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-3: PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of code violations shall be in
accordance with the following procedures, and final determinations of code
violation(s) liability shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set
forth below:
   A.   Detection Of Violations: When a city inspector finds a code violation
while inspecting a property, he/she shall note the violation on a multiple copy
violation notice and report form.
   B.   Contents Of Violation Notice And Report Form: The violation notice and
report form shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   The name and address of the owner.
      2.   The type and nature of the violation.
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed.
      4.   The names of witnesses to the violation.
      5.   The address of the structure where the violation is observed.
   C.   Docket And Assignment Of Hearing Date: The violation report form shall
be forwarded by the city inspector to the code hearing department where a
docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a hearing date
noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
   D.   Service: One copy of the report form shall be served by first class
mail on the owner along with a summons commanding the building owner to appear
at the hearing. If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the building owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made
on the owner by personal service or by posting or nailing a copy of the
violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is
found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
   E.   Record: One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in
the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of
hearing and one copy of the report form shall be returned to the city inspector
so that he/she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at
the hearing.
   F.   Administrative Hearing:
      1.   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged code violation
on its merits shall be granted to the owner pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., incorporated by reference herein, and shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The case for the city may be presented by the city inspector or by
an attorney designated by the city. However, in no event shall the case for the
city be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for
the owner may be presented by the owner, his attorney, or any other authorized
agent or representative.
      3.   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing
officer under this chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days unless agreed
upon by the parties alleged to have violated the code. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-4: DEFAULT:
If, on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-5: EVIDENCE AT HEARING:
At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation relating to the structure indicated. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-6: RETALIATORY ACTION AGAINST OCCUPANTS PROHIBITED:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-7: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be an owner's defense to a code violation charge under this chapter if
the owner, his attorney, or any other authorized agent or representative proves
to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   A.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist;
   B.   If the owner responding to the code violation charge is the building
owner or the legal or beneficial owner of the real property, the code violation
has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of
reasonable attempts by the building owner or the legal or beneficial owner of
the real property to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current
occupants continue to cause the violations; or
   C.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
building owner, the building owner's agent, or the legal or beneficial owner of
the real property or his agent, to all or a part of the dwelling for the
purpose of correcting the code violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-8: DECISION:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of evidence presented at the hearing whether or not
a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be
designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order
shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not
a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order imposing
a penalty or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved.
A copy of the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be
served on the person charged with a violation and/or the building owner within
five (5) days after they are issued. Service shall be in the same manner as the
report form and summons are served pursuant to subsection
9-3-3D of this chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of
fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the code unless the
corporate authorities provide otherwise. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-9: FINES AND SANCTIONS:
If a code violation is proved, the hearing officer may impose the sanctions
that are provided in the code for the violation proved, including fines,
license revocation or suspension, permit suspension or revocation, etc. The
city adopts by reference all current and future local ordinances and those
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., governing
codes, as herein defined, applicable to structures relative to construction,
plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation and health and
safety standards in the city, for its enforcement and adjudication within the
geographical boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-10: ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law 1  shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the city may commence a proceeding in the circuit court for purposes
of obtaining a judgment on the hearing officer's findings, decision and order.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from consolidating multiple
findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the city shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order
were issued in accordance with this chapter and applicable state law. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by
section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amounts of fines, other sanctions
and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order do not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the
findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and the applicable city ordinance, and that the building owner
had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as
provided in this chapter: 1) the court shall render judgment in favor of the
city and against the building owner for the amount indicated in the findings,
decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and
may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of
money; and 2) the court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-3-11: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER, PROPERTY:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the city as
the result of finding of a code violation under this chapter shall attach to
the property as well as to the owner, so that a finding of a code violation
against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property
to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject
to the findings, decision and order of the hearing officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-3-12: FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS/MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY/PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety
code violations.
   B.   A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars
($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Procedures
9-4-2: Purpose
9-4-3: Definitions
9-4-4: Default
9-4-5: Evidence At Hearing
9-4-6: Decision
9-4-7: Enforcement And Appeals Of Judgment
9-4-8: Administrative Personnel
9-4-9: Administrative Hearings
9-4-10: Administrative Review Law To Apply
9-4-11: Administrative Remedies Not Exclusive
9-4-1: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Issuance Of Citation: When a city enforcement officer determines that
an ordinance violation has been committed, the enforcement officer shall issue
a citation therefor.
   B.   Contents Of Citation: The citation shall include notice of:
      1.   The nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated.
      2.   The date and location of the adjudicatory hearing.
      3.   A citation to the chapter as the legal authority and jurisdiction
under which the hearing is to be held.
      4.   The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   C.   Docket And Notation Of Hearing Date: One copy of the citation shall be
forwarded by the city enforcement official to the code hearing department where
a docket number shall be stamped on the citation and the hearing date on the
citation shall be noted and docketed.
   D.   Service: The citation shall be deemed as service of process when
either: 1) served on the party or its employee or agent; 2) served by certified
mail, return receipt requested; or 3) served by posting a notice and the
citation upon the property where the violation is found when the party is the
owner or manager of the property.
   E.   Record: One copy of the citation shall be maintained in the files of
the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing and one
copy of the citation shall be returned to the city enforcement official so that
he/she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the
hearing.
   F.   Administrative Hearing:
      1.   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged ordinance
violation on its merits shall be granted to the owner of record pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., incorporated by reference herein,
and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
hearing date shall not be less than fifteen (15) days after service of process
as provided in subsection D of this section except in case of emergency. If
service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day period shall begin to run on
the day that the notice is deposited in the mail.
      2.   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing
officer under this chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days unless agreed
upon by the party alleged to have violated an ordinance.
      3.   The case for the city may be presented by the city enforcement
officer or by an attorney designated by the city. However, in no event shall
the case for the city be presented by an employee of the code hearing
department. The case for the party charged may be presented by the party
charged, his attorney, or any other authorized agent or representative. (Ord.
2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for fair and efficient
enforcement of any "ordinance violation" as defined within this chapter through
an administrative adjudication of such violation(s) and procedures for
collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT: The department established pursuant to chapter 1 of
this title to administer adjudication proceedings.
   CODE HEARING UNIT: The code hearing department established pursuant to
chapter 1 of this title.
   HEARING OFFICER: That person appointed to the position of hearing officer
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title.
   ORDINANCE VIOLATION: The violation of any code or ordinance of the city,
excepting only such codes or ordinances: a) for which administrative
adjudication is otherwise provided in chapter 2, 3, or 5 of this title or b)
for which other adjudicatory procedures are specifically mandated either by
city ordinance or by state or federal law. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-4: DEFAULT:
If on the date set for hearing the party charged with the ordinance violation
or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the party in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of an ordinance violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-5: EVIDENCE AT HEARING:
At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of an ordinance
violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-6: DECISION:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of evidence presented at the hearing whether or not
an ordinance violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall
be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order
shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not
an ordinance violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order
imposing a penalty or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not
proved.
A copy of the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be
served on the party within five (5) days after they are issued. Service shall
be in the same manner as the citation is served pursuant to subsection
9-4-1D of this chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of
fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the ordinance for which
the ordinance violation was issued. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-7: ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law 1  shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the
ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering said defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred
by the city to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, court costs and lien foreclosure costs, after they are fixed by a court
of competent jurisdiction or by the hearing officer, shall be a debt due and
owing the city and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to
any expenses being fixed by the hearing officer pursuant to this section, the
city shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall
appear at a hearing before the hearing officer to determine whether the
defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date
for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date
that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period
shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   D.   In addition to any other legal remedies, upon being recorded in the
manner required by article XII of the code of civil procedure or the uniform
commercial code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate,
or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the city
under this section. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   E.   The hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after
the issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that
the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any
time if the petitioner establishes that the city did not provide proper service
of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection, the
hearing officer shalt have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the city as a result of the
vacated default judgment. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-4-8: ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL:
The city administrator is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the
position of hearing officer and such other positions as may be necessary or
desirable for the efficient operation of the city's administrative adjudication
system. Compensation shall be as determined by the city council.
   A.   The hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized to:
      1.   Preside over the administrative hearings, established in this
chapter, as the adjudicator.
      2.   Administer oaths.
      3.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation.
      4.   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations.
      5.   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative hearing
(s). (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-9: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in
the violation notice or citation issued and served in accordance with this
chapter or such additional notices issued in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   All administrative hearings shall be tape recorded.
   C.   Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking, or
compliance violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own
expense and may present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses.
   D.   The hearing officer shall consider testimony and other evidence without
the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence.
   E.   Administrative hearings shall culminate in a determination of the
hearing officer as set forth in this chapter.
   F.   The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-4-10: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW TO APPLY:
The finding, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the appropriate county, and the provisions of
the administrative review law 1 , and all amendments and modifications thereto,
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and
govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision and order
of a hearing officer under this chapter, except as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-4-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter in addition
to any monetary penalties or fines assessed by the hearing officer hereunder,
the city shall have the right to pursue any other legally available remedies to
abate, enjoin or prevent violations of the city's codes and ordinances,
including, but not limited to, license or permit revocation or suspension
proceedings, injunctive relief or other legal or equitable remedies, all of
which remedies shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 5
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT ADJUDICATION
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: System Locations
9-5-3: Duties Of Administrator
9-5-4: Violation Notices
9-5-5: Determination Of Violations
9-5-6: Hearing Procedures
9-5-7: Final Determination Of Violations
9-5-8: Petition For Review
9-5-9: Suspension Notice
9-5-10: Appeal Of Suspension Notice
9-5-11: Nonappearance Procedures
9-5-12: Penalty
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, words or terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The city's traffic administrator, as appointed by the city.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce
recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light
signal in violation of section 11-306 of the code or a similar provision of a
city ordinance.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION: A violation described in section 11-208.6
of the code.
   CERTIFIED REPORT: A report concerning five (5) or more unpaid fines or
penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the city to the
secretary in accordance with section 6-306.5 of the code.
   CITY: The city of Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois.
   CODE: The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et
seq.
   DETERMINATION NOTICE: A notice of final determination of automated traffic
law violation liability issued pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the code and
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   RECORDED IMAGES: Images showing the time, date and location of an automated
traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system
on: a) two (2) or more photographs, b) two (2) or more microphotographs, c) two
(2) or more electronic images or d) a video recording showing the motor vehicle
and, on at least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the
registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
   SECRETARY: The Illinois secretary of state.
   SUSPENSION NOTICE: A notice of impending driver's license suspension issued
pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the code and pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   SYSTEM: Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the city
pursuant to this chapter.
   VIOLATION NOTICE: An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant
to sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the code and pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-2: SYSTEM LOCATIONS:
The city hereby determines to establish systems at the following intersections
located within the corporate limits of the city:
Southbound Illinois Route 59 at Illinois Route 56 (Butterfield Road)
Eastbound Illinois Route 56 (Butterfield Road) at Illinois Route 59
Eastbound Illinois Route 56 (Butterfield Road) at Winfield Road
Westbound Illinois Route 56 (Butterfield Road) at Winfield Road (Ord. 2742, 9-
17-2012)
9-5-3: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The administrator or his designee shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and
process violation notices and other notices required by this chapter for the
administrative adjudication of automated traffic law violations, collect money
paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law violations and operate an
administrative adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The
administrator is also authorized to make a certified report to the secretary
pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the code, and any such certified report shall
contain the information required under section 6-306.5(c) of the code. (Ord.
2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-4: VIOLATION NOTICES:
A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements of
chapter 2 of this title and with section 11-208.6 of the code, as amended,
shall be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle
cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the secretary
within thirty (30) days after the secretary notifies the city of the identity
of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after
the violation. Service of a violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the
date of deposit in the United States mail. The original or a facsimile of a
violation notice or, in the case of a violation notice produced by a
computerized device, a printed record generated by the device showing the facts
entered on the violation notice, shall be retained by the administrator, and
shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business. A violation notice
issued, signed and served in accordance with this chapter, a copy of the
violation notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct
and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
violation notice. The violation notice, copy or computer generated record shall
be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. (Ord.
2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-5: DETERMINATION OF VIOLATIONS:
Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law violation, a
determination must be made by a technician employed or contracted by the city
that, based on inspection of recorded images generated by the system, the motor
vehicle was being operated in violation of section 11-208.6 of the code or an
ordinance of the city. If the technician determines that the vehicle entered
the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield the right
of way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued. (Ord. 2742, 9-
17-2012)
9-5-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall have the
opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits of the
alleged violation as provided in chapter 2 of this title. The lessee of a
vehicle cited in a violation notice likewise shall be afforded the opportunity
for a hearing of the same kind afforded the registered owner. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012)
9-5-7: FINAL DETERMINATION OF VIOLATIONS:
A determination shall become final as provided in section
9-2-7 of this title. A determination notice, the contents of which shall comply
with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title, shall be sent following a
final determination of automated traffic law violation liability. A
determination notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the secretary or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database or, under section 11-1306 of the code, to the lessee
of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to that address is returned
as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office database. Service of the determination notice shall be deemed complete
as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-8: PETITION FOR REVIEW:
A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic law violation
penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination of such
liability within ten (10) days after mailing by the city of a determination
notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same, together with any
documentation in support thereof, to the administrator by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the administrator. The
grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: a) the person not having been
the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was
issued, b) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation
in question, and c) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing. A hearing on such a petition shall be held within thirty (30) days
after the filing of same. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a
showing of just cause, and the subject determination of automated traffic law
violation liability is thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be
provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012)
9-5-9: SUSPENSION NOTICE:
A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements
of sections 6-306.5 and 11-208.3 of the code, as amended, shall be sent to the
person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or
more unpaid automated traffic law violations. The suspension notice shall be
sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address
recorded with the secretary or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database. Service of a suspension notice shall be deemed
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-
2012)
9-5-10: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION NOTICE:
If the administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle owner and
subsequently makes a certified report to the secretary, the subject vehicle
owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To do so,
the vehicle owner must submit to the administrator a written statement under
oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the
following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report: a) that
the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or vehicles
receiving five (5) or more automated traffic law violations on the date or
dates such violation notices were issued, or b) that the person already paid
the fines or penalties for the five (5) or more automated traffic law
violations indicated on the certified report. Such statement and supporting
documentation must be sent to the administrator by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or hand delivered to the administrator within five (5) days
after the person receives notice from the secretary that the person's driver's
license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the
secretary is presented with a notice from the city certifying that the fines or
penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's
name on the certified report was in error. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-11: NONAPPEARANCE PROCEDURES:
As provided in section
9-2-9 of this title, nonresidents of the city who receive violation notices may
contest the merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without
attending a hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with
any supporting documentation, to the administrator via certified mail, return
receipt requested, within ten (10) days after service of the violation notice.
Such a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should
not be entered. The hearing officer shall rule on such a statement within
thirty (30) days after receipt of same, and shall inform the nonresident of his
decision within ten (10) days thereafter. (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
9-5-12: PENALTY:
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic law
violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time
of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. In the event that such penalty is not
paid within fourteen (14) days after service of a violation notice, the penalty
shall increase to two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2742, 9-17-2012)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ZONING
SECTION:
10-1-1: Zoning Ordinance Adopted By Reference
10-1-1: ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The zoning ordinance is hereby adopted by reference. A copy of said ordinance
is set out in full in
Appendix A to this chapter. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-2021)
APPENDIX A
ZONING ORDINANCE
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2. FILING PROCEDURES
3. ALLOWABLE USES
4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
5. OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
6. NONCONFORMITIES
7. SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS
8. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
9. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10. ACCESSORY USES AND YARDS
11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
12. ADMINISTRATION
13. DEFINITIONS
APPENDIX
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICABILITY
1. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as: The City of
Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
2. PURPOSE
This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of improving and protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare of residents of the City. To this end the
Ordinance seeks:
   a.   To further the implementation of the objectives of the adopted
Comprehensive Plan for the City of Warrenville in such a manner as any changed
conditions since the adoption of the Plan may require.
   b.   To zone all land in the City with a view to conserving property values
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
   c.   To protect all areas of the City from harmful encroachment by
incompatible uses.
   d.   To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air, and
open spaces.
   e.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population, thereby preventing the development of blight and deterioration.
   f.   To lessen congestion in the public streets.
   g.   To facilitate provision of adequate public services and facilities such
as transportation, water, sewerage, and parks.
   h.   To provide for adequate drainage, control of erosion, reduction of
flood damage, and destruction of sensitive or valuable environmental resources.
   i.   To encourage provision of a range of housing opportunities that enables
all people working in Warrenville to live within the City.
   j.   To foster a desirable pattern of relationships among residential,
commercial, industrial, and other uses for the mutual benefit of all types of
development.
   k.   To isolate and control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing
uses.
To accomplish the above objectives, this Ordinance further seeks:
   a.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings, structures, and other
uses of land shall conform.
   b.   To prevent new construction or alteration or expansion of existing
construction that does not comply with the restrictions herein.
   c.   To provide for the modification or elimination in appropriate
situations of existing uses that are incompatible with the character of the
districts in which they are located.
   d.   To define the powers and duties of the officers and bodies charged with
the enforcement of this Ordinance.
   e.   To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions hereof.
3. REPEAL
Upon adoption of this Ordinance, Warrenville Zoning Ordinance No. 725 is hereby
repealed. All other City ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
this Ordinance are also hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency
only. No other ordinance, regulation, annexation agreement, or private
agreement, covenant or easement is intended to be repealed or abrogated by this
Ordinance.
4. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication according to law.
5. APPLICABILITY
No building, structure, land, or premises shall hereafter be constructed,
altered, converted, enlarged, moved, used, or occupied except in conformity
with the provisions herein.
6. SEPARABILITY
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid any provision of
this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any particular property, such
judgment shall not affect any other provision hereof, or the applicability
thereof to any other property, not specifically included in said judgment.
7. ALLOWABLE USES
Only the following uses of land, buildings, or structures are allowed in the
City:
   a.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
   b.   Uses which:
      1.   had a Building Permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, and
      2.   began construction within six months of such date, which
construction was diligently prosecuted to completion, and
      3.   are constructed and occupied in conformance with the plans that were
the basis for the issuance of the Permit.
   c.   Permitted Uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
conditions and requirements herein.
   d.   Special Uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
approval of a Special Use Permit and other conditions and requirements herein.
   e.   Temporary Uses subject to the provisions herein.
8. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
The provisions herein shall, in their interpretation and application, be held
to be minimum requirements.
9. MORE RESTRICTIVE REGULATION OR COVENANT APPLIES
In any case in which any portion of this or any other City ordinance, or any
other law, regulation, or annexation agreement or any kind of private
agreement, covenant, or easement applying within the City, establishes a
requirement that is either more or less restrictive than a particular
requirement established herein, the provision that is the more restrictive or
that imposes the higher standard or requirement shall govern.
10. UNLAWFUL EXISTING USES NOT MADE LAWFUL
No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance shall be made lawful solely by the adoption thereof. Such
structure or use shall remain unlawful hereunder to the extent that it is in
conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance.
11. ENCROACHMENTS AND EXTENSIONS
Notwithstanding the requirements established herein, principal and accessory
structures may encroach a maximum of three inches into a maximum of one
required yard or setback, and extend up to a maximum of three inches over the
maximum structure height. Fence height shall be allowed to extend up to a
maximum of six inches over the maximum height, provided that fence panels do
not exceed six feet in height. For the purposes of this subsection, decorative
fence post caps shall not be included in the calculation of fence height. (Ord.
2894, 11-3-2014; amd. Ord. 2901, 12-15-2014)
B. ZONING DISTRICTS
1. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
(Ord. O2017-26, 5-15-2017; amd. Ord. O2025-05, 2-18-2025)
To accomplish the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Warrenville is hereby
divided and classified into the following zoning districts:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-1    Estate Density Single Family Residential District
R-1A   Low Density Single Family Residential District
R-2    Medium Low Density Single Family Residential District
R-3    Medium Density Single Family Residential District
R-4    Medium High Density Single Family Residential District
R-5    High Density Single Family Residential District
R-6    Multi Family Residential District
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
B-2    Community Retail Business District
B-4    Motorist Service Business District
OFFICE DISTRICTS
T-O   Transitional Office
O-1    Limited Office District
O-2    Office Park District
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
M-1    Light Manufacturing District
M-2    General Manufacturing District
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
SD    Special Development District
2. ZONING DISTRICT MAP
The zoning district classification of all land in the City shall be shown on
the map designated as the City of Warrenville Zoning District Map. No land
shall at any time be classified in more than one zoning district, except that
land may be classified in any district designated as an overlay district at the
same time it is classified in a district that is not an overlay district.
The Zoning District Map, everything shown thereon, and all amendments thereto
shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described herein and
shall be filed as part of this Ordinance by the City Clerk. Said Map shall be
available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. Any
amendments to this map shall be similarly filed and made available for public
reference. (Ord. O2024-35, 9-3-2024)
3. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
District boundary lines shall, unless otherwise clearly indicated on the Zoning
District Map, be on the boundary lines of the City, of sections or divisions of
sections, or tract or lot lines; on the center lines of streets, railroads,
alleys, easements, rivers, and other water bodies; or on the extension of such
lines.
District boundary lines approximately following such lines shall be interpreted
as located on those lines. Distances not specifically indicated on the map
shall be established using the scale of the map.
Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the district
governing any portion of the lot may, at the owner's discretion, be construed
as extending to the entire lot if such extension is not more than 25 feet
beyond the district boundary on the map.
4. ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND
Except as may be otherwise provided by a pre-annexation agreement or by
simultaneous or subsequent amendment to this Ordinance, any parcel of land
hereafter annexed to the City shall upon annexation be classified in the R 1
Estate Density Single Family Residential District. (Ord. O2025-05, 2-18-2025)
5. UNZONED AREAS
Public and semi public areas designated on the Zoning District Map without a
zoning district classification shall be used only for the use designated on the
Map. When such use is permanently discontinued, the property shall be
considered to be zoned in the most restrictive district adjacent to the
property until an amendment establishing another zoning classification is
adopted.
C. SPECIAL USES
1. HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES NEAR AIRPORTS
   a.   AIRPORTS WITH APPROACH PLAN
   Maximum height of structures near airports having an Approach Plan approved
by the Illinois Department of Aeronautics shall be as provided in such Plan.
   b.   AIRPORTS WITHOUT APPROACH PLAN
   Maximum height of structures near airports that do not have such a Plan
shall be 15 feet plus the additional structure height allowed as follows:
                                 Additional Structure Height in Feet Allowed
Length of Longest Runway in Feet Per 200 Linear Feet of Distance of Structure
                                 from Airport Boundary
                                 Additional Structure Height in Feet Allowed
Length of Longest Runway in Feet Per 200 Linear Feet of Distance of Structure
                                 from Airport Boundary
Non-Instrument Runways            
Under 3,950                      10
3,950 or More                    5
Instrument Runways
3,950 or More
Distance of Structure
From Airport Boundary:
Up to 10,000 Feet                4
10,000 Feet and Over             5
 
 
   c.   EXCEPTIONS
   The Zoning Board of Appeals may, after holding a public hearing thereupon,
approve an exception to the height restrictions herein on the basis of a
finding in an aeronautical study that such exception would not constitute an
obstruction to air navigation.
2. NON RESIDENTIAL USES IN OR ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A mandatory public information and input meeting in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 2 of this Ordinance shall be conducted for all new, and
expansions to existing, non-residential permitted land uses proposed in the
residential zoning district that requires Site Plan Approval.
All principal and accessory buildings associated with non-residential uses,
except Permitted Public Uses, Conditional Public Uses, Temporary Uses, and
storage sheds and detached garages that comply with the area and height
limitations applicable in the underlying zoning district shall be setback a
minimum of 40 feet from any lot line abutting a lot in a Residential District.
Storage sheds and detached garages that serve non-residential uses but comply
with the underlying zoning district area and height limitations may encroach
into required interior side and rear yards but shall be setback a minimum of 10
feet from side and rear property lines. Unless otherwise shown on a Site Plan
that has received City of Warrenville Site Plan Approval, new accessory
Recreational Equipment associated with non-residential uses in or adjacent to
Residential Districts installed after September 1, 2009 shall be set back a
minimum of 40 feet from any lot line abutting a lot in a Residential District.
The perimeter setback requirements of this section shall supersede any lesser
setback requirements in this ordinance. The perimeter setback requirements of
this section shall not supersede any more stringent setback requirements
established in
Table 4B for specific land uses. (Ord. 2536, 8-18-2009)
The lot width and area requirements for each non-residential Permitted Use
except Permitted Public Uses and Temporary Uses shall be the same as required
per dwelling unit in the same district. For non-residential Special Uses, such
requirements shall be as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan
Commission, as appropriate, but shall not be less than the requirements for
single-family detached dwellings.
Maximum building height for all non-residential uses in residential districts
shall be the same as allowed for residential uses in the same zoning district.
Off-street parking and loading, landscaping requirements and sign regulations
for all non-residential uses in residential districts shall be as provided in
the Off-Street Parking and Loading and Landscaping and Screening sections of
this Ordinance and in Title 8, Chapter 6, Signs, Municipal Code.
No non-residential land use such as schools, churches, and fire stations shall
be constructed in a manner where the only vehicular access point(s) to the
property is/are from a dead end street such as, but not limited to, Landon
Avenue, Burk Avenue immediately south of Wagner, Mignin Drive south of
Albright, Glen Drive south of Warrenville Road, Forestview Drive North, and
Riverside Parkway. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-2006)
D. TEMPORARY USES
1. REAL ESTATE OFFICES
A real estate office may be established as a Temporary Use in a real estate
development to market properties therein. Such office shall cease operation not
later than 1 year after completion of construction, unless otherwise approved
by the City Council as necessary for a longer period of time.
2. CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS
Temporary buildings for construction purposes may be established as a Temporary
Use for a period ending no later than the date of completion of construction.
3. TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary signs may be permitted as provided in Title 8, Chapter 6 of the
Municipal Code.
4. TEMPORARY EVENTS
   a.   Temporary Use Permits for temporary events that satisfy the following
criteria may be approved administratively at the discretion of the Community
Development Director or his designee:
      1.   The temporary event is limited to two days;
      2.   The temporary event does not occupy more than 30% of the required
parking spaces during the normal business hours of the business on the property
unless alternative parking arrangements are provided and found to be adequate
and satisfactory by the Community Development Director;
      3.   The temporary event does not involve street closures;
      4.   The temporary event does not involve serving alcohol; and
      5.   The temporary event is conducted between hours of 8:00 am and 8:30
pm on Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 am and 10:30 pm on Friday through
Saturday. (Ord. 2621, 12-21-2010)
5. OTHER TEMPORARY USES
Other Temporary Uses may be allowed upon approval of a Temporary Use Permit by
the City Council.
6. CARGO CONTAINERS
Cargo containers, temporary membrane structures, storage tents and temporary
storage canopies may be placed on a private property not more than four (4)
times, for a total of thirty (30) days in any one calendar year.
Notwithstanding the foregoing restriction, the City of Warrenville Chief
Building Official may extend the length of time a cargo container, temporary
membrane structure, storage tent or temporary storage canopy can remain on
private property to a maximum of 120 days provided the cargo container,
temporary membrane structure, storage tent or temporary storage canopy is
located on a property that has a valid building permit for a major construction
project and is used to store construction equipment, construction materials,
and/or relocated personal possessions. Cargo containers, temporary membrane
structures, storage tents and temporary storage canopies shall not be located
in required interior side or rear yard setbacks. A permit from the City of
Warrenville Community Development Department is required to place temporary
cargo containers, temporary membrane structures, storage tents and temporary
storage canopies on a private property. (Ord. 2191, 2-9-2005; amd. Ord. 2533,
8-5-2009)
E. OTHER GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET
Except as otherwise permitted herein, no Building Permit shall be issued for a
lot not abutting upon a public street unless a permanent access easement was
recorded prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or unless the City Council
approves the use of private streets in a development. From and after November
3, 2003, no new non-emergency vehicular driveway shall be established from a
property in an O, B or M Zoning District onto the section of any minor or
marginal access street (as defined by the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the
City) located in or directly across from a Residential Zoning District unless
the property located in the O, B or M Zoning District has only one street line.
When a property zoned O, B or M has only one street line, a single driveway
shall be permitted on the adjacent street regardless of the zoning of the
underlying or adjacent properties. (Ord. 2098, 11-4-2003)
No new private curb cuts shall be made to City of Warrenville streets or
private driveways constructed on City of Warrenville rights-of-way until a
permit is issued by the City of Warrenville in accordance with Section
7-2-3-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-2006)
2. STORMWATER DETENTION
Requirements for detention or retention of stormwater shall be as provided by
the Warrenville Subdivision Control Ordinance No. 807.
3. ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT
No more than one principal building or use shall be permitted on any lot in any
single-family residential zoning district. No more than one principal non-
residential building or use shall be permitted on any lot unless a site plan
for the lot has been approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-2006)
4. EXCEPTIONS TO ARTERIAL LOT DIMENSIONS
The following lots are exempt from the special required minimum lot dimensions
along streets designated as arterials in the City Comprehensive Plan that are
provided in the regulations for individual zoning districts:
   a.   Existing lots of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
   b.   Lots subdivided after the effective date of this Ordinance that meet
any of the following conditions:
      1.   ACCESS FROM INTERSECTING STREET
      The only permanent access to the lot is or is to be from one or more
public streets or public access drives that are not arterials and are either
already in existence or have been planned and approved by the City.
      2.   SHARED CURB CUT
      The only permanent access to the lot is from one or more curb cuts
provided jointly with one or more other lots, which together with the subject
lot have a combined frontage on the arterial of 150 feet or more.
      3.   FRONTAGE ROAD
      The only permanent access to the lot is or is to be provided from a
frontage road planned and approved by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, the County, or the City as provided by law and where right of
way adjacent to the lot has been dedicated totaling 100 feet from the center
line of the arterial or such lesser distance equaling or exceeding 50 feet as
the City Council may approve.
      4.   OTHER ARRANGEMENTS
      Other arrangements approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
         a.   establish a minimum distance of 150 feet between each curb cut on
the lot and all other curb cuts on the lot or on adjacent parcels, or
         b.   control left turns in and out of curb cuts by driveway
channelization or signage, or
         c.   otherwise reduce the harmful impact on traffic movement and
safety of closely spaced curb cuts.
5. EXCEPTIONS TO MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
The following shall be exempt from the regulations herein governing maximum
building height:
a.   For Residential Uses: Cupolas not exceeding six feet (6') in height from
the roof surface and one hundred square feet (100) in area, chimneys, elevator
penthouses, parapet walls, stacks, rotundas, spires, towers, mechanical
equipment, antennas, tanks, and similar projections not exceeding ten percent
(10%) of maximum allowed building height as established by
Table 4A.
b.   For All Other Uses: Cupolas not exceeding six feet (6') in height from the
roof surface and one hundred square feet (100) in area, chimneys, elevator
penthouses, parapet walls, stacks, rotundas, spires, towers, mechanical
equipment, antennas, tanks, and similar projections (other than signs). (Ord.
2231, 7-21-2005; amd.Ord. 1018, 3-11-2021)
2. FILING PROCEDURES
A. APPLICABILITY
Except as otherwise provided herein, no application for any zoning action under
this Ordinance shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied except in
conformance with applicable approval procedures in this chapter and in Tables
2C and
2D.
B. APPROVAL PROCESS
1. APPLICATION FILING
Except in the case of a zoning action proposed by the City Council or a board
or commission of the City, any party requesting any City action to which this
section applies shall file an application on a form provided therefore by the
Zoning Administrator. Every such application shall include as a minimum the
applicable items provided in
Table 2A.
2. STAFF REVIEW
Except in the case of a Notice of Appeal, the Zoning Administrator may,
together with other departments, consultants, and officials of the City,
prepare a written review of the application. Such review shall be forwarded to
the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, as applicable.
The staff may advise the applicant on meeting Ordinance requirements but shall,
unless specifically provided otherwise herein, have no power to approve or
disapprove any filing or in any way restrict the applicant's right to seek
formal approval thereof.
3. PUBLIC HEARING
Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application for a zoning action
requiring a public hearing under Tables
2C and
2D, the Zoning Administrator shall establish a date for a hearing and transmit
the application to the applicable hearing body, as provided in Tables
2C and
2D, which shall hold a hearing on the application.
Applicants shall have the right to request that subpoenas be issued by the City
for persons or documents, to present witnesses, and to cross examine all
witnesses testifying at the public hearing.
The Chairman may compel the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses
shall be given under oath administered by the Chairman.
The applicant shall pay all expenses of the City associated with the conduct of
the hearing.
4. MANDATORY PUBLIC INFORMATION AND INPUT MEETINGS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL
PERMITTED USES IN THE RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
At least one mandatory public information and input meeting shall be conducted
for all new and expansions to existing non-residential permitted land uses
proposed in the residential zoning district that require Site Plan Approval.
Applicants/developers/ property owners are encouraged to participate in
additional meetings if major modifications are made to preliminary site plans
after they are presented at the initial mandatory public information and input
meeting.
   a.   Meeting Purpose: The purposes of mandatory public information and input
meetings are to (i) inform interested individuals about what type of non-
residential improvements are being proposed on a residentially zoned parcel of
property and (ii) solicit input and feedback on proposed site configuration and
related development design issues prior to the applicant/developer/property
owner committing large sums of time and money into the "final" design drawings
for a specific project. It is anticipated that the applicant/owner/developer
and City staff will use the input received at these meetings to assist in the
preparation and review of final design drawings for the proposed project.
   b.   Meeting Format: Unless otherwise directed by the Community Development
Director, these meetings shall be conducted in the Warrenville City Hall in
conjunction with a regularly scheduled Plan Commission meeting. Mandatory
public information and input meetings shall begin with the applicant/owner/
developer providing a brief presentation and overview of the proposed project
for the public. Immediately following the overview presentation, the applicant/
owner/developer, their specialty design consultants, and appropriate City staff
members will participate in an informal "open house" meeting to provide
additional information, answer specific questions, and receive additional input
on the proposed project. The "open house" component of this process will
generally occur immediately in advance of the more formal portion of a regular
Plan Commission meeting. A formal input form will be provided so that meeting
attendees may submit formal written comments, questions or concerns. The
applicant/owner/developer is expected to also make a brief presentation of the
project to and solicit feedback on proposed project from the Warrenville Plan
Commission.
   c.   Meeting Notice Requirements: The applicant/owner/developer shall notify
the public of the meeting by posting a public notice sign in compliance with
the requirements listed in Section
2.E.1. of this ordinance. The applicant/owner/ developer shall include a
laminated version of the proposed preliminary site plan on the required public
notice sign. The City will endeavor to prepare and distribute a press release
identifying the time, date, and purpose of the meeting to newspapers of local
distribution.
   d.   Meeting Application Requirements: All mandatory public information and
input meeting applications shall comply with the requirements of Tables
2A and
2B. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
5. PLAN COMMISSION OR ZBA ACTION
The Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend to the petitioner
revisions in the petition that would make it more acceptable. The petitioner
may, at his or her discretion, submit a revised petition to the Commission at a
continuation of the meeting or hearing without paying an additional filing fee.
This provision shall not, however, affect the right of the petitioner to have
the original petition without revisions acted upon by the Board, Commission, or
City Council.
Within any time limit specified in Tables
2C and
2D, the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare a report
consisting of written findings of fact pertaining to the Approval Criteria
provided herein for the applicable zoning action together with an action on the
application, passed by a majority vote of its members, and any conditions or
restrictions to which the action is to be subject. The report shall include the
roll call vote on the action.
Except as otherwise provided in Tables
2C and
2D, the action taken by the Commission or Board shall be in the form of a
recommendation for final action by the City Council.
In the case of an application for a variance or a Planned Unit Development, the
action may include any modification of normal requirements that is authorized
by this Ordinance.
6. CITY COUNCIL ACTION
The Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit to the City
Council its recommendation within the time limit specified in Tables
2C and
2D. The City Council shall not act upon any application requiring a Commission
or Board recommendation until either it has received such recommendation or
until such time limit has passed.
The Council shall not approve any application unless it finds that the zoning
action applied for meets applicable Approval Criteria provided herein. An
extraordinary majority vote of all members of the City Council shall be
required to approve an application if so provided in Tables
2C and
2D.
Except in the case of an amendment, the Council may make its approval subject
to any conditions or restrictions it finds necessary to assure compatibility
with the vicinity of the subject property. The Council may also set time limits
within which such conditions or restrictions must be complied with or financial
guarantees to ensure compliance.
7. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a Special Use Permit or other permit or
certificate given final approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals, Plan
Commission, or City Council within 5 business days after approval thereof
unless the approving body directs otherwise. The permit or certificate shall
specify any conditions or restrictions to which such body has made its approval
subject. The Zoning Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of any
denial by such body and the reasons, therefore within 5 business days of the
decision.
8. REVOCATION OR INVALIDATION
   a.   The Zoning Administrator may revoke any permit or certificate issued
hereunder:
      (1)   if the action taken after the permit or certificate is issued is
not consistent with plans and information submitted in support of the
application therefore; or
      (2)   if any applicable provisions of this Ordinance or any conditions or
restrictions imposed in connection with approval of the permit or certificate
are not complied with; or
      (3)   if after they are initially complied with, compliance with such
conditions or restrictions is not maintained at any time.
   b.   The Zoning Administrator shall give the permittee or Certificate holder
15 business days notice of any intended revocation and the reasons therefore
and an opportunity within that period to answer any charges of noncompliance or
to propose measures to bring the permitted action into compliance within a
reasonable time.
   c.   In addition, any variance, Special Use, or Site Plan shall
automatically become invalid: (Ord. 2346, 12-15-06)
      (1)   if the use for which it was approved has not been established nor a
Building Permit issued and construction thereof begun within one year of such
approval; or
      (2)   if the use for which it was approved has not been utilized or has
been abandoned for a continuous period of one year or more; or
      (3)   in the case of a Preliminary Plan approval for a Planned Unit
Development Special Use, if a Final Plan or a revised Preliminary Plan is not
filed within one year of approval of the Preliminary Plan, unless the Planned
Unit Development is in the SD District; or
      (4)   in the case of a Planned Unit Development in the SD District, (i) a
Preliminary Plan shall become invalid if a Final Plan or a revised Preliminary
Plan is not approved within seven years of approval of the Preliminary Plan, or
(ii) a Final Plan shall become invalid if a building permit has not been issued
and construction thereof begun within two years of approval of the Final Plan.
The City Council may approve an extension of any time period specified herein.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the use area identified in an SD District
Preliminary or Final Plan shall survive the expiration of the preliminary or
final plan and the use area so identified shall continue to remain in full
force and effect unless otherwise amended as provided in Section
8.F.4.
9. RESUBMISSION
Except as otherwise provided herein, no application that has been denied shall
be resubmitted within one year of the date of denial except on the grounds of
new factual evidence or a change in conditions found to be valid by the Plan
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, whichever has initial jurisdiction over
the application.
C. FILING FEES AND RECOVERABLE COSTS
   1.   Application Fee established: All applications shall be accompanied by
the applicable, non-refundable Filing Fee in the amount set forth in the annual
fee ordinance.
   2.   Recoverable Development Costs:
      a.   Recovery Of Certain Costs Established: Every application filed and
processed pursuant to this zoning ordinance that requires the city to incur
costs associated with review and approval of the application is subject to the
application and, if different, the applicant, are jointly and severally liable
for the payment of recoverable costs. By filing an application, the owner and
applicant are deemed to have agreed to pay the recoverable costs; provided,
however, that the city may require the owner and applicant to enter into an
escrow agreement affirming their responsibility for the payment of the
recoverable costs.
      The recovery of city costs pursuant to this subsection 2.C.2 are, in
addition to all other filing fees and other charges established by the city, as
set forth in this code and the annual fee ordinance.
      b.   Recoverable Costs: The following costs incurred by the city in
processing an application are recoverable costs for the purpose of this
subsection 2.C.2:
         i.   Professional and technical consultant fees, including, without
limitation, fees for engineering and plan, landscape, and traffic consultant
services that the city determines necessary to review the application;
         ii.   The fees and costs of a hearing officer, if any; and
         iii.   Legal fees, including, without limitation, the city attorney
and any additional city-retained attorney or law firm (costs to be measured by
their time expended and multiplied by their hourly rate of pay) incurred for
services rendered related to the application, including, without limitation,
consultation, meeting attendance, and document review, negotiation, and
preparation.
      c.   Payment Of Recoverable Costs And Recoverable Cost Escrow:
         i.   Escrow Required: Upon filing an application, the applicant must
deposit a cash escrow with the city in an amount to be determined necessary by
the community and economic development director to cover the anticipated
recoverable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the
application. Interest is not payable on the escrow.
         ii.   Charges Against Escrow: From the date of filing of an
application, the city will maintain an accurate record of the recoverable costs
incurred in the processing of the application. The city may, from time to time,
draw funds from the escrow account established for the application to pay the
recoverable costs and may transfer such funds to the appropriate city accounts.
The city will notify the owner and applicant and maintain an accurate record of
all such drawings.
         iii.   Additional Escrow Deposits: Should the community and economic
development director at any time determine that the escrow account established
for the application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay the
recoverable costs, the community and economic development director will inform
the applicant and require an additional deposit in an amount deemed sufficient
to cover foreseeable additional recoverable costs. The community and economic
development director may direct that processing of the application be suspended
or terminated until the additional amount is deposited into the escrow.
         iv.   Final Settlement: As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application, the city will prepare a final accounting of the
escrow account in connection with the application and of the actual recoverable
costs related to the application and will make a final charge for the actual
recoverable costs remaining to be paid. Any remaining funds in the escrow
account after the final payment will be returned to the owner or applicant, as
applicable. A copy of the final accounting will be provided to the owner and
applicant.
         v.   Insufficient Amount For Final Settlement: If the amount in the
escrow account is insufficient to pay the total actual recoverable costs, a
written demand for payment of the balance due will be mailed to the owner and
applicant.
   3.   Condition Of All Applications, Approvals, And Permits: No application
filed pursuant to this zoning ordinance will be considered complete unless and
until all costs and fees, filing fees and deposits due pursuant to this section
2.C have been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to
the zoning ordinance is, whether or not expressly so conditioned, deemed to be
conditioned upon payment of recoverable costs and fees as required by this
section.
   4.   Tolling Time Periods: Where this zoning ordinance provides that the
passage of time without decision or action will be deemed an approval or a
recommendation for approval, time periods will be tolled during any period of
nonpayment of the recoverable costs and fees and deposits due pursuant ot this
section.
   5.   Failure To Pay Recoverable Costs And Fees: Failure to fully pay any
incurred recoverable cost, fees, or escrow deposit may requested or denying or
revoking any relief sought or issued to the subject property or development.
   6.   Specified Public Bodies Exempt: The provisions of subsection 2.C.2 do
not apply to any public body or agency deriving the majority or its revenues
from taxes levied within the city.
D. DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST
The party signing the application shall be considered the applicant.
An applicant must be the fee owner or trustee of record, trust beneficiary,
lessee, contract purchaser, or option holder of the subject property or his or
her agent or nominee.
   1. Applicant Is Not Fee Owner
   If the applicant is not the fee owner of record of the subject property, the
application shall disclose the legal capacity of the applicant and the full
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners.
   In addition, an affidavit of the fee owner or owners shall be filed with the
application stating that the applicant has authority from the owner to make the
application.
   2. Applicant or Fee Owner Is Corporation or Partnership
   If the applicant, fee owner, contract purchaser, option holder, or any
beneficiary of a trust is a corporation, the application shall disclose the
names and addresses of the corporation's officers, directors, and registered
agents, or the partnership's general partners and those shareholders or limited
partners owning in excess of five percent of the outstanding stock or interest
in the corporation or interest shared by the limited partners.
   3. Applicant or Owner Is a Trust
   If the applicant or fee owner is a trust or trustee thereof, the full name,
address, telephone number, and extent of interest of each beneficiary must be
disclosed in the application.
Disclosure of present ownership interests shall be accompanied by a statement
by the applicant of proposed ownership of all land.
In the event of a change in ownership between the time the application is filed
and the time of the public hearing, such change shall be disclosed by affidavit
no later than the time of the hearing.
For an application for a Temporary Use Permit, the application shall include
the written permission of the owner or manager of the premises on which the
Temporary Use is to be located. A manager providing such permission shall
furnish satisfactory evidence of his or her authority to act on behalf of the
owner.
E. PUBLIC NOTICE
Public notice of a hearing as specified herein shall be provided for any action
that requires a public hearing under Tables
2C and
2D, except that only newspaper publication shall be required for text
amendments and comprehensive map amendments if they are initiated by the City.
The required notice shall consist of the following actions:
1. SIGN DISPLAY
The applicant shall post a sign at least 10 square feet in area in the front
yard of the subject property, facing and visible from a public street and no
further than 30 feet from the right of way line.
The sign shall plainly state the type of zoning action requested and the
scheduled date, time, and location of the hearing thereupon. The sign shall
conform to such requirements as to copy, size of lettering, and other items as
may be established by the City Council.
The sign shall be erected no more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the
date of the scheduled public hearing. The sign shall remain continuously in
place until the hearing is concluded, but no more than 7 days thereafter. (Ord.
2894, 11-3-14)
No posting of a sign shall be required if the applicant is the City of
Warrenville.
If requested, the City will remove the sign after the public hearing for a fee
as set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
2. WRITTEN NOTIFICATION
The applicant shall provide written notice of a public hearing to:
   a.   the owners of record of each parcel of real estate included within the
subject property and within 250 feet in all directions, excluding public rights
of way, from the boundaries thereof, and
   b.   any homeowners organization that has filed a written request with the
City to receive notices of public hearings, such notice to be limited to
hearings on properties within the area specified in such request.
The owners of record for this purpose shall be considered those appearing on
the records of DuPage County or those who paid property taxes for the most
recent year according to the County records.
The written notice shall be sent by first class mail, not more than 30 nor less
than 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing.
The written notice shall contain:
   a.   the name and address of the owner and the applicant, if different from
the owner
   b.   the street address, legal description, and a simple description of the
location of the subject property that will enable the ordinary reader to
accurately locate it
   c.   the zoning action requested, and
   d.   the date, time, and location of the public hearing thereupon.
3. NEWSPAPER PUBLICATION
    The City shall publish a notice of all public hearings at its own cost as
set forth in the annual fee ordinance. The notice shall be published at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 15 days but no
more than 30 days before the scheduled date of the hearing. It shall contain
the same information as is required for written notification herein.
4. EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE
   No later than the beginning of the public hearing, the applicant shall file
with the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission, or Zoning Board of Appeals:
   a.   an affidavit stating that he or she has complied with all public notice
requirements herein, and
   b.   a copy of the written notice sent.
(Ord. O2023-43, 11-6-2023; amd. Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2025-25, 5-19-
2025)
TABLE 2A: REQUIRED CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FILINGS
                                                        Mandatory        SD
 Map       Special          PRD         PUD   Temporary Public    Site   General
 Amendment Use     Variance Preliminary Final Use       Info and  Plan   Site
 (Rezone)                   Plan        Plan            Input     Review Plan
                                                        Meeting          Review
                                                                                                                 Mandatory        SD
                                                          Map       Special          PRD         PUD   Temporary Public    Site   General
                                                          Amendment Use     Variance Preliminary Final Use       Info and  Plan   Site
                                                          (Rezone)                   Plan        Plan            Input     Review Plan
                                                                                                                 Meeting          Review
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant   X         X       X        X           X     X         X         X      X
and name of the development
2. Legal descriptions of the subject property as a whole  X         X       X        X           X     X         X         X      X
and of each phase thereof
3. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of any
developer, site planner, or engineer involved in project  X         X       X        X           X     X         X         X      X
plans
4. The location of the property affected by the action    X         X       X        X           X     X         X         X      X
requested
5. Description of action requested                        X         X       X        X           X     X         -         X      X
6. A non refundable Filing Fee                            X         X       X        X           X     X         -         X      X
7. Descriptions of the present & proposed uses of the     X         X       X        X           X     X         X         X      X
property
8. A disclosure of interest as provided herein            X         X       X        X           -     X         X         X      X
9. Reserved
10. Reserved
11. A current plat of survey of the property certified by X         X       X        X           X     -         X         X      X
a registered land surveyor
12. Proposed starting and ending dates of use             -         -       -        -           -     X                   -      -
13. Performance Standards certification and data          -         I       -        I           I     -         -         -      -
14. Statement of reasons applicant believes action        X         X       X        X           X     -         -         -      -
requested conforms to applicable Approval Criteria
15. SITE PLAN:
a.   A General Site Plan meeting the requirements of   -         D [b]   X        -           -     -         -         -      X
Table 2B
b.   A Detailed Site Plan meeting the requirements of  X         X       -        X           X     -         -         X      -
Table 2B
c.    Preliminary Site Plan                            -         -       -        -           -     -         X         -      -
16. RENDERINGS
Architectural renderings with substantial design intent   -         -       -        X           X     -         D         -      -
for proposed structures but not necessarily final design
detail [c]
17. PHASING
Chronological schedule of expected beginning & ending
dates for proposed stages of construction & improvement
of all structures; common or public areas; circulation    -         -       -        X           X     -         X         X      X
ways; parking, loading, & service areas; & utilities,
showing interim use & maintenance of areas not under
construction in each phase.
18. ASSOCIATION/COVENANTS Organizational details of all
proposed property owners' or condominium associations.
Proposed protective covenants or deed restrictions* to    -         -       -        X           X     -         -         -      -
govern land use, open space, or other concerns.
Documents* governing maintenance of open space and other
common areas
19. OPEN SPACE STATEMENT Written statement of advantages
proposed common or public open space at each location     -         -       -        X           -     -         -         -      X
offers for such use and ways such spaces might be used
20. TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
A professional analysis of estimated traffic generated by
the completed development per day and during AM & PM peak D         -       D        D           D     D         D         D      D
hours, the impact on existing traffic loads in the
vicinity, and street construction or traffic control
measures needed to accommodate the new traffic
21. SCHOOL CAPACITY
Evidence of capacity of all affected public school        D         D       D        D           D     D         -         D      D
districts to handle the enrollment likely to be generated
by the development
22. RETAIL MARKET STUDY Research report establishing      -         -       -        D           -     -         -         -      -
market support for any shopping center proposed
23. TAX IMPACT STUDY 
Analysis of impact of the development on revenues and     D         D       D        D           D     D         -         D      D
expenditures of affected taxing bodies
24. Preliminary Plat of Subdivision [a]                   -         -       -        X           -     -         -         -      -
25. Final Plat of Subdivision [a] & final engineering     -         -       -        -           X     -         -         -      -
plans & specifications
26. Deeds or easement agreements conveying interest in    -         -       -        -           X     -         -         -      -
any parcel to any public body
27. Financial sureties approved by City to guarantee
installation & improvement of all public or common        -         -       -        -           X     -         -         X      -
improvements provided on approved Plan [a]
28. Statement from registered civil engineer, with
supporting data, on ability of water & sewer facilities   D         -       D        -           -     -         -         X      -
to serve development
29. Any other information the Plan Commission or Board of
Appeals re-quires to determine whether the application    X         X       X        X           X     X         -         X      X
conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance
 
NOTES FOR TABLE 2A
* Draft documents are required for Preliminary Plan and final documents for
Final Plan.
X: Required for all applications
- : Not required for any application
D: Discretionary: May be required if considered necessary for review of the
application by the Zoning Administrator, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Plan
Commission.
I : Required for industrial uses only. See Performance Standards section. In an
SD District with a Preliminary Plan, Performance Standard certification and
data (Item 13) need only be provided for phases for which a specific
development is currently proposed.
[a]:   As required by City Subdivision Control Ordinance.
[b]:   In the event that a General Site Plan is required, the Special Use may
be given preliminary approval subject to final approval of a Detailed Site
Plan.
[c]:   In an SD District, Renderings per Item 16 shall be required for the
phase for which a specific development is currently proposed. Structures may be
shown on a conceptual "footprint" basis for the phases where no specific
development is currently proposed.
Contents of applications for APPEALS shall be as provided under Appeals in the
Special Development Approvals section of this Ordinance.
Contents of applications for UNLISTED USES and AMENDMENTS TO PUD PLANS AND SD
SITE PLANS shall be as established on a case by case basis by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06; amd. Ord. O2025-25, 5-19-2025)
TABLE 2B: REQUIRED CONTENTS OF SITE PLANS
Applicant shall file Preliminary Site General Site Plan Detailed Site Plan[a]
Site Plan showing:   Plan
                                                                                  Preliminary General Detailed
Applicant shall file Site Plan showing:                                           Site Plan   Site    Site
                                                                                              Plan    Plan[a]
1. Required Scale: Number of feet to 1 inch [b]:                                  100         100     100
2. Numeric & graphic scales, north arrow, and date of preparation                 X           X       X
3. Boundaries of the development and of each phase thereof                        X           A       X
4. Adjacent property 200 feet deep surrounding site                               A           -       X
5. Lot lines and dimensions and areas of lots within site                         X           D       X
6. Easements and encroachments (location, dimensions, purpose) on & adjacent to   -           X       X
site
7. Data indicating for each development phase:
a.   number of dwelling units broken down by housing type and number of bedroom-           A       X
b.   number and areas of lots                                                  X           -       X
c.   gross and net site area                                                   X           A       X
d.   land area devoted to streets, off street parking, off street loading, openX           A       X
space and each housing and land use type
e.   square footage of site coverage by:
   1.   principal buildings, and                                            X           -       X
   2.   accessory buildings
8. DRAINAGE                                                                       A           D       X
Existing & proposed drainage patterns
9. EXISTING LANDSCAPING
Existing wooded areas and isolated trees 6 inches or more in diameter at 1 foot   A           D       X
above ground level
10. STRUCTURES
Location, type, shape, dimensions, floor space, orientation, height in feet,
finished grade elevations at all entrances & corners, & number of stories of all  A           X       X
existing & proposed structures, including buildings, signs, fences, walls,
screening, bridges, culverts, exterior lighting fixtures, and entrance features
11. PARKING, LOADING, & SERVICE
Location, shape, dimensions, capacities, & areas of off street parking & loading  A           D       X
spaces & areas, outside storage, & refuse disposal and service areas, including
aisles, curbing, surface type, driveways, & curb cuts
12. TOPOGRAPHY
   a. Map showing existing contours at 2 foot intervals & proposed grading and A           D       X
contours [c]
   b. Map showing areas with slopes exceeding 10, 15, and 25 percent           D           D       X
13. CIRCULATION
Existing & proposed number, location, alignment, dimensions, design, and
construction standards of all public & private thoroughfares, sidewalks,          A           A       X
pedestrian & bicycle paths, railroad rights of way, curb cuts, & driveways, &
distance of site property lines to nearest existing intersections, and names of
streets
14. GOVERNMENT BOUNDARIES
Current school district and municipal                                             -           -       D
boundary lines on or adjacent to site
15. COMMON OR PUBLIC AREAS
The number, location, acreage, dimensions, proposed ownership, and provisions for A           A       D
maintenance of any proposed recreational & non-recreational common or public
areas
16. WATER BODIES   
Dimensions & locations of existing & proposed natural or artificial bodies of
water, flood plains, marsh areas, drainage ditches, wet or dry stormwater         A           A       X
detention or retention areas, and any proposed modifications to existing water
courses or water bodies
17. SOIL PROBLEM AREAS                                                            -           -       X
Based on site soil survey or report from Soil & Water Conservation District
18. SUBSURFACE CONDITIONS                                                         -           -       D
Data on subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions   
19. UTILITIES
Dimensions, purpose & location of existing and proposed public and private
utilities, utility easements, and drainage facilities on or within 100 feet of    -           -       X
the property. Locations of existing and proposed hydrants, catch basins, manholes
& valves
20. PROPOSED LANDSCAPING
(See Chapter 11 "Landscaping and Screening" for specific landscape Plan and
landscape planting requirements.)
   a.   Location, quantity, diameter, installation height, maturity height, and
botanic and common names, of all proposed living & non-living landscaping
materials & existing materials to be preserved                                    -           -       X
   b.   Types & boundaries of proposed ground cover
   c.   Location & contours at 1-foot intervals of all proposed berming
   d.   Dimensions & appearance of all sides of proposed fences, walls,
ornamental lighting, & other landscaping & screening treatments
   e.   Measures to be taken to protect new and preserved existing trees during
construction
21. Any other information the Plan Commission or Board of Appeals requires
determining whether the application conforms to the requirements of this          D           X       X
Ordinance.
 
NOTES FOR TABLE 2B
Site Plans specified herein shall be required as provided in Tables
2A,
2C, and
2D.
X : Required for all site plans
: Not required for any site plan
A : Approximate information only is required.
D : Discretionary: Required upon request of Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan
Commission, whichever body has jurisdiction, or of the Zoning Administrator
[a]   Detailed Site Plan filed as a PUD Preliminary Plan may contain
generalized, estimated, or approximate information for proposed development
features required by this table except where the Plan Commission requires more
specific or firm information. PUD Final Plan shall be a final version of the
Preliminary Plan approved by the City Council and shall include specific, firm
information and final engineering plans and specifications. The Final Plan
shall conform to all requirements for a Final Plat in the City Subdivision
Control Ordinance No. 807 even if no subdivision of land is involved in the
PUD.
In an SD District, Preliminary Plans may be submitted for a development parcel
which contain conceptual treatment of the submittals required hereunder for the
phases where no specific development is currently proposed and more specific or
firm treatment of the submittals required hereunder for the phases where
specific development is currently proposed.
[b]   Or such other scale as the Zoning Administrator, Zoning Board of Appeals,
or Plan Commission shall require. If site area is over 200 acres, scale shall
be 200 feet to the inch.
[c]   Data shall refer to USGS North American Datum Mean Sea Level Elevation.
One foot intervals shall be shown if any flood hazard area exists on the site.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
Table 2C: Approval Processes for Zoning Applications
           Text or                                                  Unlisted
 Site Plan Map [a]   Special Use Variance Minor    Appeal Temporary Uses
 Review    Amendment [b]                  Variance        Use       Similar to
                                                                    Listed Uses
                                                                           Unlisted
               Site   Text or                                              Uses
               Plan   Map [a]   Special Variance Minor    Appeal Temporary Similar
               Review Amendment Use [b]          Variance        Use       to
                                                                           Listed
                                                                           Uses
Hearing Body   CC     PC        PC      ZBA      ZBA      ZBA    PC        CC
is:
1. Applicant
confers
informally     X      X         X       X        X        -      X         X
with designee
of City
Council
2. Applicant
files 4 copies
of application X      X         X       X        X        X      X         X
with
Administrator
3.
Administrator
checks         X      X         X       X        X        X      X         -
application
for compliance
[c]
4. If in
compliance,
Administrator  X      X         X       X        X        X      X         X
sets date for
meeting or
hearing
5. Applicant
provides       -      X         X       X        X        -      -         -
Public Notice
[d]
6. Applicant
files 15 hard
copies and 1
electronic
copy of        X      X         X       X        X        X      X         X
application
complying with
Ordinance with
Administrator
Hearing Body   CC     PC        PC      ZBA      ZBA      ZBA    PC        CC
is:
7.
Administrator
sends copies   X      X         X       X        X        -      X         -
of application
to staff for
comment
8.
Administrator
transmits      X      X         X       X        X        -      X         X
staff report
to Hearing
Body [e]
9. Formal
Public Hearing -      X         X[k]    X        X        -      -         -
is held
10. Applicant
files revised
or additional
material       X      X         X       X        X        X      X         X
requested by
Hearing Body
(optional)
11. Hearing
Body meets &   -      -         -       -        X        X      -         -
takes final
action [f]
12. Hearing
Body meets and
makes          -      X         X       X        -        -      X         -
recommendation
to City
Council [g]
a. Time limit
in no. of days
[h]: a. from   -      45        45      45       -        -      -         -
close of
hearing
Hearing Body   CC     PC        PC      ZBA      ZBA      ZBA    PC        CC
is:
b. from
receipt of
complete       -      -         -       -        -        -      45        -
application by
hearing body
13. City
Council takes  X      X         X       X        -        -      X         X
final action
[i]
14.
Extraordinary
majority vote
of City        -      2/3[j]    -       -        -        -      -         -
Council
required to
approve
application
15.
Administrator
issues permit  -      -         X       -        -        -      X         -
for approved
application
 
See also
Table 2D for approval procedures for Planned Unit Developments and SD zoning.
X : Procedure is applicable
– : Procedure is not applicable
Administrator: Zoning Administrator
CC: City Council
ZBA: City Zoning Board of Appeals
PC: City Plan Commission
a)   Except rezonings to SD District, to which the provisions of
Table 2D apply.
b)   Except Planned Unit Developments, for which the provisions of
Table 2D apply.
c)   Completeness, accuracy, and compliance with the provisions of this and
other applicable ordinances.
d)   As provided under Public Notice herein.
e)   Shall be transmitted no less than 7 days before applicable scheduled
hearing or meeting date.
f)   Final action shall be taken within 45 days of meeting; may affirm,
reverse, or modify the action appealed and direct issuance of a permit; and
shall be subject only to judicial review.
g)   Report of Hearing Body shall be mailed to applicant and representatives of
objectors at least 5 days before scheduled date of Council meeting at which it
is to be acted upon.
h)   Shall not apply if applicant withdraws application or is granted a request
to table it.
i)   Final action shall be taken only after receipt of a recommendation from
the Hearing Body or the expiration of the time limit for submission thereof and
shall be subject only to judicial review.
j)   Extraordinary majority shown shall be required to approve the amendment if
a written protest against the amendment is filed with the City and with the
applicant by certified mail that is signed by the owners of no less than 20
percent of:
   a)   the frontage to be altered by the amendment, or
   b)   the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or
directly opposite thereto.
k)   A court reporter prepared transcript of the public hearing is not required
for minor variation requests or special use permit requests related to
commercial vehicle parking in the residential zoning districts.
(Ord 2386, 7-6-07) (Ord. O2023-17, 4-17-23)
TABLE 2D: APPROVAL PROCESSES FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
 SD District                   Planned Unit Development
               Amendment to SD PUD Special Use        Amendment to Approved
 General Site  General Site                           Plan
 Plan Approval Plan            Preliminary Final Plan Major* Minor*
                               Plan
               SD District                Planned Unit Development
                             Amendment to PUD Special Use        Amendment to
               General Site  SD General                          Approved Plan
               Plan Approval Site Plan    Preliminary Final Plan Major* Minor*
                                          Plan
The Hearing    PC            PC           PC          PC         PC     PC
Body is:
1. Applicant
confers
informally     X             X            X           X          X      X
with designee
of City
Council
2. Applicant
files 4 copies
of General     X             -            -           -          -      -
Site Plan
conforming to
Table 2B
3. Applicant
has Pre
Application    -             -            X           -          X      -
Conference
with Hearing
Body [j]
4. Applicant
files 4 copies
of application X             X            X           X          X      X
with
Administrator
5.
Administrator
checks         X             X            X           X          X      X
application
for compliance
[b]
6. If in
compliance,
Administrator  X             X            X           X          X      X
sets date for
meeting or
hearing
7. Applicant
provides       X             X[i]         X           -          X      -
Public Notice
[c]
8. Applicant
files 15 hard
copies and 1
electronic
copy of        X             X            X           X          X      X
application
complying with
Ordinance with
Zoning
Administrator
9.
Administrator
sends copies   X             X            X           X          X      X
of application
to staff for
comment
10.
Administrator
transmits      X             X            X           X          X      X
staff report
to Hearing
Body [d]
11. Formal
Public Hearing X             X[i]         X           -          X      -
is held
12. Applicant
files revised
or additional
material       X             X            X           -          X      -
requested by
Hearing Body
(optional)
13. Hearing
Body meets &   -             -            -           -          -      X
takes final
action [e]
14. Hearing
body meets and
makes          X             X            X           X          X      -
recommendation
to City
Council [f]
Time limit in
number of days
[g]:
a. from close  45            45           45          -          45     -
of hearing
b. from
receipt of
complete       -             -            -           45         -      -
application by
hearing body
15. City
Council takes  X             X            X           X          X      -
final action
[h]
16.
Administrator
issues permit  -             -            -           X          -      -
for approved
petition
 
X : Procedure is applicable.
- : Procedure is not applicable.
Administrator: Zoning Administrator
PC: City Plan Commission
ZBA: City Zoning Board of Appeals
CC: City Council
* Major and Minor Amendments shall be as defined in the Planned Unit
Development chapter of this Ordinance.
a)   Approval of a General Site Plan shall be required for all development in
the SD District before the filing of a PUD Preliminary Plan.
b)   Completeness, accuracy, and compliance with the provisions of this and
other applicable ordinances.
c)   As provided under Public Notice herein.
d)   Shall be transmitted no less than 7 days before applicable scheduled
hearing or meeting date.
e)   Final action shall be subject to Appeal as provided herein and to judicial
review.
f)   Report of Hearing Body shall be mailed to applicant and representatives of
objectors at least 5 days before scheduled date of Council meeting at which it
is to be acted upon.
g)   Shall not apply if applicant withdraws application or is granted a request
to table it.
h)   Final action shall be taken only after receipt of a recommendation from
the Hearing Body or the expiration of the time limit for submission thereof and
shall be subject only to judicial review.
i)   Public notice and a Formal Public Hearing shall be required only for a
Major Amendment.
j)   A filing fee as established by City Council shall be required for a Pre
Application Conference. A Pre-Application Conference shall be necessary only if
recommended by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 1989, 6-19-02) (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21) (Ord. O2023-17, 4-17-23)
3. ALLOWABLE USES
A. USES LISTED
Uses allowed as Permitted or Special Uses in any zoning district shall be as
provided in
Table 3A.
Any use not listed therein, or listed with no district entry, shall be
prohibited.
B. CUMULATIVE DISTRICTS
Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, within the categories of
Residential, Business, Office, and Manufacturing Districts, uses shall be
allowed as Permitted or Special Uses in any district if they are allowed as
Permitted Uses or Special Uses, respectively, in any lower-numbered district
within the same category.
Any use authorized as a Permitted Use in a district that also qualifies, by
virtue of cumulativeness with another district, as a Special Use, shall be
considered a Permitted Use in that district.
Liquor related uses must also obtain a liquor license and comply with
additional regulations provided in Title 3 Chapter 2 of the City Code titled
Liquor Control Regulations.
Table 3A: Permitted and Special Uses in All Zoning Districts
Uses listed are also Permitted or Special Uses in all higher-numbered districts
with same letter designation.
*    Indicates uses allowed only along arterial streets designated in
Comprehensive Plan.
**   Conditional use only. See Section 7 - F.
***   The following list of Home Occupations uses shall be allowed in the TO
zoning district provided that in aggregate no more than 25% of the gross floor
area of the building, up to a maximum of 1,000 square feet, is occupied by one
or more of these uses:
   a.   art, photography, painting, sculpting or crafts studio,
   b.   dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring,
   c.   teaching of music or dancing to no more than 4 pupils at one time,
   d.   other teaching or tutoring, limited to 6 pupils at one time,
   e.   hair styling and cutting,
   f.   repair of small appliances.
****   Massage establishment uses must also obtain a massage establishment
business license and comply with the additional regulations provided in Title 3
Chapter 26 of the City Code Massage Establishments.
         Most Restrictive (Lowest Numbered)  Most Restrictive (Lowest Numbered)
Land Use Districts Use is a Permitted Use    Districts Use is a Special Use in
         in
                   Most Restrictive (Lowest        Most Restrictive (Lowest
Land Use           Numbered) Districts Use is a    Numbered) Districts Use is a
                   Permitted Use in                Special Use in
Abattoirs or                                          
slaughterhouses
Abrasives                     M2                       
manufacture
Accessory                                    B2     M1  
businesses
Accessory
structures over                              R1        
max. flr. area
Accessory uses to  R1 B2 O1      M1                       
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses to                            R1 B2 O1   M1
Special Uses
Acid manufacture                                      
or processing
Adult use cannabis                                    
cultivation center
Adult use cannabis                             B2     M1
dispensary *
Adult uses                    M1                       
Agriculture                                  R1 B2 O1   M1
Agriculture
without animal     R1 B2 O1      M1                       
and/or poultry
husbandry
Airports                                         O2   M 1
Amusement parks *                              B4      
Animals farm
keeping of -
Accessory Use to                                     M 1
approved Special
Use School
Animal grooming      B2                                
Animal hospitals *                             B4      
Apparel                       M2                       
manufacture
Appliance repair     B2        M1                       
shops, domestic
Armories                                         O2   M2
Arsenals                                              
Auction rooms        B4                                
Auditoriums                                      O2   M2
Automated teller     B2 O1      M1                       
machines
Automobile & truck
rental (indoor       B2                                
only)
Automobile & truck
rental (with         B2                                
outdoor storage)
Automobile                                     B4      
Detailing Shop
Automobile Indoor                              B4      
Storage
Automobile                                     B4     M2
laundries *
Automobile repair                              B4     M2
shops
Automobile sales
(no open sales       B4        M2                B2      
lot) *
Bakeries (plants)             M2                       
Bakery
distribution
centers with or               M1                       
without Bakery
Outlet stores
Banks                B2 O2      M1                       
Barber shops         B2                                
Bars & taverns       B2                               M2
Bars with live
entertainment or     B2                                
dancing
Bars, no live
entertainment or     B2                                
dancing
Beauty shops         B2                                
Bed & breakfast                              R1 B2 O1   M1
lodging
Bicycle sales,       B2                                
rental, and repair
Blueprinting &       B2        M1                       
photostating shops
Boat repair          B4        M1                       
Boat, marine
sales-no open        B4                                
sales lot *
Body shops                                     B4     M2
Bottled gas          B4        M1                       
dealers
Bottling companies            M1                       
Bowling alleys       B4                         B2      
Brew pubs            B2                                
Brick clay                    M2                       
products
Building materials            M2                      M1
sales, storage
Bus stations *                                 B4      
Business machine     B2        M1                       
sales & rental
Business service     B2        M1                  O1    
uses
Cable TV headends                            R1        
Campgrounds                                           
Camping equipment    B4                                
sales
Cannabis craft                                        
grower
Cannabis infuser                                     M1
Cannabis processor                                    
Catering             B2                                
establishments
Cemeteries                                   R1        
Churches and
religious
institutions (occ. R1 B2 O1                              
load of 150 or
less)
Churches and
religious
institutions (occ. R1                           B2 O1    
load of more than
150)
Civic buildings
(occ. load of 150    B2 O1                              
or less)
Civic buildings
(occ. load of more                             B2 O1    
than 150)
Clinics              B2 O1      M1                       
Clothing products             M1                       
manufacture
Club or lodge,
private (occ. load   B2 O1                              
of 150 or less)
Club or lodge,
private (occ. load                             B2 O1    
of more than 150)
Cluster
residential                                  R1        
subdivisions
Colleges and                                 R1   O2    
universities
Commercial Vehicle
Parking in
Residential Zoning R1                         R1        
Districts per
Section
5.B.11.A
Community Garden   R1 B2 O1 T O   M1                       
Computer sales &     B2        M1                       
rental
Concrete mixing               M2                       
plants
Concrete, cement,             M2                       
mortar plants
Construction
bldgs, trailers,   R1 B2 O1      M1                       
temporary
Contractor
offices, no          B4        M1                       
storage yards
Contractors (at a
bldg. materials                                B2      
store)
Contractors
(incldg. shops &
storage yards                 M2                       
enclosed with
solid 8' tall
screening fencing)
Convention halls                                 O2    
Convents                                     R1        
Credit unions        B2 O1      M1                       
Crematories                                    B2      
Creosote
manufacturing or                                      
processing
Currency exchanges   B2        M2                       
Custom dressmaking   B2                                
shops
Dairy products                M2                       
processing
Dance halls (occ.
load of 150 or       B4                         B2      
less)
Dance halls (occ.
load of more than                              B2      
150)
Data processing                                  O2    
centers
Day care centers,    B2 O1                              
adult
Day care centers,                              B2 O1    
child
Dental offices       B2 O1 TO                            
Detonable
materials, over 5                                     
lbs.
Dog training                  M1                  O1    
Dog training,        B2                                
Indoor
Drive-in, drive-                               B2     M1
through facilities
Dry cleaning         B2                                
receiving stations
Dumps                                                 
Duplex or two-     R6                         R4        
family dwellings
Dwelling unit of              M2                       
caretaker
Dwelling units     R6 B2                                
above ground floor
Dwelling units,      B2 O1                              
existing
Electric vehicle
charging station,  R1 B2 O1 TO    M1                       
accessory
Electrical           B2        M1                       
showrooms
Employment           B2        M1                       
agencies
Equipment rental              M1                       
Exterminating        B4                                
services
Farm implement,
feed, & seed         B4                                
stores
Farm stands,         B2 O1      M1                       
permanent
Farms, mink,                                          
poultry, or hog
Fat rendering                                         
Feed mills                    M2                       
Feed, flour, and                                      
grain storage
Feeding stations,                                     
cattle
Fertilizer
manufacturing or                                      
processing
Finance companies    B2 O1      M1                       
Fire stations *                              R1 B2      
Food manufacture,
processing,                   M2                      M1
packaging
Freight terminal                                     M2
Fuel storage, bulk                                   M1
Funeral homes        B2                                
Furniture, carpet,
bedding                       M2                       
manufacture
Game rooms           B2                                
Gas stations,                                  B4      
automobile
Glass stores         B2                                
Golf courses and
country clubs,                               R1        
private
Golf courses,                                R1        
publicly owned
Golf driving range                           R1        
Government
buildings, no        B2 O1                              
maint. shops
Grain storage,                M2                       
processing
Graphics &           B2 O1      M1                       
drafting services
Greenhouses,         B4        M2                B2      
commercial
Gunsmith shops       B2        M1                       
Gymnastic academy/                                   M1
school
Health clubs *       B4        M1                B2 O1    
Home occupations   R1     TO***                R1        
Hospitals *                                    B2 O2    
Hotels and motels    B4                         B2 O2    
*
Illuminated skate
parks, team sport    B2 O1                     R1        
fields and courts
Incinerators                                          
Industrial                    M1                       
Assembly
Industry, heavy               M2                       
Industry, light               M1                       
Industry, limited                              B4      
*
Insurance offices    B2 O1 T O   M1                       
Junk yards                                           M2
Kennels,                                     R1 B2      
commercial *
Kennels, private                             R1        
Laboratories,
medical, dental,              M1                B2 O1    
optical
Laboratories,        B4 O2      M1                B2      
research & testing
Landfills                                             
Landscape                     M1                       
contractors
Laundries,
cleaners (max. 03    B2                                
employees)
Laundries,
cleaners (max. 05                              B2      
employees)
Laundries,
cleaners (max. 10    B4                                
employees)
Laundries,
cleaners (over 10             M 2                      
employees)
Laundries,           B2                                
receiving stations
Laundromats                                    B2      
Lawn care services            M1                       
Libraries &          B2                       R1        
reading rooms
Liquor
Manufacturing with
ancillary retail                               B2      
and/or tasting
room/pub
Liquor
Manufacturing with
or without                                           M1
ancillary retail
and/or tasting
room/pub
Locksmith shops      B2        M1                       
Lumber yards *       B4        M1                       
Machine shops                 M2                       
Machinery sales                                B4      
Machinery, heavy,             M2                       
manufacture
Machinery, light,             M1                       
manufacture
Mail order houses    B2        M1                       
Manufactured home                                     
parks *
Manufactured home                                     
subdivisions
Manufactured homes                                    
(individual lots)
Manuf. home sales
(no open sales                                 B4      
lot)
Massage              B2   TO                            
establishment****
Medical cannabis
cultivation                   M1                       
center, registered
by the State
Medical cannabis
dispensing
organization,                 M1                B2      
registered by the
State
Medical offices      B2 O1 TO                            
Meeting halls
(occupant load of    B2 O1                              
150 or less)
Meeting halls
(occupant load of                              B2 O1    
more than 150)
Metal reduction,              M2                       
refinement
Mini-warehouses                                      M1
Model home &                                   B4      
garage displays
Model homes        R1                                  
Monasteries                                  R1        
Monument sales (no   B4        M1                       
open sales lot)
Mortuaries           B2                                
Motor vehicle                 M2                       
terminal
Motorcycle repair    B4                                
shops
Motorcycle sales
(no open sales       B4                                
lot)
Multi-family
dwellings:         R6                         R5        
fourplex
Multiple-family    R6                                  
dwellings
Municipal Well     R1                                  
House
Museums & art        B2                       R1        
galleries
Musical instrument   B2        M1                       
shops
Newspaper
distribution         B4 O2      M1                       
agencies
Newspaper offices    B2                                
Nurseries, tree      B4                                
and shrub
Nursing homes        B2                       R6   O1    
Off-track
entertainment                                  B2      
complexes
Offices, business    B2 O1 TO    M1                       
and professional
Offices,
government &         B2 O1      M1                       
institutional
Oil refining                                          
Open sales lots                                B4     M1
Optometry offices    B2   TO                            
Ore reduction                                         
Outdoor
advertising                                           
(billboards)
Outdoor amusement                            R1        
establishments
Outdoor display **   B2                                
Outdoor eating &
drinking
facilities                                     B2     M1
accessory to
allowed principal
use
Outdoor storage                                B4     M1
Paper products                M2                       
manufacture
Parking, off-
street, as           B4        M2                B2 O2    
principal use *
Parks,
playgrounds,       R1 B2 O2                              
forest preserves
Parks,
playgrounds, open    B2 O1                     R1        
space, private
Pawnshops            B4                                
Pay day loan                  M1                       
stores
Permitted Public   R1 B2 O1      M1                       
Uses
Philanthropic or
charitable
institutions         B2 O1                              
(occupant load of
150 or less)   
Philanthropic or
charitable
institutions                                   B2 O1    
(occupant load of
more than 150)
Photo processing     B2        M1                       
stores
Pigeons, keeping   R1                                  
of
Planned Unit                                 R1 B2 O1   M1
Developments
Plumbing & heating   B4        M1                       
sales
Pool halls *         B4                         B2      
Post offices         B2                                
Pottery & ceramics            M2                       
manufacture
Precision
instrument                    M1                       
manufacture
Print shops (6 or    B2                                
fewer employees)
Printing &           B4        M1                       
publishing plants
Printing shops
(max. 10                                       B2      
employees)
Quarries & sand                            SD          
and gravel pits
Radio & television            M2                B2      
studios
Radio and                                      B2 O2   M1
television towers
Railroad stations                              B4      
Real estate          B2 O1 TO                            
offices
Recording studios    B4                                
Recreation
institution                                    B2 O1    
(occupant load of
150 or less)
Recreation
institution                                    B2 O1    
(occupant load of
more than 150)
Recr. vehicle
sales (no open       B4                                
sales lot)
Recreational
vehicle repair                                 B4     M2
shops
Rectories                                    R1        
Recycling centers,                                   M1
solid waste
Reducing salons &    B2                                
fitness centers
Repair of items      B2                                
sold in district
Research &
development            O2      M1                       
facilities
Restaurants          B2                           O2    
serving alcohol
Restaurants with
entertainment,       B2                                
dancing
Restaurants,                                   B2      
drive-in
Restaurants,         B2                               M2
except drive-in
Retail in off
bldg--max 50% grd    B2 O1                              
flr area
Retail               B2                                
Retail within a                                  O2   M1
Permitted Use
Roadside stands    R1                                  
Rubber
manufacturing or                                      
processing
Sales lot, open                                B4     M1
Sales office,      R1 B2 O1      M1                       
temporary
Salt works                                            
Sauerkraut
manufacturing or                                      
processing
Savings & loans      B2 O1      M1                       
and savings banks
Scavenger service                                    M2
Schools and
Educational
Institutions         B2 O1                     R1        
(occupant load of
150 or less)
Schools and
Educational
Institutions                                 R1 B2 O1    
(occupant load of
more than 150)
Schools,
commercial/ trade    B2                           O1    
(occupant load of
150 or less)
Schools,
commercial/ trade                              B2 O2    
(occupant load of
more than 150)
Secretarial          B2                                
services
Seminaries                                   R1        
Servants' living   R1                                  
quarters
Sewer cleaning                                       M1
services
Shoe & boot                   M2                       
manufacture
Shoe repair shops    B2                                
Single-family      R6                                  
attached homes
Single-family      R1                                  
detached homes
Skating rinks
(occupant load of    B4                         B2      
150 or less)
Skating rinks
(occupant load of                              B2      
more than 150)
Smelters                                              
Soap manufacturing                                    
or processing
Special Public                                 B2 O1   M1
Uses
Stables, private   R1                                  
Stadiums & arenas                              B4 O2   M2
*
Stock yards or                                        
slaughtering
Stone products                M2                       
manufacture
Streets and alleys R1 B2 O1      M1                       
Studios, art,
music, or            B2 O1      M1                       
photography
Swimming pool
sales (no open       B4                                
sales lot)
Swimming pools,                                B2      
commercial
Swimming pools,
commercial or                                R1        
public
Synthetic polymers                                    
manufacturing
Tailor shops         B2                                
Tallow, grease,                                       
lard manufacturing
Tanning salons       B2                                
Tanning, curing of                                    
hides
Tattoo & body
piercing             B2                                
establishment
Tar distillation                                      
Tax preparation      B2 O1                              
offices
Taxidermists         B2                                
Telegraph offices    B2                                
Telephone            B2                                
exchanges
Temporary
construction       R1 B2 O1      M1                       
buildings
Temporary real     R1 B2 O1      M1                       
estate offices
Theaters (occupant
load of 150 or       B2                                
less)
Theaters (occupant
load of more than                              B2      
150)
Therapeutic
equestrian                                   R1        
facility
Ticket offices,      B2                                
amusement
Ticket offices,      B2                                
transportation
Tobacco shops        B2                                
Tourist homes                                R1 B2 O1   M1
Tourist
information          B2                                
centers
Towing & vehicle              M2                       
relocation
Townhouses         R6                                  
Trailer & mobile                               B4     M2
home repair
Trailer parks &                                       
campgrounds
Trailer sales (no    B4        M2                       
open sales lot)*
Transfer stations,                                    
solid waste
Travel agencies      B2                                
Truck repair shops                             B4     M1
Truck sales (no      B4        M2                B2      
open sales lot) *
Truck stops                   M2                B4      
Union halls
(occupant load of    B2 O1                              
150 or less)
Union halls
(occupant load of                              B2 O2    
more than 150)
Veterinarian         B4                         B2      
offices *
Warehousing &        B4        M1                       
distribution
Water softener       B4                                
services
Wholesaling                   M1                       
Woodshops &
cabinet shops (10             M1                       
or fewer employees
on any one shift)
Woodshops &
cabinet shops
(between 11 and 20                                   M1
employees on any
one shift)
Woodshops &
cabinet shops (21             M2                       
or more employees
on any one shift)
Wrecking yards                                        
Zero lot line
single-family                                         
homes
 
No entry in either column indicates prohibited use.
(Ord. 1817, 3-23-00) (Ord. 1963, 2-25-02) (Ord. 2049, 4-25-03) (Ord. 2103, 12-
2-03) (Ord. 2190, 2-9-05) (Ord. 2247, 11-9-05) (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06) (Ord. 2335,
11-7-06) (Ord. 2379, 5-24-07) (Ord. 2386, 7-6-07) (Ord. 2403, 11-6-07) (Ord.
2477, 9-16-08) (Ord. 2517, 6-1-09) (Ord. 2533, 8-5-09) (Ord. 2536, 8-18-09)
(Ord. 2539, 9-9-09) (Ord. 2621, 12-21-10) (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13) (Ord. 2821, 1-6-
14) (Ord. 2977, 2-1-16) (Ord. 2988, 3-21-16) (Ord. O2017-06, 2-21-17) (Ord.
O2017-26, 5-15-17) (Ord. 2019-62, 12-2-19) (Ord. 2023-39, 9-18-2023) (Ord.
O2024-07, 2-5-2024) (Ord. O2024-11, 2-20-2024; Ord. O2024-35, 9-3-2024; Ord.
O2024-47, 11-18-2024; Ord. O2025-21, 4-21-2025; Ord. O2025-49, 10-20-2025)
Table 3B: Retail Uses
         Most Restrictive (Lowest Numbered)  Most Restrictive (Lowest Numbered)
Land Use Districts Use is a Permitted Use    Districts Use is a Special Use in
         in
                    Most Restrictive (Lowest       Most Restrictive (Lowest
Land Use            Numbered) Districts Use is a   Numbered) Districts Use is a
                    Permitted Use in               Special Use in
Antique shops        B2                             
Appliance stores,    B2                             
domestic
Art shops or
galleries, no        B2                             
auction rooms
Art, craft, school   B2                             
supply store
Auto parts stores    B2                             
Bakery stores        B2                             
(retail)
Bookstores           B2                             
Building materials
retail, no lumber    B2                             
yds.
Camera stores        B2                             
Candy shops          B2                             
Card shops           B2                             
Carpet stores,       B2                             
retail
Clothing stores      B2                             
Coin and stamp       B2                             
shops
Convenience marts    B2                             
Dairy stores (no
processing,          B2                             
bottling)
Delicatessens        B2                             
Department stores    B2                             
Discount department  B2                             
stores
Donut shops          B2                             
Drug stores          B2                             
Dry goods stores     B2                             
Fish markets         B2                             
Florist shops        B2                             
Food stores          B2                             
Frozen food stores,
including locker     B2                             
rental
Furniture stores,
including            B2                             
upholstery
Furrier shops with
storage,             B2                             
conditioning
Garden supply        B2                             
stores
Gift shops           B2                             
Glass stores         B2                             
Grocery stores       B2                             
Haberdasheries       B2                             
Hardware stores      B2                             
Health food stores   B2                             
Hearing aid stores   B2                             
Hobby and craft      B2                             
shops
Ice cream shops      B2                             
Interior decorating  B2                             
shops
Jewelry and watch    B2                             
sales and repair
Leather goods shops  B2                             
Liquor stores        B2                             
Luggage shops        B2                             
Meat markets         B2                             
Millinery shops      B2                             
Newspaper and        B2                         O2   
magazine shops
Nut shops            B2                             
Office supply        B2                             
stores
Optician sales,      B2                             
retail
Orthopedic and
medical supplies,    B2                             
retail
Paint stores         B2                             
Pet shops            B2                             
Picture framing      B2                             
shops, retail
Popcorn shops        B2                             
Produce markets      B2                             
Record, tape, and    B2                             
music shops
Second hand stores   B2                             
Sewing machine       B2                             
sales and service
Shoe stores          B2                             
Sporting goods       B2                             
stores
Stationery stores    B2                             
Supermarkets         B2                             
Tile stores          B2                             
Toy stores           B2                             
Variety stores       B2                             
Video cassette       B2                             
sales and rental
Wallpaper stores     B2                             
Yard goods stores    B2                             
Yogurt shops         B2                             
 
(Ord. O2017-26, 5-15-17) (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. O2024-
33, passed 8-5-2024). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-1 Estate Density Single Family Residential District
Purpose: To encourage the orderly transition of land from agricultural use and
to provide areas well suited by virtue of location and topography to meet
demand for single-family detached dwellings on large lots where minimum
community services may be appropriate.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B. (Ord. O2025-05, 2-18-2025)
R-1A Low Density Single Family Residential District
Purpose: To encourage an orderly transition between larger lot, rural, septic
and well residential areas and more intense urban uses by providing areas for
detached single-family dwellings on larger lots where a complete range of
public services (i.e., City sewer and water, sidewalk, street lights, concrete
curb and gutter, etc.) may be required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B. (Ord. 1817, 3-23-2000; amd. Ord. O2025-05, 2-18-2025)
R-2 Medium-Low-Density Single-Family Residential District
Purpose: To provide areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by medium-large sized lots where a range of public services may
be required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B.
R-3 Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District
Purpose: To provide areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by medium-sized lots where a complete range of public services is
required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B.
R-4 Medium-High-Density Single-Family Residential District
Purpose: To provide areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by medium-small-sized lots where a complete range of public
services is required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B.
R-5 High-Density Single-Family Residential District
Purpose: To provide areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by small-sized lots where a complete range of public services is
required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B.
R-6 Multi-Family Residential District
Purpose: To provide areas for higher-density single-, two-, and multiple-family
dwellings where a complete range of public services is required.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A,
4A, and
4B. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-2021)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
B-2 Community Retail District
Purpose: To provide areas to accommodate the general retail needs of
Warrenville residents.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C.
B-4 Motorist Service District
Purpose: To provide along arterial streets for heavier forms of retail and
wholesale uses serving more than one neighborhood that require highway
locations and that may be incompatible with retail uses permitted in other
Business Districts.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-2021)
OFFICE DISTRICTS
O-1 Limited Office District
Purpose: To provide for low-intensity office development suitable for locations
adjacent to residential development where more intensive forms of commercial
development would not be compatible.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C.
O-2 Office Park District
Purpose: To provide large, accessible parcels along arterial streets for
planned large-scale office park development and for limited retail and service
uses related thereto.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C
TRANSITIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT
To provide areas that can accommodate very limited office uses that by virtue
of the characteristics listed herein below can serve as an effective transition
between single family residential properties, institutional uses, other
sensitive uses and either non-residential zoned property and/or arterial
streets.
   A.   A small size establishment and small land area requirements
   B.   Low traffic generation
   C.   No outdoor storage, sales or operational requirements
   D.   Lack of noise, odors, and other nuisance type effects potentially
objectionable to nearby residential properties
   E.   Maintenance of an aesthetic appearance and scale compatible with nearby
residential properties
General Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C.
Eligibility Regulations: Unless otherwise approved as a variance, no property
or group of properties shall be eligible for transitional Office Zoning unless
the following requirements are met:
   A.   The property must abut a Single-Family Residential District, and
   B.   Abuts or is across a dedicated right-of way from B2, B4, O1, O2, SD,
M1, or M2 District, or is identified on the City of Warrenville Comprehensive
Land Use Plan Map for either Office or Office/Research Use, and (Ord. 1817, 3-
23-2000)
   C.   The existing structure was originally designed for residential use and
has maintained a residential appearance or in the instance of a new structure,
all special architectural design standards applicable to the Transitional
Office District are satisfied, and
   D.   The property has frontage on and access to an arterial street as
designated in the Warrenville Comprehensive Land Use Plan (see appendix A-15
for arterial road listing) unless it is a corner lot, in which case, access
shall be permitted to be off the secondary side street.
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
Purpose: To provide an environment suitable for lighter manufacturing,
warehousing, office, and related uses that will have limited adverse
environmental effects.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C.
M-2 General Manufacturing District
Purpose: To accommodate industrial activities that have more significant
adverse environmental effects than uses permitted in the M-1 District.
Regulations: As provided in Tables
3A and
4C.
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
SD Special Development District
Purpose: To provide appropriate and flexible zoning for large parcels to be
developed according to a single integrated plan for mixed residential,
business, and institutional uses.
Regulations: As provided in
Table 4C and the Planned Unit Development section herein.
TABLE 4A: Residential District Requirements(s)
 R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
           R-1      R-1A     R-2        R-3        R-4        R-5      R-6
Minimum
lot AREA
(a)(j) per 40,00 0
dwelling   sf       30,000   18,00 0 sf 14,00 0 sf 10,00 0 sf 7,000 sf 4,356 sf
unit per
square
foot
Minimum
lot WIDTH  140'     125'     90'        75'        60'        50'      140' (e)
(a)(n)(j)
Minimum
FRONT or
CORNER     40'      40'      40'        35'        35'        30' (l)  30'
SIDE yard
(m)(p)
Minimum
INTERIOR   20'      20'      12/5'      10'        7.5'       5'       (g)
SIDE yard
(f)
Minimum    60'      60'      60'        40'        35'        30'      30'
REAR yard
Minimum
Ground
FLOOR AREA
per                                                       
Dwelling   1,400 sf 1,400 sf 1,200 sf   1,200 sf   1,100 sf   1,000 sf  
One Story  800 sf   800 sf   700 sf     600 sf     600 sf     550 sf   900 sf
Buildings
Multi-
Story
Buildings
Maximum
Lot
COVERAGE      See Footnote (h)
In percent
of Lot
Area (h)
Maximum
building   35'(i)   35'(i)   34'(i)     33'(i)     32'(i)     32'      35'
HEIGHT
          See Footnote (r)
PERMITTED
and        As Provided in
SPECIAL    Table 3A
USES (k)
Maximum
building
HEIGHT     40'      40'      38'        35'        34'        N/A      N/A
with Bonus
(i)
PARKING &  As provided in Off-Street Parking & Loading chapter of the Zoning
LOADING    Ordinance.
LANDSCAPIN
G &        As provided in Landscape in Chapter 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
SCREENING
SIGNS      As provided in Sign Ordinance No. 1554, Title 8, Chapter 6.
SITE PLAN  As provided in Filing Procedures chapter of the Zoning Ordinance.
APPROVAL
 
Footnotes to Table 4A
(a)   For Single-Family detached dwellings on newly created lots not served by
public sewers, minimum lot area and width shall be 40,000 sf and 140 feet,
respectively.
(b)   Minimum lot area for townhouse, single-family attached, and multi-family
developments shall in no case be less than 40,000 sf.
(c)   Except single-family detached dwellings in R-6, which shall have 6,000 sf
if served by public sewer and 40,000 sf otherwise.
(d)   All principal uses in R-6 except single-family detached dwellings shall
be served by public sewer.
(e)   Except for the following uses in R-6:
 
Two-Family                               80 feet
Single-Family Detached with Public Sewer 50 feet
 
(f)   Or 10% of the width of the lot, whichever is less.
(g)   Minimum interior side yard width in R-6 shall be:
 
Single-Family Detached              5 feet
Single-Family Attached & Townhouses 10 feet
Two-Family                          10 feet
Multi-Family                        25 feet
Side yard requirements for attached dwelling units on separate lots shall not
apply where the unit is attached to another unit at the side lot line.
 
(h)   Unless otherwise approved by Planned Unit Development, the lot coverage
in residential districts shall be as follows:
 
Lot Size                       Max Lot Coverage, whichever is greater
>= 30,000 sf.                  28% or 9,599 sq. feet
>= 14,000 sf. and < 30,000 sf. 32% or 5,039 sq. ft.
>= 10,000 sf. and < 14,000 sf. 36% or 3,999 sq. ft.
>= 7,000 sf. and < 10,000 sf.  40% or 3,080 sq. ft.
< 7,000 sf.                    44% without limitation on the number of square
                               feet
 
   Lot coverage includes principal structures, driveways, and accessory
structures, including, without limitation, patios, pools and accessory
buildings including, without limitation, garages; provided, however, that
pervious pavers, green roofs, and fences shall be excluded from the lot
coverage calculations. For the purposes of this footnote (h), the following
definitions shall apply:
      “Pervious pavers” means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable
pavers or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow
passage of water through the pavement section. It includes an aggregate base
that provides structural support and acts as a stormwater reservoir.
      “Green roof” means an engineered roofing system that allows for the
propagation of rooftop vegetation and the retention of stormwater while
maintaining the integrity of the underlying roof structure and membrane.”
   Whenever the lot coverage would have exceeded the maximum allowable lot
coverage but for the exclusion of pervious pavers or green roofs, the property
owner must execute and record, at its sole expense, a permeable improvement
maintenance agreement and covenant, in the form periodically approved by the
City council. The permeable improvement maintenance agreement and covenant must
run with the land, bind future owners of the property, require the permeable
improvement to be maintained in a first-rate manner, and prohibit the pervious
pavers or green roof from being converted to impervious pavers or non-green
roof without first obtaining a permit for such conversion from the city.
(i)   Height Bonus: An increase of both minimum required side yard setbacks (or
both a side yard and a corner side yard setback on corner lots) of one foot
(1') more than the setback required under
Table 4A, excluding footnote (f), allows six inches (6'') more of building
height up to the maximum height as specified in
Table 4A.
(j)   Reserve/Flag lots, enabling access to interior areas of a parcel from a
dedicated street only, may be permitted in accordance with the following:
      1.   All lots shall be a minimum of 40,000 sf, exclusive of the portion
of the lot used as the reserve strip;
      2.   That each reserve strip providing access to a lot shall be not less
than 20 feet in width;
      3.   That not more than three lots consisting of two reserve lots with
reserve strips, each 20 feet in width, and one key lot with a frontage of not
less than 125 feet wide along the dedicated street shall be permitted;
      4.   That all reserve lots shall be subdivided in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations; and
      5.   That where more than one reserve lot is created, the reserve strips,
i.e., 40 foot access to interior lots, shall be dedicated and marked as private
easement or access to interior lots, with only one permitted entrance to the
dedicated street for both reserve lots.
(k)   Subject to the provisions governing Special Uses in the Special
Development Approvals section.
(l)   If a corner lot, in an R-5 residence district cannot meet the
requirements of
Table 4A corner side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, maintaining an
interior side yard of five (5) feet and a building width of no more than thirty
(30) feet is allowed.
(m)   The building façade facing the Front Property Line shall contain a window
(s) and/or egress doors containing a total rough opening area not less than 16
square feet.
(n)   Minimum lot width of corner lots in the R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 Districts
shall be increased by 20% from the minimum dimensions outlined herein. The
increase shall be required for any subdivision or re-subdivision resulting in
the creation of a corner lot after September 1, 1995.
(o)   Reserved For Future Use.
(p)   Except as otherwise provided in footnote (q), in any single family
residential district where 50 percent or more of the frontage of a block has
been developed with buildings, the minimum front or corner side yard shall be
the lesser of the mean average of the existing actual front and corner side
yards on the block or the underlying front and corner side yard setback
regulations found in Table 4A: Residential District Requirements where the new
building is proposed. In computing the “mean average of the existing actual
front and corner side yards on the block,” the following regulations shall
apply:
1.   Flag lots shall be excluded from the frontage of the block measurement and
from the mean average calculation.
2.   Homes on double frontage and through lots shall only be included in the
mean average calculation when the front façade of the home is oriented towards
the block frontage on which the mean average calculation is being performed.
3.   Frontage of the block measurement and mean average calculation on cul-de-
sac streets shall not include vacant lots where more than 50 percent of the lot
width is located on the cul-de-sac bulb or developed lots with a driveway that
connects to the cul-de-sac bulb.
(q)   The provisions of footnote [p] shall not apply in the following
situations:
   1.   Subdivisions approved as a Planned Unit Development unless specifically
stated in the approved PUD ordinance; or
   2.   Lots located in a new subdivision recorded after the effective date
(Ordinance No. O2017-54 effective August 21, 2017) of this footnote when the
entire block on which said lots are located were created by the new
subdivision; or
   3.   Existing homes proposed for reconstruction or expansion/addition shall
be allowed, subject to the provisions of the Nonconformities Chapter, to be
reconstructed or added onto at their current setback or the minimum front/
corner side yard setback established in the underlying zoning district,
whichever is greater.
(r)   See Section
10.A.3.D of the Zoning Ordinance for building height regulations regarding
solar energy systems.
(s)   The following regulations apply to lots located in the specified planned
unit development. To the extent a regulation set forth in this Footnote (s)
conflicts with the regulations provided more generally in Table 4A, the
regulations in this Footnote (s) will apply. To the extent a particular
regulation is provided in Table 4A and is not provided in Footnote (s), the
regulation set forth in Table 4A will apply.
   1.   Summerlakes Planned Unit Development (originally approved pursuant to
Ordinance No. 688):
 
              MAX BLDG HEIGHT MINIMUM YARD SETBACK
LAND USE      STORIES FEET    FRONT REAR SIDE     SIDE STREET  MIN. PARCEL AREA
                                                  (CORNER)
SINGLE FAMILY 2 ½    30'     25'   20'  10'      15'          8400 SF
PATIO HOMES   2       30'     20'   15'  0' OR 5' 15'          3 AC.
TOWN HOMES    2       30'     15'   15'  10'      20'          5AC
 
 
MIN LOT                    MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS     ALLOWABLE
WIDTH AT  MIN LOT AVG. LOT SIDE TO  SIDE TO              FRONT TO BUILDING
BUILDI NG AREA    AREA     SIDE     REAR    REAR TO REAR FRONT    COVERAGE %
LINE
70'       8400 SF 9200 SF  20'      30'     40'          50'      30%
40'       4000 SF 4400 SF  0' OR 5' 15'     30'          40'      60%
20'       1400 SF 1600 SF  0 OR 20' 25'     30'          30'      60%
 
   2.   River Oaks Planned Unit Development (originally approved pursuant to
Ordinance No. 756):
 
Front Yard Setback        35'
Rear Yard Setback         35'
Side Yard Setback         6'
Corner Side Yard Setback  25'
Maximum Height*           2.5 stories or 30' in height
Maximum Building Coverage 30%
 
   3.   Fox Hollow Planned Unit Development <originally approved pursuant to
Ordinance No. 7551:
   4.   Building Coverage: For Summerlakes. River Oaks. and Fox Hollow Planned
Unit Developments. building coverage will be calculated consistent with lot
coverage as outlined in footnote (h) to
Table 4A except that driveways will not be included in building coverage
calculations.
   5.   Maximum Height: For Summerlakes. River Oaks. and Fox Hollow Planned
Unit Developments. building height will be measured as the vertical distance
from grade to the average elevation of the roof of the highest story.
(Ord. 1817, 3-23-2000; amd. Ord. 1906, 4-18-2001; Ord. 1917, 6-20-2001; Ord.
1986, 6-19-2002; Ord. 2014, 9-4-2002; Ord. 2342, 10-3-2006; Ord. 2339, 11-27-
2006; Ord. 2346, 12-15-2006; Ord. 2366, 4-4-2007; O2017-54, 8-21-2017; O2019-
34, 6-17-2019; Ord. O2022-14, 4-18-2022; Ord. O2024-35, 9-3-2024; Ord. O2025-
03,1-20-2025; Ord. O2025-05, 2-18-2025; Ord. O2025-10, 3-17-2025; Ord. O2025-
54, 11-3-2025)
Table 4B: Special Requirements for Certain Uses in Residential Districts
                           Minimum Required Setback from Residential District
 Minimum Lot Area in Acres [a]
                           Amount in Feet Measured From
                                                                       Minimum Required
                                                               Minimum Setback from
                                                               Lot     Residential
                                                               Area in District [a]
                                                               Acres   Amount Measured
                                                                       in     From
                                                                       Feet
                                                                              Any
1.   Golf Course [b]                                        30[c]   300    accessory
                                                                              building
2.   Educational, Cultural, Philanthropic, and Recreational -       40     Principal
Institutions                                                                  building
3.   Kennels
    a. Commercial                                           [d]     -
    b. Private                                              1       -
                                                                              Any
4.   Private Outdoor Recreation Areas [e]                   5       50     accessory
                                                                              building
5. Agriculture                                                 5       -      -
6.   Agriculture without Animal and/or Poultry Husbandry    -       -      -
 
[a]:   From any other lot in a Residential District.
[b]:   Lighting for night play is allowable only if approved as a Special Use.
[c]:   A dimension smaller than the minimum may be approved as a Special Use.
[d]:   2 acres for up to 19 animals plus 2 acres for each additional 10 animals
or fraction thereof.
[e]:   Hunt and gun clubs shall be operated in accordance with National Rifle
Association regulations.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-2006; amd. Ord. 2821, 1-6-2014)
Table 4C: Commercial District Requirements
ZONING DISTRICT
 B2 B4 M1 M2 O1 O2 TO SD
                       B2     B4    M1  M2  O1    O2  TO   SD
Minimum LOT AREA                                     
Total in acres:        -      -     1   0.5 0.5   5   .25  [g]
Per Business in square 2,50 0 2,500 -   -   -     -   -    -
feet
Minimum LOT WIDTH in   75     75    150 100 75    200 75   -
feet Along Principal   150    150   150 150 150   200 150  -
Arterial [a]
Minimum FRONT YARD
depth or CORNER SIDE
YARD width in feet [b]
[c][j]                 40     40    30  30  40    60  40   -
Adjacent to                                          
Residential District   -      -     60  60  -     -   -    -
[b][j]
Lot with no street
line [m]
Minimum INTERIOR SIDE
YARD width in feet [b] 10     10    20  20  10    20  10   -
[j]                                                  
Adjacent to            15     15    100 100 15    60  15   -
Residential District
[b][j]
Minimum REAR YARD
depth in feet [b][d]   20     20    20  20  20    20  20   -
[j]                                                  
Adjacent to            30     30    100 100 30    60  30   -
Residential District
[b][j]
Maximum FLOOR AREA     0.5    0.7   0.7 0.7 0.5   0.5 -    0.5[e]
Ratio
Maximum LOT COVERAGE
in Percent of Lot Area -      -     -   -   -     -   27%  -
(k)
Maximum Building                                     
HEIGHT [f]             2      3     -   -   2     -   2    -
In Stories:            30***  42    40* 50  30*** 60  33   60**
In Feet:
                         See Footnote (l)
Maximum Building SIZE  -      -     -   -   -     -   6000 -
(in S.F.)
PERMITTED Uses         As provided in
                       TABLE 3A [h]
SPECIAL Uses [l]       As provided in
                       Table 3A [h]
PARKING & Loading      As provided in Off-Street Parking & Loading chapter.
Chapter
LANDSCAPING &          As provided in Chapter 11 of this Ordinance
Screening
PERFORMANCE Standards  As provided in Performance Standards chapter.
SIGNS                  As provided in Title 8, Chap. 6 Municipal Code Ordinance
                       No. 1554
SITE PLAN Approval     As provided in Filing Procedures chapter.
OTHER Requirements     As provided in General Provisions chapter and General
                       Commercial District Regulations section.
 
Footnotes to Table 4C
* Height of up to 60 feet may be approved as a Special Use.
** Height of up to 225 feet may be approved as a Special Use.
*** Height of up to 38 feet is allowed for structures with pitched roof.
(Ord. 2231, 7-21-2005)
[a]:   Required frontage for front and corner side yards on any lot abutting an
arterial street designated in the City Comprehensive Plan except for lots
meeting requirements under Exceptions to Arterial Lot Dimensions in General
District Regulations section.
[b]:   Plus 1 foot in O-2, or 1/3-foot in M-1 and M-2, for each foot of
building height over 35 feet.
[c]:   In the O-2 District, minimum front yard depth or corner side yard width
along an internal circulation drive within a lot shall be 30 feet.
[d]:   In M Districts, no rear yard shall be required adjacent to a railroad or
railroad siding.
[e]:   Maximum Floor Area Ratio in an SD District shall be a cumulative total
of zero point five (0.5) for the gross project area as determined by the
general site plan. For the purposes of this District, the floor area ratio
shall not include floor space devoted to off-street parking and loading. Also,
for the purpose of this District, the gross project area shall not include the
areas contained within existing or proposed dedicated road rights-of-way, but
shall include the areas preserved for open space.
[f]   Maximum is the lesser of the number of stories or height in feet. (Ord.
2231, 7-21-2005)
[g]:   For Single-Family Residential: 10,000 square feet.
   For Multi-Family Residential: 1 acre.
   For Non-Residential: 5 acres.
[h]:   (1)   Permitted Uses in SD District shall be:
      a.   The Permitted and Special Uses allowed within the following
districts:
         (I)   R-6
         (ii)   B-2
         (iii)   0-2
         (iv)   M-1, provided that M-1 uses which are manufacturing uses are
confined to Industrial Assembly and Light Industry Uses only, and further
provided that all M-1 uses, whether manufacturing or non-manufacturing uses,
shall be conducted within an enclosed structure and with no outside storage.
      b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this paragraph,
the following shall not be permitted uses within an SD District:
         (i)   commercial kennels
         (ii)   motor vehicle sales (no open sales lot)
         (iii)   outside storage
         (iv)   bulk fuel storage
         (v)   landscape contractors
         (vi)   lawn care services
         (vii)   recycling centers
         (viii) boat repair
         (ix)   bottled gas dealers
         (x)   lumber yards
         (xi)   sewer cleaning services
   (2)   Special uses in the SD District shall be confined to:
      a.   surface mining activities and related uses
      b.   automobile laundries
      c.   motor vehicle sales (no open sales lot shall be permitted)
      d.   automobile gas station
      e.   manufacturing operations which are not Light Industry or Industrial
Assembly Uses.
      f.   buildings or structures exceeding a height of 60 feet, provided that
the building or structure shall not exceed 225 feet in total height and that
the structure shall not be located within 700 feet of any residential district.
      g.   outside storage
      h.   food manufacture, processing, packaging
      i.   adult use cannabis dispensary; provided, however, that adult use
cannabis dispensary uses in the SD District must comply with the regulations
set forth in the Adult Use Cannabis Dispensaries Additional Regulations and
Restrictions set forth in Subsection 14 of the General Commercial/Office/
Manufacturing District Regulations in Section 4 of this Code. (Ord. O2023-16,
4-17-2023)
[i]:   Subject to the provisions on Special Uses in the Special Development
Approvals section.
[j]:   In the M-1, M-2, and O-2 Districts, minimum for all yards adjacent to
the Illinois Tollway shall be 80 feet
[k]:   Including accessory buildings and structures
[l]:   See Section
10.A.3.D of the Zoning Ordinance for building height regulations regarding
solar energy systems. (O2019-34, 6-17-2019)
[m]:   For a lot with no street line, the minimum front yard depth is measured
from the street line closest to the front lot line instead of from the front
lot line; provided, however, that the distance between any structure on the lot
and the front lot line must not be less than the required interior side yard
width. Note that this measurement might result in a portion of the minimum
front yard depth being provided on a parcel adjacent to the lot with no street
line. (Ord. 2231, 7-21-2005; amd. Ord. O2023-22, 6-5-2023)
GENERAL COMMERCIAL/OFFICE/MANUFACTURING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The following regulations shall apply in all Business, Manufacturing, and
Office Districts, except as otherwise provided herein, and regulations 1, 2, 5,
6, 8 and 10 shall apply to development in an SD District unless otherwise
provided in the SD Development Control Regulations of an SD District.
1. GLARE
Lighting shall be directed away from surrounding properties.
2. OPERATIONS IN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS
Except as may be allowed as a Temporary Use or as otherwise provided herein,
all business, service, storage, merchandise display, and repair and processing
activities shall be wholly conducted within completely enclosed buildings
except for off-street parking and loading; drive-in and drive-through
facilities and walk-up windows; sale of fuel, lubricants, and related fluids at
service stations; open sales lots and outside storage where permitted by
district regulations; and other uses and operations that are commonly and
characteristically conducted in the open. Other uses that are allowed in the M-
2 District may be conducted outside of enclosed buildings within this district
as a Special Use.
3. RETAIL OPERATIONS ONLY IN B-2
In the B-2 District, all businesses shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers, and all goods produced on the premises shall
be sold thereupon at retail.
4. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Where dwelling units are allowed, minimum lot area per dwelling unit and other
development standards shall be the same as required in the highest-numbered
Residential District.
5. MINIMUM SIZE OF SD DISTRICT
No rezoning to the SD Special Development District shall be approved by the
City Council unless the area to be rezoned together with any properties zoned
in the same District that are contiguous or directly across a street total not
less than 300 acres.
6. SERVICE STATION SETBACKS
The minimum setback from the street line of an arterial street or frontage road
for fuel pumps, canopies over pumps, and poles for air and water hoses shall be
20 feet.
7. MANUFACTURING USES IN B-4
In the B-4 District, limited manufacturing uses shall only be approved as
Special Uses if they:
   a.   have no more than 5 employees excluding office, sales, and managerial
workers, and
   b.   employ no power equipment exceeding 3 horsepower.
8. LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS IN B-2
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments approved as Special Uses in the B-
2 District shall meet the following requirements:
   a.   The dry cleaning process shall be a closed, self-contained system.
   b.   All chemicals and "still" residue shall be stored inside the building.
   c.   All waste products shall be disposed of by a waste hauler licensed by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency with records subject to inspection
by the City.
   d.   The establishment shall be subject to periodic inspection by the City.
9. FAR BONUSES IN M-1 and O-2
The following increases in maximum Floor Area Ratio in the M-1 and O-
2 Districts may be approved as a Special Use under the provisions for Special
Uses herein:
   a.   An increase of 0.2 if at least 75 percent of required off-street
parking is provided underground or within a building
   b.   In M-1 only, an increase of 0.02 for each acre of lot size between 2
acres and 10 acres
   c.   In O-2 only, an increase of 0.1 for each 5 acres of lot size between 5
acres and 20 acres.
10. OFF-TRACK ENTERTAINMENT COMPLEXES
Notwithstanding the provisions of
Table 4C, minimum lot area for an off-track entertainment complex, as defined
herein, shall be 15 acres and minimum floor area shall be 25,000 square feet.
11. TRANSITIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT ARCHITECTURAL CONTROLS
To insure structures in the Transitional Office Zoning District are developed
with the appropriate scale and character needed to achieve its intended purpose
as a transitional use between residential properties and non-residential
properties, all principal buildings in the Transitional Office Zoning District
shall either be:
   a.   Roof Design: All buildings shall be designed with hip or gable roofs.
No flat roofs shall be permitted.
   b.   Building Materials: To achieve the character necessary to achieve
harmony with residential uses, the dominant exterior building material and the
trim material shall be limited to brick, stone wood, or aluminum, vinyl or
other material specifically authorized by the Plan Commission.
   c.   Glazed surfaces (glass): Not more than 40% of any architectural
elevation shall be glazed surface. Glazed surfaces shall be residential in
character, such as, double hung windows, casement windows and residential bay/
picture windows.
12. MOTOR VEHICLE, TOWED OR RELOCATED VEHICLE OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND
RESTRICTIONS
The following regulations shall apply to towed or relocated vehicle operations:
   a.   All outdoor storage of vehicles shall be enclosed with a solid eight-
foot tall screening fence.
   b.   All damaged or inoperable vehicles leaking automobile fluids shall be
stored indoors until the leaking fluids are completely drained or the leak is
repaired.
   c.   No inoperable or unlicensed vehicle shall be stored outdoors for more
than seven (7) days. When requested by the City's designated code Enforcement
Officer, the business owner shall provide a copy of the records or log kept to
track how long an individual vehicle has been parked or stored on the property.
   d.   All vehicles shall be stored/parked on a paved surface in accordance
with the requirements of section
5.A.14 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   e.   The outdoor storage of vehicles parts and fluids shall be prohibited
unless specifically approved under a special use permit.
   f.   Outdoor sales of vehicles or vehicle parts shall be prohibited unless
specifically approved under a special use permit.
   g.   All structures that will accommodate the indoor parking or storage of
tow trucks, towed vehicles and/or recovered vehicles shall be equipped with
floor drains and gas and oil interceptors in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2103, 12-02-2003; amd. Ord. 2190, 2-9-2005)
13. AGRICULTURE USE IN COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS
SHALL BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OUTLINED IN TABLE 4B SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR
AGRICULTURE
(Ord. 2821, 1-6-2014)
14. ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSARIES ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
(Ord. O2019-62, 12-2-2019; amd. Ord. O2023-16, 4-17-2023)
The following regulations shall apply to all adult use cannabis dispensaries:
   a.   State License Required: Adult use cannabis dispensaries must obtain
and, at all times, maintain a valid professional license issued by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to operate an adult use
cannabis dispensary. Copies of all state licenses as well as all renewals shall
be provided to the City no later than 30 days of issuance as well as copies of
corresponding application materials, including all required certifications,
declarations, and affidavit, for state licenses and corresponding license
renewals.
   b.   Number of Special Use Permits: No more than two special use permits
shall be issued by the City and be in use for the operation of an adult use
cannabis dispensary at any one time; provided, however, that the City Council
may increase or decrease the maximum number of adult use cannabis dispensary
special use permits by ordinance duly adopted.
   c.   Age Restriction: No person under the age of 21 may be permitted within
any adult use cannabis dispensary, except as authorized by state law.
   d.   Hours of Operation: Adult use cannabis dispensaries shall only operate
between 9:00 am and 9:00 pm.
   e.   Location Restrictions: No adult use cannabis dispensary may be located
on any lot that is:
      (i)   less than 500 feet from any lot used for a pre-existing church,
religious institution, or public library facility;
      (ii)   less than 1,000 feet from any lot used for a pre-existing public
or private preschool, elementary school, or high school;
      (iii)   less than 1,000 feet from any lot used for a pre-existing day
care center, day care home, group day care home, or part-day child care
facility registered with the State of Illinois; or
      (iv)   less than 1,500 feet from any other existing and operating adult
use cannabis dispensary, adult use cannabis cultivation center, cannabis craft
grower, cannabis processor, or cannabis infuser.
      The minimum distance requirements set forth in this Subsection 14.e are
to be measured from lot line to lot line.
   f.   Exterior Illumination: Regardless of the number of parking spaces
required for an adult use cannabis dispensary, all exterior lighting on the
property must comply with the City's illumination performance standards, as the
same may be amended from time to time, set forth in Section
9.I of the Zoning Ordinance.
   g.   Interior Lighting, Security and Video Surveillance, and Inventory
Control: The interior lighting, security and video surveillance, and inventory
control of each adult use cannabis dispensary shall comply with all
requirements of applicable state laws and regulations, including the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act and the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, as the same may be amended from time to time, as well as all state
regulations promulgated pursuant to those Acts.
   h.   On-Site Use/Conduct:
      (i)   Loitering is prohibited on any lot used as an adult use cannabis
dispensary.
      (ii)   It shall be prohibited to smoke, inhale or otherwise consume
cannabis products in the adult use cannabis dispensary or anywhere on the lot
used for the adult use cannabis dispensary." (Ord. 1018, 3-11-2021)
15. ACCESSORY BUSINESSES
The following regulations apply to all accessory businesses:
   a.    Ancillary Use: Accessory businesses must be located on lots with one
or more active principal uses. Accessory businesses may not count as a
principal use and may not be the only use on a lot.
   b.   Number of Accessory Businesses on a Single Lot: No more than one
accessory business may be located on any lot.
   c.   Size of Lot: Accessory businesses may only be located on lots that are
at least four acres in area.
   d.   Lot Location: Accessory businesses may only be located on lots with
frontage on a major arterial street.
   e.   Location: Accessory businesses may not be located in drive aisles, on
sidewalks or walkways providing pedestrian or emergency access, in required
parking spaces, within any required landscape island, or in a required building
setback.
   f.   Canopy Required: Accessory businesses must be located under a permanent
canopy structure.
   g.   Signage: Signage for accessory businesses is prohibited except for a
canopy sign on the required canopy. (Ord. O2024-47, 11-18-2024)
5. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
A. PROVISIONS APPLYING TO PARKING AND LOADING
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to further the appropriate
provision and design of off-street parking and loading areas that will:
   1.   provide access for occupants, employees, customers, clients, and
visitors to land uses in a community dependent on automobile and truck
transportation
   2.   foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians both
on private property and on adjacent public streets
   3.   minimize nuisance in residential areas from on- or off-street parking
of large numbers of, or incompatible types of, vehicles.
2. APPLICABILITY
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in conformance with the
requirements of Tables
5A,
5B,
5C,
5D, and
5E and other provisions herein for:
   1.   all new uses, and
   2.   all existing uses that are changed so that they are:
      a.   enlarged or expanded, or
      b.   otherwise changed in density, intensity, capacity, or other measure
that determines parking or loading requirements hereunder, or
      c.   converted to any other use to which different parking requirements
herein apply.
Except that any lawful use existing on the day of effect of this Ordinance, or
of any applicable amendment thereto that increases the number of parking or
loading spaces required for such use, shall be required to add only the number
of spaces equivalent to the difference between the requirements of the
Ordinance or amendment for the use after the change and for the use before the
change.
The requirements of this chapter apply to any provision, removal, enlargement,
or alteration of any off-street parking or loading spaces or areas that are
accessory to any building or structure and either:
   1.   are existing as of the effective date of these regulations, or
   2.   are new spaces or areas required to be provided hereunder or
voluntarily provided in excess of the requirements herein.
These provisions shall likewise apply to parking that is the Principal Use of a
parcel. Open sales lots for motor vehicles shall not be considered as parking
spaces for purposes of this chapter.
No additional spaces shall be required for expansion or change of an existing
use if the standards herein would require an increase over the spaces already
provided on the site of less than 15 percent.
3. PREREQUISITE FOR PERMITS
1.   Building Permit/Zoning Certificate
Prior to issuance of a Building Permit, Zoning Certificate, or Special Use
Permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the application therefor
exhibits compliance with:
   1.   all applicable provisions of these and other City regulations from
which a variance has not been approved as provided therein, and
   2.   all conditions to which any approval thereunder has been made subject.
2.   Certificate of Occupancy
Either prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or within such period of
time thereafter as the Plan Commission may have approved, he or she shall
likewise determine either:
   1.   that parking and loading facilities required herein have been fully
installed and improved in conformance with:
      a.   all currently applicable approved applications for City permits,
certificates, or approvals, and
      b.   any conditions to which approval thereof was made subject, and
      c.   all provisions of this and other applicable City ordinances from
which a variance has not been approved, or
   2.   that financial sureties approved by the City Attorney have been
provided guaranteeing such installation and improvement.
4. VARIANCES; ADMINISTRATIVE REDUCTIONS
   1.   The City Council may approve a variance to the parking or loading
requirements herein on the basis either:
      a.   of criteria provided in the general regulations governing variances
in this Ordinance, or
      b.   of submission of parking demand studies, documented industry
standards, or other evidence satisfactory to the Board that the nature of the
use requires fewer spaces than required herein.
      Procedures for approval of parking variances shall otherwise be the same
as provided in this Ordinance for all variance approvals.
   2.   The Community Development Director may reduce the number of off-street
parking spaces for residential and commercial uses required by Table 5D and
Table 5E of this Code by up to 20 percent if the reduction is justified by any
of following:
      a.   The availability of on- or off-street parking, whether public or
private, located within the proximity of the subject property;
      b.   A parking analysis prepared by a professional engineer and submitted
by the party requesting the administrative reduction indicates the proposed use
requires at least 20 percent fewer off-street parking spaces than what Table 5D
or Table 5E require.
(Ord. O2023-27, 7-17-23)
5. PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING SPACES
No off-street parking or loading spaces or areas provided in full or partial
conformity with the provisions of these or previous regulations, shall be
reduced in size, number, or other characteristic below the requirements herein,
or further below such requirements in the case of a Nonconformity, so long as
the use they serve continues in operation. This shall also apply to uses re-
established after damage or destruction.
Residential garages shall not be converted into non-parking use unless parking
requirements herein will be met after such conversion.
A use that undergoes a reduction in floor area or other measure specified
herein for determining the number of required spaces or a change of use may
nonetheless reduce the number of spaces to those required herein for the new or
downsized use.
6. PARKING SITE PLAN
   1.   Submission
Twenty copies of a Site Plan at a minimum scale of 50 feet to one inch showing
off-street parking and loading facilities shall accompany an application for
any of the following for any use required herein to provide over 8 off-street
parking spaces or one or more off-street loading spaces:
      a.   Building Permit
      b.   Certificate of Occupancy
      c.   Zoning Certificate
      d.   Rezoning
      e.   Preliminary or Final Plat approval as provided in the Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance
      f.   Variance from off-street parking or loading requirements
      g.   Development Plan for Residential Development District
      h.   Planned Unit Development Preliminary or Final Plan
      i.   Conditional Use Permit
The Zoning Administrator may waive or defer this requirement in any instance in
which the specific use of the premises, and therefore the specific parking and
loading requirements applicable, are not yet determined, such as in the case of
a rezoning for an industrial subdivision.
   2.   Contents
The Site Plan required herein shall provide the information required in
Table 5F.
7. USE OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
Except as otherwise provided herein, required off-street parking shall be used
solely for parking for patrons, occupants, guests, visitors, or employees of
the premises on the same lot.
No sales, dead storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle dismantling, repair, or
servicing work except for emergency services, is permitted in any open off-
street parking or loading area except as an accessory use to dwellings or as
otherwise provided herein or as may be approved by the City Council.
8. ACCESS
Except for uses required hereunder to provide 15 or fewer spaces, each required
off-street parking space and loading space shall open directly upon an aisle or
driveway of such width and design as to provide a safe and efficient means of
vehicular access. Each space shall have vehicular access to a public
thoroughfare in a manner that will least interfere with traffic movement
thereupon. Dimensions of aisles and driveways shall be as provided in
Table 5A. (Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
9. GRADING AND DRAINAGE
All parking and loading areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall
comply with the Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, 6/19/94.
10. MAINTENANCE
All parking and loading areas shall be maintained free of dust, trash, and
debris. The surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, marking, signage, and
related appurtenances shall be maintained in good condition so long as such
areas are used for parking or loading purposes.
11. SIGNS
All signs relating to off-street parking and loading areas shall conform to the
Warrenville Municipal Code, Title 8, Chapter 6, Signs.
12. ILLUMINATION
Uses required herein to provide over 15 parking spaces or one or more loading
spaces shall not cause glare on adjoining streets or properties. Parking lot
lighting shall comply with all requirements set forth herein in amended Section
9.I. Illumination and Glare and all related documentation requirements set
forth herein in
Table 5. F. G. Photometrics. (Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
13. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be installed as provided in
Chapter 11 of this Ordinance.
14. SURFACING
All open off-street parking and loading areas and related vehicular access
drives and aisles, including residential driveways and widenings thereof, shall
be surfaced as outlined hereinbelow:
 
Use           Required Surfacing Options
                         A minimum of                            Asphalt,
                         8" (eight                               concrete,
                         inches) of                              brick, paving
                         stone and 3"                            block, or
              Crushed    (three        Existing                  similar
              stone,     inches) of    aggregate                 dustless
              gravel, or asphalt or 5" depth of stone Structural surface with a
              similar    (five inches) and 3" (three  gravel *   structural
              material   of concrete   inches) of                number of 2.5
                         reinforced    asphalt                   in vehicular
                         with                                    access and
                         fibermesh or                            parking areas,
                         wire mesh                               and 2.8 in
                                                                 loading areas
Single-family
detached
dwellings
with existing
legal non-
conforming
gravel drives x          x             -              x          x
constructed
prior to the
effective
date of this
Ordinance
(February 6,
1989)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
with existing
non-
conforming
aggregate and
asphalt
drives with   -          x             x              x          x
fewer than 8"
of aggregate
constructed
prior to the
effective
date of
Ordinance
O2022-16 (May
2, 2022)
All other
single-family -          x             -              x          x
detached
dwellings
All other     -          -             -              -          x
uses
 
x: allowed
- : not allowed
* Structural gravel driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the
following specifications:
   1.   have permanently installed edging such as, but not limited to,
concrete, paving brick, cut stone, or steel, as approved by the Director of
Community Development or his designee;
   2.   have a structural number of at least 1.8;
   3.   be constructed with 12 inches of stone and geogrid or similar
structural reinforcement as approved by the Director of Community Development
or his designee;
   4.   be located on private property and setback a minimum of 10 feet from
the edge of the adjacent road pavement and 2 feet from public sidewalk;
   5.   the portion of the driveway located within the adjacent right-of-way
shall be concrete or asphalt or paving bricks;
   6.   the property owner is responsible for the regular maintenance and
removal of any gravel from the public right-of-way.
The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for surfacing herein for a
parking area located no less than 400 feet from a Residential District that
serves a use located in an M Manufacturing District. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13) (Ord.
O2017-26, 5-15-17) (Ord. O2022-16, 5-22-2022)
15. PARKING SETBACKS
Off-street parking and loading areas shall maintain the setbacks provided in
Table 5B.
16. REPAIRS AND SERVICE
No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in
conjunction with off-street parking facilities in any district or any
residential driveway, except for minor repairs on motor vehicles owned by owner
or occupant of the property. Service and repairs that cannot be completed
within a twenty-four hour period shall not be considered minor repair. (Ord.
2012, 8-22-02)
B. OFF-STREET PARKING PROVISIONS
1. COLLECTIVE PROVISION
Required parking spaces for different uses may be provided collectively. Except
as provided herein under Parking for Shopping Centers and Shared Parking, the
total number of spaces so provided shall not be less than the sum of the spaces
required for each separate use, and no parking space shall serve as the
required space for more than one use.
A binding written agreement approved as legally sufficient by the City Attorney
shall be filed with an application for a Building Permit guaranteeing the
intended users of collective parking spaces the right to their use.
2. PARKING FOR SHOPPING CENTERS
The number of parking spaces required for retail and personal service uses
located in a shopping center shall be as provided for shopping centers in
Table 5E rather than the sum of the spaces required for the individual uses.
Except that the number of spaces for restaurants, taverns, and drive-in
facilities located in a shopping center, and for any establishment occupying
over 50 percent of the net floor area of the center, shall be as provided in
Table 5E for these individual uses. This number shall be added to the number of
spaces required by
Table 5E for shopping centers for the balance of the uses in the center.
3. MARKING
All off-street parking spaces for uses required to provide over 15 spaces shall
be marked by durable painted lines, curbs, or other means that clearly
designate individual spaces. (Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
4. SHARED PARKING
Off-street parking spaces provided in a public or commercial parking lot
located within 500 feet of a house of worship may be credited by the Zoning
Administrator toward the spaces required herein for the house of worship up to
a maximum of 50 percent of the total spaces required.
To be credited, such spaces shall be included in a written agreement filed with
the Zoning Administrator and approved as legally sufficient by the City
Attorney that specifically allows the use of such spaces by the house of
worship.
5. PHASED INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED PARKING FACILITIES
Upon presentation of clear and convincing evidence by the applicant that the
total number of required parking spaces are not immediately necessary for the
current use of a building or structure, the Plan Commission may recommend and
the City Council may permit the phased/future installation of up to 25% of the
total number of required parking spaces. Sufficient area shall be reserved on
the site for the construction of the future parking facilities and related
required landscaping and stormwater management improvements in accordance with
all applicable City requirements.
The future parking facilities shall be installed when the City Council passes a
motion and requires their installation.
If phased installation of required parking facilities is approved, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement, in a form acceptable to the City,
setting forth the terms and conditions applicable to the phased installation of
the parking facilities. The agreement shall run with the land and shall be
recorded with the DuPage County Recorders Office at the applicant's sole cost
and expense. The agreement shall further provide that, in the event that the
applicant fails to comply with any term or condition thereof, the City shall
have the following legal remedies, none of which shall be exclusive:
   (1)   the right to sue for breach of contact, whether in law or in equity,
for damages, specific performance, or any other legal remedy deemed appropriate
by the City;
   (2)   the right to revoke the certificate of occupancy for the premises;
   (3)   the right to enter upon the property to install the required parking
spaces at the owner's sole cost and expense and to lien the premises in order
to enforce payment to the City for the work performed; and
   (4)   the right to recover the City Attorney's fees and court costs in any
enforcement action.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
6. WHEEL GUARDS OR CURBING
Where parking spaces are so located that vehicles parked therein might extend
beyond the parking surface, such as onto streets, sidewalks, or landscaped
areas, there shall be installed wheel guards, bumper guards, curbing, or other
means of restraint to prevent such encroachment. This requirement shall not
apply to uses providing 15 or fewer parking spaces. (Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
7. FORWARD VEHICULAR MOTION
Except for dwellings having individual garages or driveways, off-street parking
areas shall be designed to enable vehicles to enter or leave such areas moving
in a forward direction.
8. LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES
a.   On Same Or Separate Lot
Required off-street parking for all residential uses shall be provided on the
same lot as the use served. Parking spaces within garages or carports and on
driveways shall be counted as required spaces for such dwellings and
Transitional Office zoned uses. Stacked parking spaces (i.e., a second parking
space located directly behind the first driveway parking space) shall not be
counted as required spaces for such dwellings, but may be counted (up to a
maximum of 2 spaces deep) as required spaces for Transitional Office zoned
uses.
Required parking for other uses may also be provided on a separate lot that is
in the same possession by deed, lease, or other written certification approved
as legally sufficient by the City Attorney that confirms its availability to
the use.
Required parking on a separate lot shall be located within the following
walking distances from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest
pedestrian entrance to the use served:
 
Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts: 300 feet
All Uses in Non-Residential Districts:         1,000 feet
 
b.   In Yards
1.   Single-Family, Townhouses and Transitional Office Stacked Driveway Spaces
Open off-street parking for single-family detached and attached, two-family,
and townhouse dwellings and stacked driveway parking spaces in the Transitional
Office Zoning District may be located in required front, side, and rear yards,
except as otherwise provided herein, but shall be no less than 5 feet from all
lot lines.
2.   Other Uses
Open off-street parking for other uses, including other multi-family dwellings,
may be located in required rear and interior side yards, but not in required
front or corner side yards, and shall be no less than 5 feet from all lot
lines.
No off-street parking for any such use is permitted within any required yard
abutting or across an alley from property in a Single-Family Residential
District. No parking for any non-residential use is permitted within any
required yard abutting or across an alley from property in any Residential
District.
9. HANDICAPPED PARKING
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Required Minimum Number of Accessible
                                         Spaces
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Required Minimum Number of Accessible
                                         Spaces
1-25                                     1
26-50                                    2
51-75                                    3
76-100                                   4
101-150                                  5
151-200                                  6
201-300                                  7
301-400                                  8
401-500                                  9
501-1000                                 2% of total number
Over 1000                                20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
 
All housing for the elderly shall mark at least 10 percent of all spaces
provided.
All such spaces shall be as close as possible to an entrance to the building or
use accessible to the handicapped and shall be connected thereto by a paved
surface at least 5 feet wide with a maximum slope of 5 percent at any point.
Such spaces shall have sufficient width to allow for wheelchair access to a
passenger car or passenger van parked therein.
10. PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
   A.   In Residential Districts - General
A single recreational vehicle as defined herein may be parked or stored on a
lot having a minimum area of 7,000 square feet and containing a single-family
detached dwelling unit. One additional recreational vehicle may be parked or
stored on such lot for each additional 20,000 square feet of lot area over
7,000 square feet. No more than three recreational vehicles shall be parked or
stored on any single residential lot. Outdoor overnight parking and storage of
recreational vehicles is not permitted on lots containing attached single-
family dwelling units (town homes) or apartments unless it involves the parking
of a travel van, 20' or less in length, regularly used for daily personal
transportation unrelated to recreation or camping, in which case the City
Council, by motion, may authorize such overnight outdoor parking.
   B.   Parking in Residential Districts
Recreational vehicle parking (as defined herein) shall either be (1) in a
garage or (2) on the driveway or widening thereof, (3) in rear yards, interior
side yards, front yards and corner side yards provided all portions of such
vehicles are parked a minimum of 3' from the garage and/or principal building
and 5' from all lot lines (see Appendix) unless the Recreational Vehicle being
parking is 5' or less in height, in which case it may be parked not less than
1' from a side or rear lot line if adjacent to a solid wood fence with a
minimum height of 1' foot taller than the height of the adjacent Recreational
Vehicle and installed on the same property on which the Recreational Vehicle is
parked.
   C.   Storage in Residential Districts
Recreational Vehicle storage (as defined herein) is not permitted in (actual)
front yards or (actual) corner side yards. All portions of street legal
motorized travel trailers shall be on the driveway or widening thereof. Other
recreational vehicles may be stored on a nonpaved surface, provided that the
yard area is not torn up and no permanent ruts are created. All recreational
vehicles shall be stored a minimum of 3' from the garage and/or principle
building, and 5' from interior side lot lines and rear lot lines (see Appendix)
unless the Recreational Vehicle being stored is 5' or less in height in which
case it may be stored not less than 1' from a side or rear lot line if adjacent
to a solid wood fence with a minimum height of 1' taller than the height of the
adjacent Recreational Vehicle and installed on the same property on which the
Recreational Vehicle is stored.
   D.   Storage/Parking in Other Districts
Storage and Parking of one Recreational Vehicle on a single lot in the M
District and in non-residential districts shall be subject to the requirements
related to outdoor storage and parking setback regulations.
   E.   Temporary Use of Recreational Vehicles
Occasional use of travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers and similar
vehicles for not more than seven (7) days out of a thirty (30) day period twice
per calendar year as sleeping quarters will be permitted. No connections or use
for living quarters will be allowed as listed below:
      1.   Connection to sewer
      2.   Connection to water for other than filling or maintenance equipment
      3.   Cooking with equipment
11. PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
   A.   In Residential Districts
      1.   General Prohibition: Except as specifically permitted in subsection
5.B.11.A.2, no Commercial Vehicle as defined herein may be parked or stored in
a Residential District other than in a completely enclosed garage except for
loading or unloading of household belongings between 6:00 a.m. and midnight for
the purpose of moving a personal residence or for deliveries, repairs,
construction, maintenance, or service calls.
      2.   Specifically Permitted regardless of presence of commercial
lettering or logos:
         (i)   Pick-up trucks, cargo vans, sprinter vans with a State vehicle
license of Class "D" or less and enclosed trailers may be parked anywhere on a
private residential driveway provided the height of the vehicle/trailer,
including any attached accessories, does not exceed nine (9) feet in height.
         (ii)   Pick-up trucks, cargo vans, sprinter vans and enclosed trailers
over nine (9) feet in height, step vans, panel vans, box trucks and extended
wheel base limousines, may be parked on private residential driveways provided
(a) any such vehicle/trailer is parked outside actual Front, actual Corner
Side, and required Interior Side Yards and at least ten (10) feet from rear
property lines and (b) any such motorized vehicle either has valid state
vehicle license of Class "D" or less or a livery license plate.
      3.   Special Use Commercial Vehicles: The outdoor parking of a single
Commercial Vehicle not specifically allowed herein may be approved as a Special
Use under provisions for Special Uses in this Ordinance. (Ord. 2386, 7-06-07)
   B.   In Commercial Districts
No commercial vehicle as defined herein may be parked or stored in a Commercial
District other than in a completely enclosed garage or in a public off-street
parking facility unless it is used in a business located on the same premises
or is being parked temporarily by a customer, supplier, contractor, or visitor
or for loading, unloading, moving, or construction, maintenance, or repair of
the premises.
C. OFF-STREET LOADING PROVISIONS
1. LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES
All required loading spaces shall have adequate ingress from and egress to a
public street or alley and shall be located:
   1.   on the same lot as the use to be served, and
   2.   in such a manner that no portion of a vehicle shall project across a
public sidewalk or into a street, and
   3.   in conformity with the setback requirements of
Table 5B.
2. STANDARDS FOR LOADING AREAS
Off-street loading areas shall conform to the requirements of
Table 5C.
Table 5A: Parking Dimensions
Parking Spaces
Minimum DEPTH in feet                              18 [a]
Minimum WIDTH in feet                              8.5
Minimum Vertical CLEARANCE in feet                 7
Minimum AISLE width in feet by angle of spaces:   
   0 degrees [b]                                13
   30 degrees                                   12
   45 degrees                                   13
   60 degrees                                   18
   90 degrees [c]                               24   
[a]:   Parallel parking spaces shall be 22 feet deep. Stacked parking spaces
permitted in the Residential and Transitional Office Districts on a paved
driveway shall be 20 feet deep.
[b]:   Zero degree parking refers to parallel parking.
[c]:   Aisle width for 90 degree parking allows for two-way traffic.
 
(Ord. 2077, 8-5-03)
Table 5B: Minimum Required Setbacks for Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces
and Other Vehicular Pavement
         MINIMUM PARKING SPACE      MINIMUM LOADING   MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR ALL
         SETBACKS (measured in      SPACE SETBACKS    OTHER PAVEMENT (a) (d)
         feet)                      (measured in      (measured in feet)
SETBACK                             feet)
MEASURED                        R1                                           R1
FROM                            R1A                                          R1A
         B2 B4 O1 O2 TO M1 M2 R R2  B2 B4 O1 O2 M1 M2 B2 B4 O1 O2 T M1 M2 R6 R2
                              6 R3                                O          R3
                                R4                                           R4
                                R5                                           R5
                                                 MINIMUM LOADING   MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR ALL
            MINIMUM PARKING SPACE SETBACKS       SPACE SETBACKS    OTHER PAVEMENT (a) (d)
            (measured in feet)                   (measured in      (measured in feet)
SETBACK                                          feet)
MEASURED                                     R1                                             R1
FROM                                         R1A                                            R1A
            B2 B4 O1    O2 TO  M1   M2 R 6   R2  B2 B4 O1 O2 M1 M2 B2 B4 O1 O2 T  M1 M2 R6  R2
                                             R3                                O            R3
                                             R4                                             R4
                                             R5                                             R5
            20 (When           20 (When
Front/      applicable,        applicable,
Corner Side this               this
Property    requirement        requirement
Line        supersedes any 40  supersedes        Not Applicable    Not Applicable (See below
Adjacent to other          (h) any other     5   (See below        requirements)
Principal   requirement        requirement       requirements)
Arterial    except the         except the
St. (g)     tollway            tollway
            setback            setback
            requirement)       requirement)
Front/
Corner Side                            30                                               1 0 3
Property                   15          (b)                                              (b) (e)
Line Across 40          60 (h) 60      or 5  5   40       60 60 60 15          10 5     or  or
from                                   (c)                                              5   0
Residential                                                                             (c) (f)
Zoning
Front/                                                                                  1 0 3
Corner Side                                                                             (b) (e)
Property    40          20 15  30            5   40       60 30    15          10 5     or  or
Line Across                (h)                                                          5   0
from Non.                                                                               (c) (f)
Res. Zoning
Interior
Side/Rear                                                                               10  3
Property                            25 side                                             (b) (e)
Line        15          60 15  60   or 30    5   15 15    60 100   10    30    5  30    or  or
Adjacent To                         rear                                                5   0
Residential                                                                             (c) (f)
Zoning
Interior
Side/Rear                                                                               10  3
Property                                                                                (b) (e)
Line        5              5   5             5   5           5     5           5  5     or  or
Adjacent to                                                                             5   0
Non. Res.                                                                               (c) (f)
Zoning
Any         Not         50 (When
Property    Applicable  applicable,              Not Applicable
Line        (See above  this        N/A (See     (See above        Not Applicable (See above
Adjacent to requirement requirement above)       requirements)     requirements)
Tollway     s)          supersedes
                        all others)
 
(a)   "ALL OTHER PAVEMENT" includes driveways, outdoor storage areas, etc.
(b)   When adjacent to attached or detached single-family uses.
(c)    When adjacent to non-single family uses.
(d)   Except where an access drive crosses a property line.
(e)   3' in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts.
(f)   0' in the R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts.
(g)   The Warrenville Comprehensive Plan classifies Route 56 and Route 59 as
Principal Arterials.
(h)   The total area of parking spaces shall not exceed 25 percent within the
required front yard or required corner side yard. These requirements shall not
apply to "stacked parking spaces" where permitted.
(Ord. 1817, 3-23-00), (Ord. 2988, 3-21-16)
Table 5C: Required Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces
Minimum Number of Loading Spaces
Land Use Category Gross Floor Area in Square Small Spaces [a] Large Spaces [b]
                  Feet (000)
Land Use Category        Gross Floor Area in  Small Spaces [a] Large Spaces [b]
                         Square Feet (000)
                         10-200               1                -
Hospitals, Hotels [c]     
                         Over 200             1 [d]            -
                         10 - 20              1                -
Hotel Mixed Use [e]      20 - 150             -                1
                         Over 150             -                1 [d]
                         5 - 10               1                -
Retail, Wholesale, Food  10 - 25              2                -
Service [f]              25 - 40              1                2
                         40 - 100             1                3
                         Over 100             -                1 [d]
                         10 - 20              1                -
Auditoriums & Arenas [g] 20 - 100             2                -
                         Over 100             -                1 [h]
                         10 - 100             1                -
Offices & Banks [i]      Over 100 & Under 500 1 [h]            -
                         Over 500             1 [j]            -
                         5 - 10               1                -
Manufacturing &          10 - 40              -                1
Warehousing [k]          40 - 100             -                2
                         Over 100             -                1 [h]
Theaters                 8 - 25               1                -
                         Over 25              1 [l]            -
Funeral Parlors          8 - 100              1                -
                         Over 100             1 [h]            -
 
Notes for Table 5C
No space shall at the same time fully or partially serve to meet the
requirement for both off-street parking and loading facilities.
Uses smaller than the smallest values given for each category, and uses not
listed in this table, shall be provided with other receiving facilities for
motor vehicles judged adequate by the City Council. The Plan Commission may
make a recommendation thereupon to the Council. Such facilities shall have
minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 25 feet.
[a]:   With minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 30 feet.
[b]:   With minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet.
[c]:   Hospitals, sanitariums, and other institutional uses; hotels, clubs, and
lodges.
[d]:   For each additional 200 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.
[e]:   Hotels, clubs, and lodges with retail, convention halls, auditoriums,
exhibition halls, or offices.
[f]:   Retail, restaurants, taverns, wholesale establishments excluding
warehouses and storage buildings, and motor vehicle and machinery sales.
[g]:   Auditoriums, convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas, stadiums,
and bowling alleys.
[h]:   For each additional 100 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.
[i]:   Business, professional, and government offices and financial
institutions.
[j]:   For each additional 500 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.
[k]:   Manufacturing, processing, servicing, cleaning, testing, or repair of
goods, materials, or products; and warehouses and storage buildings.
[l]:   For each additional 50 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.
Table 5D: Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces for Residential and
Lodging Uses
                                         Minimum Number of Spaces Required Per
                                          Dwelling or Lodging Unity
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL [a] [b] [c] [f]
[g] [h] [i]
                                                  Minimum Number of Spaces
                                                 Required Per Dwelling or
                                                  Lodging Unity
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL [a] [b] [c] [f] [g] [h]
[i]
1 Required Parking Space per Bedroom               
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL [h]
   Dwellings Units 800 Square Feet or Smaller  1
   Dwelling Units Between 800 and 1,200 Square 2
Feet
   Dwelling Units Larger than 1,200 Square Feet4
LODGING [b] [c]
   Hotel                                       1 [d]
   Motel or Tourist Home                       1 [d]
   Apartment Hotel                             1
   Rooming House                               0.5
   Dormitories, Fraternities, Sororities       0.20 [e]
 
See also
Table 5E for required spaces for other uses.
Notes for Table 5D
[a]:   Includes single-family attached, townhouse, duplex, and multi-family
dwelling units, and manufactured homes. Required spaces shall be increased by 1
space for each roomer or lodger. No more than 6 spaces shall be provided per
dwelling or lodging unit. Efficiency units shall require 1 parking space.
[b]:   Plus 1 parking space per nonresident owner, manager, and employee on
largest shift.
[c]:   One space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an
establishment on the premises, other than those used by employees for commuting
to the site, shall be provided in addition to the number of spaces indicated in
this table.
[d]:   Plus spaces for restaurant, retail, and meeting rooms, if any, as
provided in
Table 5E.
[e]:   Requirement is number of spaces per bed, not per unit.
[f]:   For those single family attached, townhouse and duplex developments, and
multifamily buildings with more than 10 total units, 0.25 spaces per dwelling
unit for guest parking is required.
[g]   Electric vehicle charging stations shall be counted as one required space
when calculating minimum required off-street parking spaces for multi-family
residential developments.
[h]   All new single-family attached and single family-detached construction
shall be EV capable.
[i]   Any new construction providing 20 or more shared parking spaces shall
install level 2 electric vehicle charging stations to serve at least 10% of
parking spaces for a maximum of twelve spaces.
(Ord. O2023-27, 7-17-23; amd. Ord. O2025-21, 4-21-2025)
Table 5E: Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces for Non-Residential and
Non-Lodging Uses
Minimum Number of Spaces Required [a] [s] [t]
 Per Employee [b] Per 1,000 Square Feet Floor Per Person Design Capacity [c]
                  Area
                                                                 Per    Per
                                                        Per      1,000  Person
                                                        Employee Square Design
                                                        [b]      Feet   Capacity
                                                                 Floor  [c]
                                                                 Area
SCHOOLS
   Elementary                                        1        --     .07 [d]
   Junior High                                       1        --     .07 [d]
   High School                                       1        --     .20 [d]
   College or University                             1        --     .50 [d]
   Commercial                                        1        --     .25 [d]
RECREATIONAL
   Indoor Theater                                    0.5      --     0.4
   Bowling Alley Per Lane                            1        --     -- [h]
   Arena or Stadium                                  --       --     .33
   Auditorium (school)                               --       --     .33
   Swimming Pool                                     1        --     .25
   Community Center or Municipal Recreation Bldg.    0.5      --     .25 [p]
   Club or Lodge                                     1        --     .10 [l]
   Off-Track Entertainment Complex                   --       30     --
   Other Recreation Facility                         1        10     --
INSTITUTIONAL
   Church                                            --       --     .40
   Public Utility & Service                          0.5      --     -- [p]
   Institution Office or Mtg. Hall                   --       1      --
   Library, Museum, or Gallery                       --       2.0    --
   Sanitarium, Nursing Home, Institution for Aged or [q]      --     -- [f]
Children
   Adult Day Care Center                             1        --     .10 [d]
   Child Day Care Center                             1        --     .10 [d]
                                                                        [o][p]
   Government Offices                                --       3.5    --
MEDICAL
   Hospital                                          [q]      --     -- [e]
   Clinic                                            --       4      --
   Animal Hospital                                   --       4      --
   Mental Health Center                              [q]      --     --[p]
   Govt. Health Center                               --       --     --[r]
OFFICE BUILDING                                         --       3      --
AUTOMOTIVE
   Automobile Laundry                                1        --     -- [i]
   Service Station                                   1        --     -- [k]
   Vehicle Sales or Rental                           --       2.0    -- [j]
SHOPPING CENTER                                                  3
DEPARTMENT STORE                                        --       3      --
SUPERMARKET or Food Store                               --       3      --
HARDWARE Store                                          --       3      --
BANK or Financial Institution                           --       2      -- [g]
RESTAURANT
   Carry Out Only                                    --       5      --
   Drive In and Eat In                               --       10     -- [m]
   Eat In, No Drive In                               --       8      --
TAVERN                                                  --       8      --
MORTUARY                                                --       5      --
CONTRACTOR or Construction Office                       1        --     --
FURNITURE & APPLIANCE
   Sales or Repair Store                             --       2      --
OTHER RETAIL/Personal Service                           --       3      -- [g]
OPEN SALES LOT                                          1        --     -- [j]
INDUSTRIAL
   Cartage & Express Firms                           1        --     --
   Wholesaling                                       --       1.6    --
   Radio or TV Station or Studio                     1        --     --
   Manufacturing, Research, Testing                  --       1.0    --
   Warehousing                                       --       --     --[n]
ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSARY                                    3
 
Notes for Table 5E
Unless otherwise provided herein, required parking is the sum of the
requirements in all columns of this Table.
See also
Table 5D for required spaces for residential and lodging uses.
Parking for uses not listed shall be as provided for the most similar listed
use as determined by the City Council. The Plan Commission may make a
recommendation thereupon to the Council.
Floor area shall be Net Floor Area, as defined herein. All required space
figures shall be prorated for each establishment. Fractional spaces shall be
rounded to the nearest integer.
[a]:   One space for each truck or business vehicle employed by an
establishment on the premises, other than those used by employees for commuting
to the site, shall be provided in addition to the number of spaces specified.
[b]:   Maximum number of full- and part-time employees, including owners or
managers, on duty on the premises at any one time.
[c]:   Per seat in main auditorium or meeting room or per person of design
capacity of the facility. Eighteen inches of seating space shall be considered
a seat for purposes of this requirement where individual seats are not
discernable, as with pews or bleachers.
[d]:   Capacity in full-time students attending classes at any one time
[e]:   Plus 0.5 spaces per bed, excluding bassinets, plus 1.5 spaces per
emergency room examination table or bed.
[f]:   Plus 0.25 spaces per bed.
[g]:   Plus 5 stacking spaces per drive-in window.
[h]:   5 spaces per bowling lane. Additional spaces shall be provided for
affiliated bars or restaurants as provided herein for such uses.
[i]:   Plus stacking spaces equal to 5 times the capacity of the car wash. The
capacity shall be calculated as the number of vehicles that can be accommodated
at any one time in any phase of the washing or waxing process. Number of spaces
for self-service facilities shall be as determined by the Plan Commission.
[j]:   Plus 0.4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of open sales lot area plus spaces
required for service station if service facility is on premises.
[k]:   Plus 2 spaces per service bay.
[l]:   Plus 1 space per lodging room.
[m]:   Plus 10 stacking spaces per drive-in window.
[n]:   1 space per 1,000 square feet up to 100,000 square feet and 0.5 spaces
per 1,000 square feet thereafter.
[o]:   Plus 10 stacking spaces for pick up/drop off.
[p]:   Plus such other spaces as the Plan Commission shall require.
[q]:   1 space per staff doctor plus 0.5 spaces per other employee on largest
shift.
[r]:   5 spaces per doctor plus 1 space per other employee on largest shift.
[s]   Electric vehicle charging stations shall be counted as one required space
when calculating minimum required off-street parking spaces.
[t]   Any new construction requiring 20 or more parking spaces shall install
level 2 electric vehicle charging stations to serve at least 10% of parking
spaces for a maximum of twelve spaces.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06) (Ord. O2019-62, 12-2-19) (Ord. O2023-27, 7-17-23; Ord.
O2025-21, 4-21-2025; Ord. O2025-49, 10-20-2025)
Table 5F: Required Contents of Parking Site Plan
   a. Basic Information
      1.   Numeric and graphic scales, north arrow, and date of preparation.
      2.   Boundaries of the development and of each phase thereof.
      3.   Lot lines and dimensions and areas of lot(s).
      4.   Easements and encroachments on the property.
   b. Drainage: Existing and proposed drainage patterns and appurtenances for
collecting storm water.
   c. Structures: Location, type, shape, dimensions, net floor area,
orientation, height in feet and number of stories, and finished grade
elevations at all entrances and corners, of all existing and proposed
structures, including buildings, fences, walls, and screening.
   d. Parking and Loading: Location, shape, dimensions, and area of all off-
street parking and loading spaces and areas, including aisles, curbing, surface
type, driveways, and curb cuts.
   e. Proposed Landscaping and Screening: For all landscaping and screening
within and abutting all off-street parking and loading areas:
      1.   Location, quantity, diameter and height at installation and at
maturity, and botanic and common names of all proposed living and non-living
landscaping materials and existing materials to be preserved.
      2.   Types and boundaries of proposed ground cover.
      3.   Location and contours at one-foot intervals of all proposed berming.
      4.   Dimensions, materials, colors, and appearance of all sides of
proposed fences, walls, ornamental lighting, and other landscaping and
screening treatments.
      5.   Measures to be taken to protect new and preserved existing trees
during construction.
   f. Other Information: Any other information the Zoning Administrator
requires to determine whether the application conforms to the requirements of
this Ordinance.
   g. Photometric Plan: For all outdoor lighting.*
      1.    Identification of all proposed light fixtures (site, canopy and
exterior building), control equipment and wiring locations.
      2.    Average illumination calculations, in foot candles, throughout the
parking lot.
      3.    Average to minimum uniformity ratio for all points on the parking
lot surface.
      4.   Construction details of the pole, pole foundation, electrical trench
detail and all other control equipment.
      5.   Catalog cut sheets for proposed light poles, fixtures and control
equipment.
   *The Zoning Administrator may waive any Photometric Plan requirements for
uses requiring 15 or fewer parking spaces and no loading spaces. (Ord. 2023-28,
8-7-2023)
Table 5G: Driveway Standards
   RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS
Minimum WIDTH in feet measured at the property line:                  10(a)(b)
Maximum WIDTH in feet measured at the property line:                  24(a)(b)
   COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS
Maximum WIDTH in feet measured at the property line:                  36(c)
Minimum WIDTH in feet for driveways serving small parking lots (15 or 12(d)
fewer spaces) in the Transitional Office District:
(a)   Semi-circular driveways are permitted within residential zoning
districts with the maximum driveway of 31 feet in cumulative width.
(b)   The maximum allowable paving coverage of the required front yard is 50%.
(c)   Driveways in the Transitional Office District shall not exceed 36 feet
in width anywhere on the property.
(d)   A 12 foot drive width accommodates one-way traffic even though it may be
used for both ingress an egress at different times.
 
(Ord. 2077, 8-5-03) (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21; Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
6. NONCONFORMITIES
A. PURPOSE
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the continuation and, under
appropriate circumstances, elimination of existing uses of property that do not
conform to the requirements of this Ordinance or that may not conform to future
amendments thereto.
The provisions herein are designed to accomplish this intent in a way that:
   1.   Recognizes the rights and interests of owners of individual properties
that have been rendered nonconforming by City action to upgrade zoning policies
and standards;
   2.   Allows the property owner or lessee to recover his or her investment in
the Nonconformity, while also recognizing that by virtue of the Nonconformity
he or she enjoys a right not generally available to other property owners in
the same district; and
   3.   Minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring property values, and
other adverse effects of properties that do not conform to their environs.
B. TYPES OF NONCONFORMITIES
A Nonconformity is any characteristic of a structure or lot or parcel of land,
or of the use thereof, which was lawful prior to the date of enactment of this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto but that does not currently conform to the
requirements thereof.
The lawful issuance of a Building Permit prior to the dates specified above
shall be considered to establish the lawful nonconforming status of any
building or structure.
There are three categories of Nonconformities:
   1. Use Nonconformities
   Use Nonconformities are any activities or functions carried on at a premises
(as either a Principal or Accessory Use) that are not allowed by the Permitted
and Conditional Uses of the zoning district in which the premises is situated,
irrespective of the use for which the premises may have been designed.
   2. Design Nonconformities
   A Design Nonconformity is the design or intended use of all or substantially
all of a premises for any Principal or Accessory Use not allowed by the
Permitted and Conditional Uses of the zoning district in which it is located,
irrespective of the nature of the use or activity currently carried on at that
premises.
   3. Standards Nonconformities
   Standards Nonconformities are all other Nonconformities with the
requirements of this Ordinance, usually involving failure to conform to the
quantitative development standards established herein.
C. ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMITIES
Properties with Nonconformities shall be lawful uses hereunder and may continue
unchanged without time limitation, but changes thereto shall be subject to the
provisions of
Table 6A.
D. VACANT ADJACENT NONRESIDENTIAL LOTS
Two or more adjacent lots shall be considered as a single lot for zoning
purposes if:
1.   All of the lots are in the same ownership, and
2.   All of the lots are vacant, and
3.   One or more of the lots is a legal nonconforming lot of record, and
4.   All of the lots are in the same non-residential district, and
5.   At least one of the other lots abuts a nonconforming lot along a side lot
line, or, in the case of a corner lot, along a side or rear lot line.
No division, sale, or use shall be made of any portion of such zoning lot
except in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance and with any
approved variance therefrom.
E. ADMINISTRATION
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for the continuation of all
Nonconformities created by this Ordinance or any amendment thereto.
When the Zoning Administrator determines that a property has any Nonconformity,
he or she shall notify the owner or lessee thereof of such Nonconformity and of
the applicable regulations.
Such notice shall require that the recipient file with the Zoning
Administrator, within 90 days of the date thereof, either satisfactory evidence
that the property is not nonconforming or a completed application for a
Certificate of Occupancy to continue the Nonconformity.
Upon timely receipt of a complete and accurate application therefor, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the nonconforming
property.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a file of all Nonconformities of which
he or she has sent notice and of all Nonconformities issued Certificates of
Occupancy.
Table 6A: Mandatory Elimination of Lawfully Pre-Existing Nonconformities
                                         Types of
Change to Property Type of Nonconformity Nonconformities to Be Conditions [b]
                                         Eliminated [a]
                                                                             Types of
Change to Property                                     Type of Nonconformity Nonconformities Conditions
                                                                             to Be           [b]
                                                                             Eliminated [a]
1.   REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE                                                               
   a.   Without Structural Alternation           Any                   None            -
   b.   With Structural Alteration               See “Reconstruction  �              
2.   RECONSTRUCTION                                                                      
   a.   Minor [c]                                Any                   None            -
   b.   Major [c]                                Any                   All             -
3.   ADDITION OR ENLARGEMENT                                                             
                                                                                             Addition
   a.   Of Residential Property                  Any                   None            is fully
                                                                                             conforming
                                                                                             [g]
   b.   All Other                                Any                   All             -
4.   INTERNAL EXPANSION                                                                  
   a.   Within a Structure                                                            
      1.   Of Residential Property            Any                   None            -
      2.   All Other                          Any                   All             -
   b.   Of Use of Land [d]                       Use                   Use             -
5.   CHANGE OF USE                                                                       
   a.   Of Land [d]                              Use                   Use             -
   b.   Of Structure: Conforming Use to ConforminDesign or Standards   None            -
   c.   All Other                                Any                   All             -
6.   RESUMPTION OF DISCONTINUED USE                                                      
   a.   Of Structure                             Any                   Use             -
   b.   Of Land [d]                              Use                   Use             -
7.   MOVING OF STRUCTURE [e]                        Any                   All             -
                                                                                             See
8.   DEVELOPMENT OF NONCONFORMING LOT [f]           Standards             None            footnote
                                                                                             [f]
9.   CHANGES INVOLVING EXEMPTED NONCONFORMITIES     Any                   None            -
 
Footnotes for Table 6A
For cases not included in this table, no Nonconformities are required to be
eliminated.
(The following are definitions of Changes to Property as listed on Page 6-3.)
3. Addition or Enlargement
Any addition, enlargement, or structural alteration as defined herein to a
structure.
4. Internal Expansion
Within a Structure: Expansion of a use within a structure involving no addition
to or enlargement of the structure.
Of Use of Land: Any extension of a use of land beyond land occupied as of the
time the use became nonconforming, whether involving a Principal or Accessory
Use.
5. Change of Use
Any change in the functions or activities carried on at a premises as related
to the uses allowed in the applicable zoning district.
6. Resumption of Discontinued Use
Any resumption, expansion, or change in any use that was voluntarily and
intentionally discontinued for a continuous period of 6 months or more.
7. Moving of Structure
The relocating of a structure in whole or in part to any other location on the
same or any other lot.
8. Nonconforming Lot
Any lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance or any applicable
amendment thereto that has no substantial structure upon it. See 9 [f] below.
9. Exempted Nonconformities
Any Nonconformities resulting solely from changes in the locations of streets,
structures, or uses that are beyond the control of the owner of the property
with the Nonconformity, such as a nonconforming setback resulting from a street
widening or a Nonconformity resulting from relocation of a structure on an
abutting lot in different ownership.
[a]:   These Nonconformities shall be completely eliminated on properties
having the type of Nonconformity specified when the specified change to the
property is undertaken, except as may be authorized by variance under the
provisions of this Ordinance or otherwise explicitly allowed by Table 6A and
its footnotes.
[b]:   Provisions shall apply only subject to the Conditions specified.
[c]:   A Minor Reconstruction is repair or reconstruction work on a damaged or
destroyed structure that:
   1.   Has a value of less than 50 percent of the cost of constructing the
entire building new, based on figures approved by the Zoning Administrator, and
   2.   Is started within 6 months, and completed within 12 months, of the date
of the damage, and at no time ceases for more than 60 days before completion.
A Major Reconstruction is any repair or rebuilding that does not qualify as a
Minor Reconstruction, including total replacement of a structure that is
completely removed with another structure of the same type. If a structure to
be replaced has been removed, other than by natural forces, prior to
application for a replacement structure hereunder, total elimination of all
Nonconformities of the structure shall be required in the replacement
structure.
[d]:   Use of land not involving a building, or only incidentally involving one
as an accessory use.
[e]:   The elevation of the ground previously covered by a moved structure
shall be restored to the grade of the rest of the lot.
[f]:   No variance shall be required to build a single-family dwelling served
by public sewers on a nonconforming existing lot of record if lot area, width,
and yard dimensions are all 80 percent or more of the minimums required by this
Ordinance. No variance shall be required to build a single-family dwelling on a
nonconforming existing lot of record not served by public sewers if the lot has
been approved for a private sewage disposal system by the DuPage County Health
Department within the 6-month period prior to the date of Building Permit
Application.
[g]:   No variance is required to build a vertical addition to a nonconforming
single-family dwelling as long as the addition does not increase the extent of
the nonconformity by further encroaching into the applicable required yard and
does not further exceed the height restrictions. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21) (Ord.
O2023-21, 5-15-23)
7. SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS
A. VARIANCES
1. PURPOSE
Because of special characteristics of particular properties in the City, the
literal application of the provisions of this Ordinance may in certain
instances create hardships or practical difficulties not intended by these
regulations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may accordingly recommend, and the
City Council may grant, variances from the literal application of the
provisions of this Ordinance based on findings of fact as provided in this
chapter. Variances herein shall be considered the same as variations under the
Illinois Revised Statutes.
2. APPROVAL PROCESS
Variances shall be approved only in conformance with the Approval Process
provided in the Filing Procedures section of this Ordinance and the Approval
Criteria in
Table 7A.
3. EXISTING VARIANCES
Any lawful variance previously granted to any lawful use existing on the date
of adoption of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto that requires a variance
under such Ordinance or amendment, shall be considered a lawful variance
without the need for approval of a variance hereunder. Variances shall be
transferable and shall run with the land.
Table 7A: Approval Criteria for Variances
In recommending or granting approval or conditional approval of a variance, the
Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Council shall prepare written findings of
fact that all of the conditions below apply to the application:
1. Special Circumstances
Special circumstances exist relating to the physical character of the property
that are peculiar to the property and that do not apply generally to other
properties in the same zoning district. And these circumstances are not of so
general or recurrent a nature as to make it practical to provide, in the form
of an amendment to this Ordinance, a general rule to cover them.
2. Hardship or Practical Difficulties
Because of these special circumstances, the literal application of the
provisions of this Ordinance would, without a variance, result in unnecessary
and undue hardship or practical difficulties for the applicant, as
distinguished from mere inconvenience.
3. Not Resulting from Applicant Action
The special circumstances, practical difficulties, or hardship that are the
basis for the variance have not resulted from any act, undertaken subsequent to
the adoption of this Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto, of any
party with a present interest in the property.
4. Reasonable Use and Return
Without the requested variance, the property cannot yield a reasonable return,
or cannot be reasonably used consistent with the intent of the zoning district
and the use of other properties therein, but the purpose of the variance is not
otherwise to increase the return from the property or to confer special
privileges not ordinarily enjoyed by other properties in the same district.
5. Not Alter Local Character
The variance will not alter the essential character of the locality or
substantially impair public safety or welfare or property values in the area.
6. Minimum Variance Needed
The variance approved is the minimum required to allow reasonable use and
enjoyment of the property.
B. AMENDMENTS AND REZONINGS
1. PURPOSE
To adapt to changing development conditions and provide for the phased
implementation of the City Comprehensive Plan, the Plan Commission may from
time to time recommend, and the City Council may adopt, amendments to the
provisions of the text of this Ordinance, or the Zoning District Map, as
provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes.
2. APPROVAL PROCESS
Amendments shall be approved in conformance with the Approval Process provided
in the Filing Procedures section of this Ordinance. Map amendments shall be
approved only in conformance with applicable Approval Criteria in
Table 7B.
Table 7B: Approval Criteria for Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings)
In recommending approval or conditional approval of a map amendment (rezoning),
the Plan Commission shall transmit to the City Council written findings of fact
that all of the conditions below apply to the application. In granting approval
or conditional approval, the City Council shall similarly find that all of the
following conditions apply:
   1. Compatible With Use or Zoning of Environs
   The proposed use(s) or the uses permitted under the proposed zoning
classification are compatible with existing uses or existing zoning of property
in the environs.
   2. Supported by Trend of Development
   The trend of development in the general area since the original zoning of
the affected property was established supports the proposed use of zoning
classification.
   3. Consistent With Comprehensive Plan Objectives
   The proposed use or zoning classification is in harmony with the objectives
of the Comprehensive Plan of the City as viewed in light of any changed
conditions since its adoption.
   4. Furthers Public Interest
   The proposed use or zoning classification promotes the public interest and
not solely the interest of the applicant.
C. SPECIAL USES
1. PURPOSE
Certain uses cannot be allowable generally in a particular zoning district, or
in any zoning district, because of the impact their special character creates
on surrounding areas.
Some such uses may, however, be allowed under special conditions. These uses
are provided for in this Ordinance as Special Uses.
Because a Special Use is compatible with the applicable zoning district only
under special conditions, a Special Use Permit is required before any use
authorized herein as a Special Use may be established.
Except as specifically provided herein, all regulations of the applicable
zoning district, and all other applicable regulations of this and other City
ordinances, shall apply to Special Uses.
2. APPROVAL PROCESS
Special Uses shall be approved by the Plan Commission only in conformance with
the Approval Process provided in the Filing Procedures section of this
Ordinance, the applicable Approval Criteria in
Table 7C, and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
3. EXISTING USES
Any lawful use existing on the date of adoption of this Ordinance or any
amendment thereto that requires Special Use approval under such Ordinance or
amendment, shall be considered a lawful Special Use without the need for
approval of a Special Use Permit hereunder whether or not a Special Use Permit
was ever issued prior to such date. It shall be the responsibility of the user
of the property to provide evidence of the existence of the use on or prior to
such date.
Any change in the operation of a use that does not conform with conditions
attached to a previous and applicable Special Use Permit Approval and all
changes from the Approved Special Use Permit involving an increase in the
occupant capacity of a structure, in the building footprint, the volume of the
structure, or in the area of parking lot pavement on the site subsequent to
such Approval date shall require the approval of a new Special Use Permit.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
4. REVIEW OF SPECIAL USES
In evaluating the suitability of a proposed Special Use, the Plan Commission
and City Council shall examine the following characteristics of the proposed
use and its individual structures or components:
   a.   Location and orientation
   b.   Lot size
   c.   Size of facility, including floor area, structure height, design
capacity, and anticipated employment.
   d.   Site design and arrangement
   e.   Provisions affecting on- and off-site pedestrian and traffic movement,
vehicle storage, and the passage of emergency vehicles
   f.   Appearance
   g.   Screening or landscaping
   h.   On- or off-site buffering from incompatible uses with open spaces or
transitional uses
   i.   Operations factors, such as hours of use or environmental controls
   j.   Other characteristics of the proposed use pertinent in the judgment of
the Commission or Council to an assessment of the impact of the use on the area
The Commission may recommend, and the Council may require, such conditions
relating to any of the above characteristics as it may judge necessary to allow
the use to conform to the Approval Criteria in Table 7C.
The Commission or Council may call upon technical experts or have studies
performed to determine specific development standards or conditions for any
particular Special Use.
5. EXPANSION OR ALTERATION
A new Special Use Permit shall be required for any existing Special Use that
expands its operations in conflict with conditions attached to an existing
valid Special Use Permit approval, and/or increases (i) the occupant capacity
of the structure, (ii) the building footprint of the structure, (iii) the
volume of the structure, or (iv) the area of parking lot pavement on the site.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
Table 7C: Approval Criteria for Special Uses
In recommending or granting approval or conditional approval of a Special Use,
the City Council and Plan Commission shall prepare written findings of fact
that on the basis of the characteristics cited under Review of Special Uses
herein -- or changes to such characteristics that conditions to which the
approval is made subject require -- the proposed use will be compatible with
existing uses in the area, and with Permitted Uses in the zoning district, in
the following ways:
1. Traffic
Any adverse impact of types or volumes of traffic flow not otherwise typical in
the zoning district has been minimized.
2. Environmental Nuisance
Any adverse effects of noise, glare, odor, dust, waste disposal, blockage of
light or air, or other adverse environmental effects of a type or degree not
characteristic of Permitted Uses in the zoning district, have been
appropriately controlled.
3. Neighborhood Character
The proposed use will fit harmoniously with the existing natural or man-made
character of its surroundings and with Permitted Uses in the zoning district.
The use will not have undue deleterious effect on the environmental quality,
property values, or neighborhood character already existing in the area or
normally associated with Permitted Uses in the district.
4. Public Services and Facilities
The proposed use will not require existing community facilities or services to
a degree disproportionate to that normally expected of Permitted Uses in the
district, nor generate disproportionate demand for new services or facilities
as compared with the Permitted Uses, in such a way as to place undue burdens
upon existing development in the area.
5. Public Safety and Health
The proposed use will not be detrimental to the safety or health of the
employees, patrons, or visitors associated with the use nor of the general
public in the vicinity.
6. Other Factors
The proposed use is in harmony with any other elements of compatibility
pertinent in the judgment of the Commission or Council to the particular
Special Use or its particular location.
D. SITE PLAN APPROVAL
No building permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued in any district
for any non single-family or non two-family use that involves a change and
increase in the intensity of the basic land use occurring on the property
(examples include changing from residential to office, residential to
institutional, office to restaurant, etc.), increases in the occupant load of
the structure, increases in the building footprint of the existing principal
structures, increases in the volume of the principal structures, and/or
increases in the area of parking lot pavement located on the site without:
   a.   submission of a Site Plan as provided under Site Plan Review in
Table 2C; and
   b.   determination by the Zoning Administrator and by the City Council,
prior to issuance of any such Permit or Certificate, that such Plan is in
compliance with applicable provisions of this and other applicable City
ordinances except where variances thereto have been approved as provided
therein. Such compliance shall include the provision for, and financial
sureties to guarantee the installation of, such public and private improvements
as are required by Subdivision Control Ordinance No. 807, whether or not a
subdivision of land is proposed.
Neither the Zoning Administrator nor the City Council shall deny any such
Permit or Certificate, or make approval thereof subject to conditions, except
on the basis of noncompliance of the application therefor with applicable City
Ordinances including the City roadway improvement requirements outlined in
Section
7-2-3-1 of the City of Warrenville City Code.
The City's review and approval of a Variance, Special Use Permit, and Final PUD
Plan shall satisfy the Site Plan Approval Requirements of this Section. (Ord.
2276, 4-18-06)
E. UNLISTED USES
The City Council may, by amendment to the district regulations, allow in any
district a use not listed as a Permitted or Special Use in that district if:
   1.   the use is not listed either as a Permitted or Special Use in any
district in the Ordinance, and
   2.   the Council deems the use similar in nature to another use listed as a
Permitted or Special Use in the same district with respect to:
         a.   types of goods or services produced or sold
         b.   generation of automobile, truck, or pedestrian traffic
         c.   hours of operation
         d.   general effect upon its environs.
Provisions and restrictions herein applicable to the listed use shall also
apply to the unlisted use to which it is judged similar. The Zoning
Administrator may make a recommendation to the Council on the approval of such
uses.
F. CONDITIONAL USE
1. OUTDOOR DISPLAY
The City of Warrenville may allow a business to display items outdoors for the
convenience of the customer provided that (a) the business holds a valid
annual, seasonal or temporary conditional display permit as may be applicable,
(b) is located in B-2 or B-4 Zoning District, (c) has submitted a site plan
indicating the location of display areas and (d) observes the following:
   a.   The items are displayed wholly upon the parcel on which the principal
sales structure is located.
   b.   The display does not utilize any required parking spaces and does not
disrupt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No display shall be
allowed in required landscape areas.
   c.   No item shall be displayed at a location where the width of paved clear
space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than five (5) feet.
   d.   No items shall be placed in required front or required corner side yard
setbacks applicable to the principal structure or designated fire lanes or
public right of way.
   e.   No item shall be stacked higher than six (6) feet. Single items
representative of stock stored indoors may exceed six (6) feet. A lesser height
can be designated by the City Building Department if it is determined that a
height condition exists which is hazardous to public safety.
   f.   Items shall be set back six (6) inches from any building.
   g.   No item may be displayed within five (5) feet of any fire department
connection.
   h.   No hanging material may be placed in pedestrian or vehicular passages.
   i.   The following items may be displayed outdoors on an annual basis
provided that the area is accessible to retail customers:
      (i)   Bulk salt, when screened from residential view.
      (ii)   Fire wood, if stacked neatly in cord fashion and when screened
from residential view.
      (iii)   Nursery stock.
      (iv)   LP gas.
      (v)   Garden sheds.
      (vi)   Swing sets.
      (vii)   Other similar merchandise customarily displayed outdoors on an
annual basis and as approved by the Community Development Director.
   j.   Other merchandise may be displayed outdoors on a seasonal basis.
"Seasonal Merchandise" shall mean single items representative of stock which
are not normally sold throughout the year and are displayed and sold during the
time of year for which they are appropriate or for which they are intended to
be used. The following items may be displayed outdoors on a seasonal basis
provided the area is accessible to retail customers:
      (i)   Soda pop and water.
      (ii)   Charcoal.
      (iii)   Mulch.
      (iv)   Christmas trees and pumpkins may be displayed outdoors for (1)
period of thirty (30) consecutive days only between October 1st and December
31st.
      (v)   Other similar merchandise customarily displayed outdoors on a
seasonal basis and as approved by the Community Development Director.
   k.   General merchandise representative of merchandise normally displayed
and sold within the principal structure of a particular property may be
displayed in conjunction with temporary outdoor sales. Merchandise must be
placed inside the principal structure or a substitute enclosed structure before
the close of the business day. All temporary sales shall be conducted by a
business permanently operating from the property on which the temporary outdoor
sale will occur. (Ord. O2017-36, 6-5-17)
   l.   Outdoor display shall be subject to the permit procedures set forth in
Title 3, Chapter 11 of the City Code.
   m.   The Building and Code Enforcement Department will issue conditional
display permits for annual, seasonal and temporary outdoor display. The term of
any permit shall not exceed one (1) calendar year, with all renewals due on
January 1. The Department will determine if the site plan conforms with these
standards and general public safety. Code Enforcement Officials shall have the
authority to revoke the conditional display permit and remove or cause to be
removed items from outdoor display should they not conform to the approved
outdoor display site plan. Code Enforcement Officials will make available
written procedures for businesses to follow when applying for or renewing a
conditional display permit.
   n.   Any retail display not meeting the above requirements may be granted
only through the Planning Commission review and City Council approval.
   o.   No signs shall be displayed on or in conjunction with the outdoor
display, except as permitted in Title 3, Chapter 11 of the City Code.
2. COMMUNITY GARDEN
   a.   The Community Development Director and his/her designee shall have the
authority to issue a community garden conditional permit provided that (a) the
community garden group submits a use agreement outlining operation of the
community garden, responsibilities of the community garden group members, and a
site plan, (b) no accessory structures and/or portable toilets shall be
installed on the property, (c) no storage of tools and/or gardening equipment
shall be allowed on the property, and (d) the following characteristics of the
proposed use and its individual components are effectively addressed:
      (i)   Location
      (ii)   Lot size
      (iii)   Site design and arrangement
      (iv)   Provisions affecting on- and off-street parking, pedestrian and
traffic movement, and emergency vehicle circulation
      (v)   Appearance
      (vi)   Screening from public streets and adjacent properties
      (vii)   Operations factors, such as hours of use, site clean up
      (viii)   Other characteristics in the judgment of the Community
Development Director or his/her designee.
   b.   A conditional community garden use permit may be issued for one-year
increments. The term of any permit shall not exceed one (1) calendar year, with
all renewals due on January 1.
   c.   Code Enforcement Officials shall have the authority to revoke the
conditional permit should it not conform to the approved community garden site
plan and/or requirements established in this Section.
   d.   Any community garden not meeting the requirements of this Section may
be approved through Plan Commission review and City Council approval.
   e.   No signs shall be displayed in conjunction with the community garden,
except as permitted in Title 8, Chapter 6 of the City Code.
(Ord. 2821, 1-6-14)
3. TEMPORARY OUTDOOR DINING
The City of Warrenville may allow a business to set up and operate a temporary
or seasonal outdoor dining area for the convenience of the customer under the
following parameters and conditions:
   1.   A temporary or seasonal outdoor dining area may be provided by a dining
establishment in conjunction with its permanent indoor operation.
   2.   An outdoor dining area shall be located on private property only, and
shall be adjacent to the permanent dining establishment.
   3.   An outdoor dining area shall be located on paved surface only, and
shall not utilize any required parking spaces or disrupt vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
   4.   A permit from the City shall be required for each season. A detailed
plan illustrating the outdoor patio and all associated temporary improvements
(i.e., furniture, fencing, etc.) shall be provided.
   5.   The hours of operation of an outdoor facility shall be consistent with
the permanent dining facility operation hours.
   6.   Pedestrian ways and accessible means of egress route shall be
maintained free from new obstructions or encroachments that would reduce the
width of paved clear space for the passageway of pedestrians to less than four
feet.
   7.   Flower beds/container planting are encouraged.
   8.   If alcohol is to be served in the outdoor dining area, the following
requirements shall apply:
      i.   A valid Liquor License from the City; and
      ii.   A fence shall be installed that would allow a point of entry/exit
to card customers and discourage underage drinking. Fencing shall be of durable
materials with a maximum of four-inch spacing between the bars.
(Ord. O2017-26, 5-15-17)
G. APPEALS
1. APPLICABILITY
Any officer, board, or agency of the City or any party aggrieved by an
administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made under this
Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator or other authorized administrative
official, board, commission, or department of the City other than the City
Council, may file an Appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. APPROVAL PROCESS
Appeals shall be decided only in conformance with the Approval Process provided
in the Filing Procedures section of this Ordinance and the Approval Criteria
herein.
3. NOTICE OF APPEAL
A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within 20 days
of the date of the order or decision being appealed.
The notice shall contain:
   a.   the name, address, and telephone number of the party filing the appeal,
and
   b.   the location of the property affected by the decision being appealed,
and
   c.   identification of the provision of the Ordinance governing the decision
being appealed, and
   d.   a statement of the grounds on which the Appeal is based, and
   e.   the reason given by the administrative official or body for the
decision, and
   f.   a brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the Appeal is based,
and
   g.   a plot plan and verbal description of the use affected by the decision
being appealed.
4. STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
The filing of a Notice of Appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board
of Zoning Appeals that in his or her judgment a stay would cause imminent peril
to life, health, or property. In such case, no proceedings shall be stayed
without issuance of a restraining order by the Board or a court of record.
5. APPROVAL CRITERIA
The Board shall reverse the decision appeal only if it finds that such
decision:
   a.   was arbitrary or capricious, or
   b.   was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or
   c.   constituted an abuse of discretion, or
   d.   was based on an erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or
zoning law. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
8. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. PURPOSE
The provisions of this section are intended for special situations in which:
   a.   adequate space, light, air, and other objectives of this Ordinance
relating to the public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved without the
literal application of the detailed zoning and subdivision requirements
otherwise applicable, and
   b.   special amenities and benefits to the community beyond those required
by this and other City ordinances can be achieved by allowing more flexible
design than is otherwise permitted by such requirements.
These objectives can be achieved where an area of land is planned for
development as an integrated unit and where its design is subject to more
detailed review and approval by the City than is normally required.
The objective of Planned Unit Development (PUD) is therefore not simply to
allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations. It is instead to
encourage a higher level of design and amenity than it is possible to achieve
under the usual land development requirements.
It is accordingly the intent of the City to suspend the application of detailed
zoning and subdivision standards as provided herein only where such special
amenity is achieved. In this way the City may grant the creative developer a
desirable flexibility and at the same time not only protect but enhance the
welfare of the residents and other users of a development as well as the rest
of the community.
B. QUALIFICATION FOR FILING AS A PUD
Planned Unit Development shall be the only form of development in the SD
District. A PUD may also be developed in any other district in which Planned
Unit Developments are allowed as Special Uses.
No development shall be filed as a Planned Unit Development unless it is
initially under the same ownership or control.
A Planned Unit Development may be residential, commercial, office, industrial,
or a combination thereof. Flexibility to suspend requirements imposed elsewhere
is not conferred upon the PUD applicant as a matter of right but is in all
cases subject to a finding by the City that the objectives of these provisions
will be served thereby.
C. INCENTIVES FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
To further a superior level of design and amenity in new development, the
following incentives are offered in Planned Unit Developments:
1. VARIABLE DIMENSIONAL ZONING STANDARDS
Except as otherwise provided herein, standards for lot width, building height,
floor area ratio, yard dimensions, off-street parking and loading, landscaping
and screening, fences, signs, and other standards may vary from those
established elsewhere in this Ordinance if such variations are approved by the
City Council as conforming to the Approval Criteria in
Table 8A.
2. VARIABLE SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Dimensional and design standards for subdivisions and subdivision improvements
such as streets, blocks, sidewalks and parkways, but not improvement
construction standards, may vary from those established in the City Subdivision
Control Ordinance No. 807.
3. MIXED LAND USES
Land uses other than those allowed as Permitted or Conditional Uses in the
applicable zoning districts may be permitted. In Residential Districts, no more
than 10 percent of the net area of the development--excluding streets,
retention and detention areas, and other public improvements--shall be devoted
to business uses.
4. VARIABLE DENSITY STANDARDS
The City Council may approve a reduction in minimum lot area or minimum lot
area per dwelling unit of no more than 15 percent provided that no less than 15
percent of the net site area excluding streets is devoted to public or common
private open space. Fifty percent of the area of dry stormwater retention areas
may be counted toward such open space. No less than 25 percent of such open
space shall be suitable for use for active recreation. Maximum floor area ratio
required by the applicable zoning district may be exceeded by no more than 20
percent. This subsection shall not be applicable to an SD District for which a
General Site Plan and SD Development Control Regulations have been approved.
5. ESTABLISHMENT OF SD DEVELOPMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS
At the time of approval of a General Site Plan for the SD District, the City
Council may approve detailed design standards (SD Development Control
Regulations) setting forth the zoning and design standards which shall apply to
development in the SD District. Approval of the SD Development Control
Regulations by the City Council shall be subject to conformance of such
Standards to the Approval Criteria in
Table 8A. To the extent the SD Development Control Regulations are exceptions
from otherwise applicable City ordinances, such exceptions shall be subject to
the Approval Criteria in
Table 8A Article 7A and
Table 7A shall not be applicable to such exceptions. The SD Development Control
Regulations shall supersede any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance, Landscaping Ordinance, Signage Ordinance, or other City ordinances
which are inconsistent with such SD Development Control Regulations. The SD
Development Control Regulations, as originally approved or as generally amended
thereafter, shall govern all future development and land use in the SD
District. A General Amendment to the SD Development Control Regulations shall
be proposed as a major amendment. All Preliminary and Final Plans must conform
to such SD Development Control Regulations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a lot or development parcel within
the SD District may request an amendment of the SD Development Control
Regulations as they apply to such lot or development parcel, which request
shall be processed as a site-specific major or minor amendment under Article
8.F.4. Requests for exceptions to otherwise applicable City ordinances as part
of an SD District General Site Plan or a PUD Preliminary Plan or Final Plan
shall also be subject to the Approval Criteria in
Table 8A and shall be processed as part of General Site Plan or Preliminary
Plan approval or as a major amendment to an approved plan under Article 8.F.4.
D. REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
1. SITE PLAN REVIEW
Whether or not a land subdivision is involved, Preliminary and Final Plans for
the development shall be filed and approved by the City in conformance with the
provisions of
Table 2D in the Filing Procedures section of this Ordinance.
2. REQUIRED COMMON OPEN SPACE
Dedication or reservation of land for park or school sites shall be as provided
in Ordinance No. 392 for developments or portions thereof that provide for
residential uses.
Except in an SD District, for developments or portions thereof in business,
office, or industrial uses, no less than 15 percent of net site area shall be
common open space. In an SD District the percentage of landscape coverage shall
be governed by the General Site Plan and SD Development Control Regulations for
the SD District.
3. QUALITY OF DESIGN
(Ord. 2593, 6-21-10)
To be granted the flexibility permitted hereunder, a Planned Unit Development
must evidence a level of design and amenities exceeding those typical of
conventional development.
Among the features that may evidence such amenities are:
   a.   amount and quality of landscaping,
   b.   amount, quality, and interconnectedness of common open space,
   c.   provision of pedestrian or bicycle paths separated from streets,
   d.   preservation of drainage ways and other natural features,
   e.   provision of common recreational facilities,
   f.   enclosed, underground, depressed, or outstandingly landscaped parking
areas,
   g.   varied building setbacks or other measures to reduce monotony in
design,
   h.   incorporation of stormwater management Best Management practices
(BMPs),
   i.   incorporation of green building, smart growth and other sustainable
design principles,
   j.   Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) and/or LEED
Neighborhood Design (LEED-ND) certifications and/or other nationally recognized
sustainable design criteria and standards, and
   k.   other features as determined by the Plan Commission or City Council.
4. MAINTENANCE OF LAND INTENDED FOR FUTURE PHASES
Land designated for future construction phases and other land not intended for
immediate improvement shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained with a neat
and orderly appearance as specified by the Zoning Administrator.
5. UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
All utility lines within a Planned Unit Development shall be installed
underground, except that the City Council may permit electrical transmission
regional service lines to be located aboveground in an SD District as part of
the General Site Plan.
6. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Lot coverage by buildings shall not exceed 25 percent on single-family detached
residential lots and 30 percent on all other lots. In Residential Districts,
yards required by applicable zoning district regulations shall be provided on
lots abutting the boundaries of the development. All business and industrial
buildings shall be no less than 50 feet, and all other buildings no less than
30 feet, from such boundaries. No building height shall exceed 45 feet except
as otherwise provided in
Table 4C above. This subsection shall not be applicable to an SD District for
which a General Site Plan and SD Development Control Regulations have been
approved.
7. PARKING SPACE RESERVE
Except as otherwise provided in SD Development Control Regulations, up to 25
percent of the parking spaces required herein for office, laboratory, and
commercial uses may be shown as unimproved parking space reserve areas on the
Preliminary and Final Plans required herein, provided that:
   a.   an alternative version of the Plan is filed with the Plan and is
approved by the City Council that shows the configuration of the reserve areas
when fully improved with parking spaces and related landscaping, marking,
illumination, and other accoutrements, and
   b.   the Plan shows the landscaping of the reserve areas that is proposed to
be installed and maintained until such areas are required for parking, and,
unless such maintenance has been made a condition of the Special Use approval
for Planned Unit Development, is accompanied by an agreement approved by the
City Council binding the applicant to maintain such landscaping until such
time, and
   c.   if at any time after the issuance of the last certificate of occupancy
for a project, after notice to the owner and an opportunity to be heard, the
City determines that the land banked parking, or any portion of such parking,
is necessary to alleviate an observed parking problem, the City Council through
a motion can require the owner of the subject property to install the land
banked parking within one hundred eighty (180) days of the action by the City
Council.
E. APPROVAL PROCESS
(Ord. O2017-26, 5-15-17)
   1.   Preliminary Plans and Final Plans for all Planned Unit Development and
General Site Plans for SD Districts (including Development Control Regulations
associated therewith) shall be approved only in conformance with the Approval
Process provided in
Table 2D and other provisions of the Filing Procedures section of this
Ordinance and the Approval Criteria provide in
Table 8A. No Special Use Permit for a PUD or phase thereof shall be issued
before approval by the City Council of a Final Plan as provided herein.
   2.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 8 or in the
City Subdivision Control Ordinance No. 807, the City Council may, within its
reasonable discretion, authorize the issuance of a "Quick Start" grading and/or
infrastructure installation permit at the developer's risk prior to the City
Council's approval of the necessary Ordinances required for Final PUD approval
of a specific project or development. However, in each such case, the
infrastructure which may be installed under a "Quick Start" installation permit
shall be limited to those particular infrastructure components which have
received final engineering review and approval by the City Council.
F. FINAL PLAN
1. FILING OF FINAL PLAN
The City Council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Final Plan of a
Planned Unit Development, or any phase thereof, for which it has approved a
Preliminary Plan. The Final Plan may be filed, and may be approved,
simultaneously with the Preliminary Plan.
The terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in a Preliminary Plan, or any
phase thereof, approved by the City Council shall not be modified, revoked, or
impaired by the City except as provided under Revocation or Invalidation in the
Filing Procedures chapter herein.
The financial sureties submitted with the Final Plan in conformance with
Table 2A herein shall provide for the phasing of the installation and
improvement of public or common areas and improvements, open spaces, and
amenities in a manner generally proportionate to the number of dwelling units
or the amount of non-residential floor space, as applicable, to be built in
each phase together with the phases that preceded it.
2. RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN
The Final Plan as approved by the City Council shall be filed with the County
Recorder of Deeds as the Final Plat for the PUD under provisions of the City
Subdivision Control Ordinance No. 807 whether or not the PUD involves any
subdivision of land. No Building Permit shall be issued before the approved
Final Plan is recorded and a Special Use Permit issued. The applicant shall pay
all recording costs.
3. AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLAN
Except with respect to an SD District PUD, approval of an amendment in
conformance with the procedures in
Table 2D shall be required for:
   a.   any material change, deletion, or addition made to:
      1.   an approved Preliminary Plan, or
      2.   an approved Final Plan, or for
   b.   a Final Plan that does not conform to the Preliminary Plan approved by
the City Council.
A Minor Amendment to a Planned Unit Development shall be any change from the
previously approved Plan that involves:
   1.   No change in the number of principal structures provided in the Plan,
and
   2.   No change in land use type or housing type, and
   3.   No change in the location provided in the Plan of any structure, off-
street parking or loading area, common open space area, or any area or right-
of-way to be conveyed to or reserved for a public body by more than 10 feet in
any direction, nor a change in the spacing between any two such structures by
more than 10 percent, and
   4.   No change of more than 10 percent in any non-locational quantitative
specification of the previously approved Plan, including:
      a.   any dimension of any lot, yard, structure, or pedestrian or
vehicular thoroughfare,
      b.   any residential density,
      c.   amount of common open space acreage,
      d.   utility line capacity,
      e.   amount of floor area of non-residential development,
      f.   amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for any public body,
      g.   size, number, or capacity of off-street parking or loading areas
other than parking areas providing four or fewer parking spaces,
      h.   amount or dimensions of proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping,
or screening, and
   5.   Modifications to an approved planned unit development landscape plan,
and
   6.   No other change that causes the development to fall short of meeting
the requirements of the otherwise applicable zoning regulations to any greater
degree than already provided on the previously approved Plan.
The Plan Commission may disallow Minor Amendment status if a proposed amendment
fails to meet the foregoing criteria when it is considered together with one or
more Minor Amendments previously approved for the same development.
A Major Amendment shall be any amendment that does not qualify as a Minor
Amendment.
An amended Final Plan shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions
herein governing recording of a Final Plan.
4. AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS FOR THE SD DISTRICTS
   a.   Approval of an amendment in conformance with the procedures in
Table 2D hereinabove shall be required for any material change, deletion or
addition made to an approved plan:
      (1)   General Site Plan and/or the Component Documents (including the SD
Development Control Regulations),
      (2)   PUD Preliminary Plan in the SD District, or
      (3)   PUD Final Plan in the SD District.
   b.   As set forth in
Table 2D hereinabove, the approval process for the amendment shall depend on
whether the proposed amendment constitutes a "Major Amendment" or a "Minor
Amendment." The category of the proposed amendment shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator within fourteen (14) days after request made by the
applicant. The proposed amendment shall then be referred to the appropriate
hearing or decisional body in accordance with
Table 2D. If the applicant disagrees with the Zoning Administrator's
determination, the matter, along with a written statement from the applicant
stating the reasons for this disagreement, shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for determination of the appropriate category. If the Applicant
disagrees with the Plan Commission's determination, the matter, along with a
written statement from the applicant stating the reasons for the disagreement
shall be referred to the City Council for the final determination of the
appropriate category.
   c.   The following types of changes shall be considered a "Major Amendment":
      (1)   A change in the previously approved use areas permitted within the
parcel.
      (2)   A change in the previously approved residential dwelling unit type.
      (3)   A change of location where any collector roadway intersects an
arterial roadway by more than 50 feet.
      (4)   An increase of the overall density (floor area ratio or residential
density, as applicable) approved as part of the General Site Plan.
      (5)   A change of 10% or greater of the previously approved density for
any subarea.
      (6)   A relocation of greater than 100 feet in the previously approved
location of the dividing line between (a) subareas shown on the General Site
Plan or (b) Use Area or lot lines which separate areas restricted in an
approved Plan to different Use Area categories.
      (7)   A change that causes the development to fall short of meeting the
requirements of the otherwise applicable zoning regulations or the SD
Development Control Regulations to any greater degree than already provided on
the previously approved Plan, including (a) a request for an exception to an
otherwise applicable zoning regulation, (b) a request for a site specific
amendment to SD Development Control Regulations, and (c) a request for a
general amendment to SD Development Control Regulations.
      (8)   A decrease of 10% or more of the previously approved amount of
Landscape Coverage.
      (9)   A decrease of 10% or more in the amount of land to be conveyed to
or reserved for any Public Body.
      (10)   A decrease of 10% or more in the amount of plantings on a
previously approved proposed tree, ground cover or landscaping plan.
      (11)   A request for a Use Permitted with Special Approval under SD
Development Control Regulations.
      (12)   Any significant change which is not listed as a "Minor Amendment."
   d.   The following types of changes shall be considered a "Minor Amendment."
      (1)   A change in the number of principal structures located on a lot or
a change in the number of lots shown in a subarea.
      (2)   A change of location where any collector roadway intersects an
arterial roadway by 50 feet or less.
      (3)   A change of location of any structure, parking area, loading dock
or open space which is not a significant reorientation of the improved area
within the site.
      (4)   A relocation of 100 feet or less in the previously approved
location of the dividing line between (a) subareas shown on the General Site
Plan or (b) Use Area or lot lines which separate areas restricted in an
approved Plan to different Use Area categories.
      (5)   A change of less than 10% of the previously approved density for
any subarea, provided that the overall density approved as part of the General
Site Plan is not exceeded.
      (6)   An increase of previously approved density on any lot which
increases the previously approved density for a subarea by less than 10%,
provided that the overall density approved as part of the General Site Plan is
not exceeded.
      (7)   A decrease of less than 10% of the previously approved amount of
Landscape Coverage.
      (8)   A decrease of less than 10% in the amount of land to be conveyed to
or reserved for any Public Body.
      (9)   A decrease of less than 10% in the amount of plantings on a
previously approved proposed tree, ground cover, or landscaping plan.
      (10)   Any other minor dimensional or other adjustments which are not
Major Amendments and which otherwise are consistent with the character of
development on the site and do not significantly change the overall orientation
of the improved areas on the site or the infrastructure serving the site.
5. CHANGES ON DEVELOPED RESIDENTIAL LOTS
After initial construction thereon is completed, no Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot within a Planned Unit
Development that is in single-family or two-family use unless:
   a.   The application therefor conforms either to:
      1.   The approved Final Plan, or
      2.   The otherwise applicable district and other zoning regulations
herein, or
   b.   A variance from the Plan or the regulations has been approved by the
Zoning Board of Appeals as provided herein, and evidence or guarantees
satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator of compliance with any conditions to
which the approval has been made subject has been submitted.
Table 8A: Approval Criteria for Planned Unit Developments
In recommending approval or conditional approval of a General Site Plan for an
SD District Development (including Development Control Regulations associated
therewith) or a Preliminary or Final Plan for a Planned Unit Development (PUD),
the Plan Commission shall transmit to the City Council written findings of fact
that the application meets all of the criteria below or will meet them when the
Commission's conditions are complied with. The City Council shall, in granting
approval or conditional approval, also find that all of the following criteria
are met or will be met when the conditions to which the approval is made
subject are complied with:
1. SUPERIOR DESIGN (Ord. 2593 6-21-10)
The PUD represents a more creative approach to the unified planning of
development and incorporates sustainable design practices (i.e., Stormwater
Management BMPs, LEED and/or LEED-ND certifications), and/or other nationally
recognized sustainable design criteria and standards, and a higher standard of
integrated design and amenities than could be achieved under otherwise
applicable zoning district and subdivision regulations, and solely on this
basis modifications to the use and design standards established by such
regulations are warranted.
2. MEETS PUD REQUIREMENTS
The PUD meets the requirements for Planned Unit Developments set forth in this
Ordinance, and no modifications to the use and design standards otherwise
applicable are allowed other than those permitted herein.
3. CONSISTENT WITH CITY PLAN
The PUD is generally consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive
Plan as viewed in light of any changed conditions since its adoption.
4. PUBLIC WELFARE
The PUD will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare.
5. COMPATIBLE WITH ENVIRONS
Neither the PUD nor any portion thereof will be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other properties in its vicinity, seriously impair property values
or environmental quality in the neighborhood, nor impede the orderly
development of surrounding property.
6. NATURAL FEATURES
The design of the PUD is as consistent as practical with the preservation of
natural features of the site such as flood plains, wooded areas, steep slopes,
natural drainage ways, or other areas of sensitive or valuable environmental
character.
7. CIRCULATION
Streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, off-street parking, and
off-street loading as appropriate to the planned land uses are provided. They
are adequate in location, size, capacity, and design to ensure safe and
efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks, bicycles, pedestrians, fire
trucks, garbage trucks, and snow plows as appropriate without blocking traffic,
creating unnecessary pedestrian-vehicular conflict, creating unnecessary
through traffic within the PUD, or unduly interfering with the safety or
capacity of adjacent streets.
8. OPEN SPACES AND LANDSCAPING
The quality and quantity of public and common open spaces and landscaping
provided are consistent with the higher standards of design and amenity
required of a PUD. The size, shape, and location of a substantial portion of
total public and common open space provided in residential areas render it
useable for recreation purposes.
Open space between all buildings is adequate to allow for light and air, access
by fire fighting equipment, and for privacy where walls have windows, terraces,
or adjacent patios. Open space along the perimeter of the development is
sufficient to protect existing and permitted future uses of adjacent property
from adverse effects from the development.
9. COVENANTS
Where individual parcels are to be later sold, adequate provision has been made
in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners or condominium associations, or
the like for:
   a.   the preservation and maintenance of any open spaces, thoroughfares,
utilities, water retention or detention areas, and other common elements not to
be dedicated to the City or another public body
   b.   such control of the use and exterior design of individual structures,
if any, as is necessary for continuing conformance to the PUD Plan, such
provision to be binding on all future ownership.
10. PUBLIC SERVICES
The land uses, intensities, and phasing of the PUD are consistent with the
anticipated ability of the City, the school districts, and other public bodies
to provide and economically support police and fire protection, water supply,
sewage disposal, schools, and other public facilities and services without
placing undue burden on existing residents and businesses.
11. PHASING
Each development phase of the PUD can, together with any phases that preceded
it, exist as an independent unit that meets all of the foregoing criteria and
all other applicable regulations herein even if no subsequent phase should ever
be completed. The provision and improvement of public or common area
improvements, open spaces, and amenities--or the provision of financial
sureties guaranteeing their improvement--is phased generally proportionate to
the phasing of the number of dwelling units or amount of non-residential floor
area. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21; amd. Ord. O2022-13, 4-18-2022)
9. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
The requirements herein are intended to provide a basis for determining the
compatibility of land uses that may produce measurable adverse environmental
effects on their surroundings.
They shall apply to all uses in the City and shall be administered as provided
under Administration herein. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
B. NOISE
1. MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS
No operation or activity shall cause or create noise above the sound pressure
levels in Tables
9A and
9B at the locations specified therein.
2. MEASUREMENT
A sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to the
specifications of the American Standards Association shall be employed to
measure the intensity and frequency of sound.
3. EXEMPTIONS
The following shall be exempt from noise performance standards:
   a.   Noises of construction or maintenance activities from 7 AM to 9 PM.
   b.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves.
   c.   Transient noises of moving sources such as transportation vehicles.
   d.   Noises associated with snow plowing, street sweeping, and mosquito
abatement.
   e.   Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
   f.   Other noises not under the direct control of the property user.
Table 9A: Permitted Sound Levels
                   Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level in Decibels at
                   Boundaries of:
Preferred Center   Nearest Lot in Residential Nearest Lot in Business or
Frequency in Hertz Zone                       Industrial
                   Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level in Decibels at
                   Boundaries of:
Preferred Center   Nearest Lot in Residential Nearest Lot in Business or
Frequency in Hertz Zone                       Industrial
0-75               72                         79
75-150             67                         74
150-300            59                         66
301-600            52                         59
601-1,200          46                         53
1,201-2,400        40                         47
2,402-4,800        34                         41
Over 4,800         32                         39
 
Above figures for octave band analyzers calibrated with Preferred Frequencies
(American National Standards Institute S1.6-1984, Preferred Frequencies and
Band Numbers for Acoustical Measurement)
Sound levels above shall be modified where applicable by the adjustments in
Table 9B.
Table 9B: Adjustments to Permitted Sound Levels
 Adjustment in Decibels
                                                                     Adjustment
                                                                     in
                                                                     Decibels
1.   DURATION of noise in any one-hour period (use one adjustment  
only):
      a.   under 12 minutes                                 Add 5 dB
      b.   under 3 minutes                                  Add 10 dB
      c.   under 1/2 minute                                 Add 15 dB
2.   At boundaries of nearest Office or COMMERCIAL zoned lot      Add 5 dB
3.   Noise is IMPULSIVE in character (e.g. hammering)             Subtract 5
                                                                     dB
4.   Noise is PERIODIC in character (e.g. hum, screech)           Subtract 5
                                                                     dB
5.   Noise may be heard between HOURS of 7 PM and 7 AM            Subtract 5
                                                                     dB
 
C. VIBRATION
Vibration shall not at any time:
   a.   result in a combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe"
range of U.S. Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 442, Seismic Effects of Quarry
Blasting, Table 7, on any structure, or
   b.   produce an acceleration exceeding 0.1 gravities based on methods of
Bulletin 442, or
   c.   be discernible to the human sense of feeling at the property line for 3
minutes or more in any hour.
D. SMOKE
Emissions of smoke shall not exceed the darkness or opacity of Number 0 on the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, Information Circular 8333
(revision of IC 7718), May 1, 1967, or of Number 1 for periods not exceeding 4
minutes in any 30-minute period.
E. PARTICULATE MATTER
1. MAXIMUM EMISSIONS
Particulate matter is fine, solid or liquid particles small enough to be
carried in the air, including products of combustion such as soot and fly ash,
industrial dust, and products of wind erosion.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources at any point shall
not exceed 0.1 grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas or air. For
measurement of particulate matter in gases resulting from combustion, standard
corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit
and 50 percent excess air.
2. CONTROL OF WIND EROSION
Emission of particulate matter from materials, products, or surfaces subject to
wind erosion shall be minimized by paving, oiling, wetting, covering,
landscaping, fencing, or other means.
This shall apply to vacant lots; unpaved roads; yards and storage piles of bulk
materials such as coal, sand, cinders, slag, and sulfur; and similar sources of
windborne particulates.
F. TOXIC MATTER
Release of any toxic matter is prohibited in concentrations that are
detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare or that cause
damage to property or business. Values given in Tables I, III, IV, and V in
Chapter 5 of the latest revision of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the
Manufacturing Chemists Association shall be used to determine permissible
concentrations. Detailed plans for elimination of toxic matter may be required
before issuance of a Building Permit.
G. ODOR
Odorous material released shall not exceed the Odor Threshold Concentration at
the property line.
Odor shall be measured by Odor Threshold Concentrations with the American
Society for Testing and Materials Method D1391-57, Standard Method for
Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method).
Odor shall be measured at ground level and habitable elevation, as defined
herein. Detailed plans for elimination of odors crossing property lines may be
required before issuance of a Building Permit.
H. FIRE AND EXPLOSION
1. OTHER REGULATIONS APPLICABLE
In addition to the requirements herein, all materials regulated in this section
shall be utilized, stored, manufactured, and handled in accordance with the
City Fire Code (Title 8, Chapter 3, of the Warrenville Municipal Code) and the
standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
2. DETONABLE MATERIALS
Storage, utilization, and manufacture of materials or products that decompose
by detonation shall be permitted only as specifically licensed by the City
Council.
Such materials shall include:
   a.   all primary explosives, such as lead azide, lead sulfate, and fulminate
of mercury
   b.   all high explosives and boosters, such as TNT, RDX, tetryl and ammonium
hydrate
   c.   propellants and components thereof, such as dynamite and nitroglycerine
   d.   pyrotechnics and fireworks materials, such as powdered magnesium,
potassium chlorate, potassium permanganate, and potassium nitrate
   e.   rocket fuels such as hydrazine nitrate
   f.   nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor
elements, such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
3. FLAMMABLE SOLID MATERIALS
The utilization, storage, and manufacture of flammable solid materials are
permitted subject to the following restrictions:
 
Rating                                                                             Restrictions
Noncombustible to Moderate Burning                                                 None
                                                                                   Only in
                                                                                   completely
Free to Active Burning to Intense Burning construction in compliance with the      enclosed
Building Code that are:                                                            buildings
                                                                                   with minimum
                                                                                   fire-
                                                                                   resistive
   1.   Located at least 100 feet from all lot lines, and
   2.   Protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system complying with
installation standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
 
4. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES
The manufacture of flammable liquids or gases that produce flammable or
explosive vapors at ordinary weather temperatures shall be prohibited except
when such materials are used in secondary processes or are required in
emergency or stand-by equipment. Storage of such materials shall be permitted
if in conformity with standards of the National Fire Protection Association and
regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Safety.
I. ILLUMINATION AND GLARE
1. ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
Uses required herein to provide over 15 parking spaces or one or more loading
spaces shall provide, for such uses as defined hereunder, illumination as
follows:
TABLE 9C: ILLUMINATION STANDARDS [a][c][d]
Permitted Illumination Levels for Vehicle Use Areas in Foot Candles (F/C)
 
Level of Activity Minimum at any Point           Average (not to be exceeded)
Low               0.3 F/C                        0.8 F/C
Medium            0.5 F/C                        2.0 F/C
High              0.8 F/C                        2.8 F/C [b]
Illumination average to minimum uniformity ratio Between 3:1 and 4:1
for all parking lots
Illumination maximum to minimum ratio for all    15:1
parking lots
Maximum illumination level at lot lines adjacent
to or across from detached and attached Single   .1 F/C
Family zoned properties
 
[a]   The Community Development Director, with the prior written approval of
the City Engineer, shall have the administrative authority to approve
illumination plans that provide illumination levels other than those listed in
 
Table 9C. (Ord. 1917, 6-20-01)
[b]   Except gasoline station canopies, for which the average illumination may
not exceed 20 F/C and the maximum illumination may not exceed 30 F/C; provided,
however, for legally non- conforming gasoline station canopies where the light
fixtures are not earlier replaced, the maximum average illumination may not
exceed 60 F/C until January 1, 2028 pursuant to Section Table 6A of this Code.
After January 1, 2028, for all gas station canopy lighting, the maximum average
illumination may not exceed 20 F/C and the maximum illumination may not exceed
30 F/C.
[c]   All existing fixtures legally nonconforming to these regulations must be
updated to current illumination standards by January 1, 2028.
[d]   Fixtures may be equipped with dimming devices to reduce lighting to no
less than 0.8 F/C.
For the purpose of this section, the following guidelines shall be used to
determine the activity level for individual parking lots:
   A.   HIGH ACTIVITY LEVELS:
      Includes high intensity Motorist Service and General Manufacturing uses
including, but not limited to, athletic arenas, regional shopping centers with
retail space above 300,000 square feet, entertainment theaters, gas stations,
and fueling centers.
   B.   MEDIUM ACTIVITY LEVELS:
      Includes Motorist Service uses, mixed uses, and moderate intensity
General Manufacturing uses.
   C.   LOW ACTIVITY LEVELS:
      Includes Community Retail uses, churches, schools, and neighborhood
recreational facilities, Light Manufacturing uses with modest nighttime uses or
lighting requirements, and multi-family residential developments. (Ord. 2276,
4-18-06; amd. Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
2. FIXTURE SPECIFICATIONS
All exterior luminaries, except decorative fixtures as approved by the Plan
Commission, shall have full horizontal cutoff optics with zero intensity at or
above horizontal (90 degrees) with flat lenses, with no portion of the lens
protruding below the housing, without the option to tilt. All installations
shall have a Correlated Color Temperature (CCT) of no greater than 4000 K.
Standard City of Warrenville decorative streetlight fixtures shall be exempt
from this regulation.
All parking lot lighting shall be equipped with and operated on a timer or
other equivalent City approved system to substantially reduce the amount of
parking lot lighting provided during times and periods when the parking lot is
not normally used. The required photometric plan for such parking lots shall
clearly reference and accommodate the installation of this type of system.
(Ord. 2276, 4-18-06; amd. Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
3. MOUNTING HEIGHT SPECIFICATIONS
Parking lots adjacent to or across from detached and attached Single-Family
zoned properties shall have a maximum light fixture mounting height of 26-feet.
Non-residential parking lots located on residentially zoned property shall have
a maximum light fixture mounting height of 22-feet. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
4. ILLUMINATION GLARE
Sources of lighting shall be directed, shaded, or otherwise arranged to
minimize perceived glare from adjacent properties.
When the City Engineer determines it is practical and technically feasible,
non-residential parking lots located on residentially zoned property shall be
illuminated with perimeter parking lot fixtures. All perimeter parking lot
fixtures installed on such parking lots shall be equipped and maintained with
house side shields to minimize off-site light pollution and reduced perceived
glare from adjacent off-site properties. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
TABLE 9D: TRANSITIONAL OFFICE LIGHTING
 
Maximum fixture lighting height in feet   8
Light Source (a) (b)                       
Time during which parking lots may be lit 6:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
 
   (a)   Catalog cut sheets and a lighting location plan must be submitted for
review by the Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   All lighting shall be of a residential character and shielded or
directed to minimize perceived glare on surrounding residential properties.
(Ord. 2023-28, 8-7-2023)
J. HEAT
No heat from operations or processes shall be capable of being sensed at any
lot line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than
five degrees Fahrenheit.
K. RADIOACTIVE RADIATION
No operation shall be permitted that causes any individual outside of the lot
lines to be exposed to any radiation exceeding the lowest concentration
permitted for the general population by federal and state laws and regulations
in effect as of the day of application for a Certificate of Occupancy.
L. WASTE
All sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and disposed of in compliance
with regulations of the City, State, and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. Approval by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency shall be
required before issuance of any Building Permit.
M. UTILITY FACILITIES
All equipment and facilities used in supplying gas, sewer, water, electric,
communication, or governmental utility services of any kind shall be permitted
or special uses in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
   1.   All such utility equipment and facilities which are defined in this
Ordinance as special public uses shall require site plan approval.
   2.   All wiring (including transmission, distribution and service lines) for
the supply of electric and communication services shall be placed underground
except as hereinafter provided. Unless otherwise required by City Ordinance,
the following wiring is exempt from the underground placement requirement:
      a.   Wiring which carries more than 15,000 volts; or
      b.   Wiring which is for temporary service during the period of new
construction; or
      c.   Wiring which is relocated at the request of the City; or
      d.   Wiring which is for minor repair of existing facilities; or
      e.   Lead-in or service wiring from existing poles to single-family
dwellings.
   3.   No transformers, utility substations, electric service entrances or gas
meters of any buildings (except detached single-family dwellings) shall be
visible from any immediately adjacent public street, or from any adjoining
residential district at grade level.
Screening may be done in any manner which does not interfere with the operation
of or cause equipment or devices to be inaccessible, and shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
   4.   No operation or activity under the control of the property user shall
cause or create electromagnetic interference that adversely affects at any
point the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator
of such interference, or that violates any regulation of the Federal
Communications Commission.
With respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of any public or
private electrical utility substation, all reasonable steps shall be taken to
reduce and minimize the measurable average annual milligauss level at any
property line. For the purpose of this provision, the property owner shall
submit to the City a study identifying all available scientific or technical
measures used to achieve such a measurable average annual milligauss level. The
property owner shall also identify any measure which could reduce the
measurable average annual milligauss levels but which was not deemed
reasonable. In addition, such study shall include a documented projection of
the anticipated measurable average milligauss level at any property line.
N. ADMINISTRATION
The procedures herein are intended to enforce the Performance Standards herein,
to protect businesses from arbitrary enforcement, and to protect the public
from unnecessary enforcement costs.
1. NEW USES
An application for a Special Use Permit or a Building Permit for an industrial
use within any Manufacturing District shall include a certification by a
licensed engineer or scientific laboratory that the use involved in the
application is able to meet all applicable Performance Standards to the extent
that this can be judged based on the submitted building plans and other
information available prior to construction.
This certification shall be accompanied by copies of all data or information
supplied by the applicant and used as the basis of the certification. The
Zoning Administrator may refer the certification and data to the City Engineer
for review.
The Zoning Administrator may also require such certification for a land use in
any other zoning district when in his or her judgment the use has potential to
exceed any Performance Standard herein. Such certification may include all
Performance Standards or only individual Standards specified by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. EXISTING USES
In enforcing Performance Standards on existing uses, the Zoning Administrator
may issue a written Notice of Violation to an alleged violator. The Zoning
Administrator shall, before issuing such Notice, make technical determinations
of violation when such determinations can be made using equipment and trained
personnel normally available to the City or obtainable without extraordinary
expense.
In other cases, however, technical complexity or extraordinary expense may make
it unreasonable for the City to maintain personnel or equipment for making
determinations of violation prior to issuing a Notice of Violation. In such
cases, a Notice of Violation may be issued when the Zoning Administrator has
other reason to believe there is probable violation. The Zoning Administrator
shall give Notice of Violation by any means that ensures a signed receipt for
such notice to the party responsible for the alleged violation.
The notice shall describe the alleged violation and the results of technical
determinations or the other reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there
is a violation. The notice shall require either an answer or correction of the
alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator and within a
time limit he or she shall specify in the Notice.
The Notice shall also state that failure to provide an answer or correct the
alleged violation within this time limit shall constitute admission of a
violation.
The Notice shall further state that, if technical determinations have not
already been made, upon request of the alleged violator such determinations
will be made. If a violation is found as a result of such determinations, the
cost of the determinations will be assessed against the properties or parties
responsible in addition to any other penalties provided for. If no violation is
found, the City will pay the cost of the determinations.
10. ACCESSORY USES AND YARD
A. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Compatibility
Accessory uses and structures shall be compatible with the principal use of the
lot on which they are located and shall not be established prior to the
establishment of the principal use. Notwithstanding the above, accessory
structures on vacant parcels contiguous to the parcel(s) developed with a
principal building may be constructed prior to the establishment of a principal
use provided that:
   (i)   Except as provided in subsection (ii) below, both the developed parcel
and the vacant parcel remain under unified, single ownership at all times;
   (ii)   In the event that both parcels will no longer be under unified,
single ownership due to a transfer of ownership, the accessory structure may
remain in place provided that within nine (9) months from the date of ownership
transfer, a building permit has been acquired and construction of a new
principal structure has begun on the accessory structure vacant parcel; and
   (iii)   A protective covenant shall be recorded with the DuPage County
Recorder's Office against such vacant parcel on which the accessory structure
(s) is (are) constructed prior to issuance of a Building Permit for the
accessory structure(s). The protective covenant shall (a) include a provision
requiring the owner of the property to notify the Community Development
Director of the property ownership transfer, and (b) document the property
owner's obligations as required herein. The form of the protective covenant
shall be approved by the City Attorney. All recording costs shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2536, 8-18-09)
Except for the keeping of goats, horses, llamas, and chickens as provided
herein and as an accessory use to agriculture where permitted herein, the
keeping, preparation, or culture of poultry (not including pigeons) or
livestock shall not be an accessory use. (Ord. 2517, 6-1-09) (Ord. 2533, 8-5-
09) (Ord. 2539, 9-9-09) (Ord. 2821, 1-6-14)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, animal keeping associated with a formal project
conducted in conjunction with an educational organization such as but not
limited to 4-H projects may be permitted on a zoning lot containing not less
than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area. All buildings used for
such projects shall be set back not less than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from the front lot line and not less than thirty feet (30') from any side or
rear lot line. All project activities shall comply with Animal Nuisance
regulations found in Title 4, Chapter 4 Animal Control of the Warrenville City
Code. (Ord. 2346, 12-15-06)
Accessory structures attached to a principal building shall be considered a
part of the principal building and shall be subject to applicable yard
requirements; provided, however, that solar energy systems may project into
required yards as set forth in Section
10.A.3 of the Zoning Ordinance (O2019-34, 6-17-19)
Religious study groups and similar secular and non-secular activities conducted
in a structure occupied as a dwelling unit shall be considered permitted
accessory uses in the residential zoning districts. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
B. Location
Accessory uses may be located in courtyards and required yards only as provided
in
Table 10B. No accessory structure, except fences as defined herein, may
encroach upon a drainage (without blocking drainage) or utility easement
without a waiver from the party to which the easement is dedicated. If a fence
is installed in or across a utility or drainage easement, the City of
Warrenville or any other utility company which has legal rights to utilize said
easement shall have the right to remove the fence. Notwithstanding emergency
situations, removal of a legally permitted fence in a utility or drainage
easement shall be performed with care and in a workmanlike manner intended to
minimize unnecessary damage to said fence.
C. Standards
All accessory uses shall conform to the applicable standards in
Table 10A.
2. SPECIAL ACCESSORY USES
A. Home Occupations
Home occupations as defined herein shall be accessory uses only and shall be
governed by the following regulations:
1. Employment
Home occupations shall not employ more than 2 persons that are not members of
the family, as defined herein, living on the premises.
2. Enclosed Structures
Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within enclosed structures, and
there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used.
3. No Exterior Evidence
There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such occupation in the
outside appearance of the premises other than signage as permitted in the
Warrenville Signs Ordinance No. 1554, Title 8, Chapter 6, Municipal Code.
4. Parking
Any need for parking generated by the occupation above that normally is
associated with residential uses allowed in the zoning district shall be met
off the street and outside of any actual front or corner side yard.
5. Fire Rating
No home occupation shall involve construction features or the use of electrical
or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or
of the fire district in which the structure is located.
6. Commercial Vehicles
No home occupation shall involve the use for delivery of materials to or from
the premises of commercial vehicles, as defined herein, other than those that
normally serve residential areas and those permitted to be stored in
residential areas by this and other City ordinances.
7. Maximum Floor Space
No more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, up to a
maximum of 1,000 square feet, shall be devoted to the home occupation.
8. Environmental Standards
No home occupation shall create noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odor, dust,
glare, heat, radioactive radiation, or electrical interference; release toxic
matter; or generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic that:
   a.   is more than is normally associated with uses allowed in its zoning
district, an
   b.   adversely affects other dwellings or businesses.
9. Permitted Occupations
The following uses are permitted as home occupations provided they conform to
all other requirements herein:
   a.   art, photography, or crafts studio,
   b.   dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring,
   c.   teaching of music or dancing to no more than 4 pupils at one time and
conducted in single-family detached dwellings or their accessory buildings
only,
   d.   other teaching or tutoring, limited to 6 pupils at one time in single-
family detached dwellings and their accessory buildings and one pupil at a time
in all other dwellings,
   e.   writing, editing, composing, painting, or sculpting,
   f.   offices of a professional person such as a clergyman, attorney,
architect, engineer, physician, dentist, or accountant,
   g.   telephone answering,
   h.   home crafts such as rug weaving, model making, lapidary work, and
cabinet making,
   i.   home cooking and preserving,
   j.   computer programming,
   k.   typing and word processing,
   l.   laundry and ironing,
   m.   hair styling and cutting,
   n.   real estate brokerage employing no more than one broker or salesperson,
   o.   babysitting,
   p.   telephone sales,
   q.   repair of small appliances,
   r.   mail order businesses not requiring maintenance of on-site inventories,
   s.   offices of sales people who normally meet customers and prospects
outside the salesperson's home, and
   t.   beekeeping along with the selling of honey and related products on lots
of 20,000 square feet or more, provided that:
      1)   The number of colonies shall not exceed 4 for the first 20,000
square feet of lot area and 2 colonies for each 10,000 square feet thereunder.
      2)   All bees must be of the common domestic honey bees of the Apis
Mellifera species.
      3)   All bee colonies and beekeepers must be registered with the Illinois
Department of Agriculture as required by the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act
(510 ILCS 20/1 et seq.) and shall comply with all applicable regulations of
said Department and legislation.
      4)   All colonies must be kept in inspectable-type hives, with removable
combs, which shall be kept in sound, usable and sanitary condition.
      5)   All colonies must be kept at least 10 feet from all property lines
at all times and may not be located in side, corner side or front yards.
      6)   Notwithstanding the previous regulation, if any colony is located
within a 15 feet distance from a property line and has landing boards facing
the property line, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the
property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier,
which may consist of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination
thereof, that completely encloses the apiary, or forms an effective barrier, so
that the bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least 6 feet above ground
level when crossing the property line to reach the hives. Any such flyway
barrier shall be constructed in compliance with applicable City ordinances.
      7)   Bee hives shall be provided with water source at times when bees are
active.
      8)   Production and sale of honey comes from hives on the lot.
      9)   Except as otherwise required by state law, the foregoing regulations
shall not apply unless beekeeping is conducted in conjunction with the selling
of honey and related products on the Subject Property. (Ord. 2916, 4-6-15)
10. Prohibited Occupations
Home occupations shall not include:
   a.   any manufacturing or processing operations,
   b.   public stables or kennels,
   c.   restaurants,
   d.   clinics, and
   e.   motor vehicle repair
11. Special Use Home Occupations
A home occupation not listed herein as either a permitted or prohibited home
occupation may be approved as a Special Use under provisions for Special Uses
in this Ordinance.
B. Keeping of Animals
1. Keeping of Horses
Horses may be kept on lots of 40,000 square feet or greater in any Residential
District provided that:
   a.   A stable meeting requirements of Tables
10A and
10B shall be provided.
   b.   The number of horses shall not exceed 1 for the first 40,000 square
feet of lot area and 1 for each 20,000 square feet thereafter.
   c.   A fenced area/pen shall be provided.
2. Keeping of Llamas, Goats, and Miniature Horses
   1)   General Requirements:
      a.   A shelter meeting requirements of Tables
10A and
10B shall be provided.
      b.   A fenced area/pen shall be provided.
         i.   For goats a minimum 1,000 square foot per animal fenced area/pen
with a minimum fence height of 5 feet shall be provided.
         ii.   For miniature horses a minimum 1,000 square foot per animal
fenced area/pen with a minimum fence height of 4 feet shall be provided.
      c.   The combined number of llamas, goats, and miniature horses shall not
exceed 2 for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area and 1 for each 10,000
square feet thereafter, except that goat offspring may be kept for up to 12
weeks from birth.
      d.   Llamas, goats, and miniature horses may be kept on lots of less than
40,000 square feet but not less than 28,000 square feet in any Residential
District provided that:
         i.   the combined number of llamas, goats and miniature horses shall
not exceed 2, except that goat offspring may be kept for up to 12 weeks from
birth;
         ii.   the minimum fenced area/pen setback from front and corner side
property lines shall be 30 feet; and
         iii.   the following applicable requirements are met:
            a)   for llamas:
               1)   a Special Use Permit has been approved;
               2)   a minimum 10,000 square foot fenced area/pen shall be
provided;
               3)   a food supplement in the form of quality hay, grains,
minerals, etc., shall be provided; and
               4)   the type of fence shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
            b)   for goats and miniature horses:
               1)   a permit has been issued by the Community Development
Director or his/her designee; and
               2)   the type of fence shall be approved by the Community
Development Director or his/her designee.
   2)   Special Requirements for Goats:
      a.   Only miniature, pygmy, or dwarf goats may be kept.
      b.   All goats must be dehorned.
      c.   Males must be neutered.
3. Keeping of Goats, Horses, Llamas, and Miniature Horses
If goats, llamas, miniature horses, and horses are kept on one lot, the maximum
combined number of animals shall be determined based on the requirements
related to the number of horses that would be permitted and where 1 horse is
equal to 2 goats, 2 llamas, or 2 miniature horses. (i.e., total number of
animals cannot exceed total number of horses that would be permitted under
Section
10.A.2.B.1)." (Ord. 2517, 6-1-09) (Ord. 2533, 8-5-09) (Ord. 2821, 1-6-14)
(O2018-15, 5-21-18)
C. Keeping of Chickens
Chickens may be kept on lots of 10,000 square feet or more in any Residential
District, provided that:
   a.   no more than ten (10) chickens shall be allowed on a property, (Ord.
2894, 11-3-14)
   b.   no roosters shall be allowed,
   c.   chickens shall be confined at all times in a chicken coop and chicken
run,
   d.   a chicken coop and chicken run shall be provided as required in Tables
10A and
10B,
   e.   chicken coops shall not be allowed to be located in any part of a home
and/or attached garage but may be located adjacent to a principal or other
accessory building or within an accessory building, and
   f.   chicken feed shall be kept in a predator/rodent proof container. (Ord.
2539, 9-9-09)
D. Public Paper Recycling Bins (Ord. 2593, 6-21-10)
Public paper recycling bin (bins) may be installed on school, governmental or
not-for-profit properties in any zoning district, provided that:
   a.   no more than two bins shall be allowed on any property,
   b.   a bin shall not exceed 7 cubic yards and 6 feet in height,
   c.   a bin shall be enclosed with a 6 foot high fence on at least 3 sides,
   d.   required parking spaces shall not be blocked by the bin, and
   e.   bins shall be located outside front and corner side yards, in the area
least visible from the adjacent public right-of-way, and shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any lot line abutting a lot in a residential district.
3. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
A. Decks, Patios, and Porches
No open porch shall cover more than 20 percent of the required front yard, or
of the actual front yard if it is smaller than the required front yard. (Ord.
2625, 1-4-11)
B. Fences
The maximum height of a fence in a Residential District, measured from the
finished grade at the fence post, shall be 6 feet, except fences abutting a
railroad right-of-way or along the edge of a utility easement that adjoin and
run parallel with a railroad right-of-way shall be a maximum of 8 feet in
height. Fences shall display the finished side toward the abutting property
except that, for properties abutting a railroad right-of-way or along the edge
of a utility easement that adjoins and runs parallel with a railroad right-of-
way, the finished side may be displayed toward the property. The height of
protection fencing/backstops shall not exceed 30 feet for baseball and softball
fields, 16 feet for batting cages, 12 feet for tennis courts, and 10 feet for
all other recreational equipment. The installation and use of razor wire and
barbed wire on fences is prohibited in Residential Districts. (Ord. 2539, 9-9-
09) (Ord. 2593, 6-21-10) (Ord. O2022-12, 4-18-2022)
C. General Swimming Pool Regulations (O2017-26, 5-15-17)
No private swimming pool in a Single-Family Residential District shall be
located in the actual front yard.
Pools and surrounding decks or patios may not be located in any easement. All
pools shall be set back 10 feet from any well. Above-ground pools must be set
back a minimum of 10 feet from any septic system and in-ground pools must be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from any septic system.
Protective fencing is required in accordance with the Building Code.
D. Solar Energy Systems (O2019-34, 6-17-19)
Structure-mounted and ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be a permitted
accessory use to a permitted principal use in all zoning districts subject to
the standards set forth in this Ordinance. Solar energy systems must comply
with all the requirements of all applicable codes and ordinances. Owners of
solar energy systems are solely responsible for obtaining from other property
owners any desired solar easements to protect access to sunlight.
1. Structure-mounted solar energy systems:
Current building and structure setback regulations shall apply to structure-
mounted solar energy systems. Systems mounted on building awnings and canopies
may project into required yards by a maximum of three feet (3'). Systems
mounted on the roof over an enclosed deck and/or patio may project into
required yards by a maximum of ten feet (10'). Systems mounted on sloped,
gable, and hip roofs shall not extend beyond three feet (3') parallel to the
roof surface, provided that they do not exceed the height of the ridge. Systems
mounted on a flat roof shall not extend beyond six feet (6') parallel to the
roof surface, and may extend above the maximum established building height by
six feet (6').
2. Ground-mounted solar energy systems:
Ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be located in required front and
corner side yard building setbacks. Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be
located within required interior side and rear setbacks, provided they are set
back a minimum of five feet (5') from the rear/interior side lot line. Ground-
mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
Ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be located in any easement. Ground-
mounted solar energy systems shall be excluded from lot coverage and yard
coverage calculations."
B. YARDS
1. ESTABLISHMENT OF YARDS
Yards shall be established and maintained on the same lot as a use as provided
in the district regulations herein.
The minimum yard space required for one building or structure shall not be used
as the required yard space for another adjoining building or structure.
The front and side yards required herein shall be established for all uses
without buildings except for agriculture, gardening, and recreation areas and
as otherwise provided herein.
2. OBSTRUCTIONS
Court yards and required yards may be obstructed by accessory uses or building
projections only as provided in
Table 10B. (Ord. 2894, 11-3-14)
3. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ADJACENT TO UNDEVELOPED RIGHT-OF-WAY
The required Corner Side Yard for Accessory Structures may be reduced by 50%
when the required Corner Side Yard is adjacent to an undeveloped City-owned
Right-of-way.
4. REDUCTION IN YARD AREA
No nonconforming yard shall be reduced in any dimension in which it is
nonconforming. No conforming yard shall be reduced in any dimension to less
than required by this Ordinance.
5. VACANT THROUGH OR CORNER LOTS
On a vacant through or corner lot, either of the lot lines abutting a street
may be established as the front lot line, except that where two or more through
lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been duly established by the
construction of a building on one lot, the same street lot line shall serve as
the front lot line of all such contiguous lots.
6. VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE
(Ord. 2346, 12-15-06)
Within the triangular area located at the at grade intersection of a street and
a railroad, a street and a driveway and/or two streets when the minor street
approach is under a stop condition and the major approach is uncontrolled or
where the street intersection is controlled by a traffic signal and right-turn-
on-red is permitted. Solid fences, as defined herein, hedges, opaque
landscaping or screening, walls, and other solid obstructions having a height
of over two feet shall not be permitted.
The triangular area shall be formed by the centerlines of two intersecting
streets, driveways and/or a railroad and a straight line between these crossing
centerlines as illustrated on ILLUSTRATION 10A. TABLE 10-1 shall be used to
define the length of the (a) and (b) legs of the triangular area.
TABLE 10-1
Design Speed                      a                                      b
(Calculated as posted speed limit
plus 5 mph)
(mph)                             (feet)                                 (feet)
15                                                                       170
20                                                                       225
25                                Determined by the distance to the      280
30                                decision point 8' behind the stop bar  335
35                                but not less than 18' from the edge of 390
40                                pavement, nor less than 12' behind a   445
45                                sidewalk or other pedestrian pathway   500
50                                                                       555
55                                                                       610
60                                                                       665
 
ILLUSTRATION 10-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2282.png]
Overhanging objects, including tree branches, and street signs shall be
permitted within this triangle only if all parts thereof are higher than seven
feet above the level of the railroad or the pavement of the street or driveway
where the stopped motorist is located. Signs shall be permitted only if the
sign clearance is seven feet or greater or the sign height is two feet or less.
(Ord. 2144, 6-23-04)
Table 10A: Standards for Accessory Structures[r][t]
Maximum HEIGHT in Residential Districts in feet [a]:
   On lots < 18,000 SF in size:                                    23*
   On lots 18,000-40,000 SF:                                       24*
   On lots > 40,000 SF:                                            27*   
   In R-6 District:                                                18
Maximum COVERAGE:
   of Required Rear Yard [b] [c]:                                  20%
   of Area of Actual Rear Yard Outside of Required Rear Yard [b]:  40%
Minimum SETBACK in feet:
   From NON-BUILDING Accessory Structure to NON-BUILDING Accessory 0
Structure, Principal or Other Accessory BUILDING:
   From Accessory BUILDING to Accessory BUILDING [d]:              6
   From Accessory BUILDING to Principal BUILDING:                     8
   From LOT LINES [e]
                                                                     Front & Corner  Other Lot
                                                                      Side Lot Lines  Lines
Accessory Buildings with eave height                                  --              20
over 10 feet
Accessory Structures above 1,000 square feet in ground floor area     --              20
Agriculture Accessory Structures                                      150             30
Animal Shelter on lots of 40,000 square feet and greater              200             30</ce>
Animal Shelter on lots less than 40,000 square feet                   150             30
Bee hives for beekeeping as home occupation                           --              10
                                                                                      20' from
                                                                                      interior
Chicken Coop and Chicken Run                                          --              side,
                                                                                      3' from
                                                                                      rear
                                                                                      5' from
                                                                                      interior
Deck/patio/pergola open and detached from principal building          --              side,
                                                                                      10' from
                                                                                      rear
Development Entrance Structures [f]                                   5               --
Dog Runs                                                              10              10
Flagpoles                                                             10              10
Garages, Detached Private [g]                                         (m)             3
Horse Stables                                                         200             30
Private Swimming Pools                                                (m)             10
Recreational Equipment                                                10              3[s]
Roadside Stands [i]                                                   40              --
Other Accessory Structures                                            10              3
Sheds                                                                 10              3
Solar Energy Systems                                                  See note [t]    See note
                                                                                      [t]
Stairways, Steps, Stoops, Fire Escapes                                10              3
Window Wells                                                          10              3
Maximum NUMBER SIZE of Residential Accessory Buildings [j]:
                                                                              Maximum
                                                                              Floor
                                                                     Maximum Area in Lot Size
                                                                      Number  Square
                                                                              Feet**
                                                                              (g)
                                                                              (n)     >40,000 sf.
Detached Private Garage [g]                                           1       825     18,000-
                                                                              650     40,00 0 sf.
                                                                                      <18,000 sf.
                                                                                      All
Dog Run                                                               1       --      Residential
                                                                                      Lots</ce>
Horse Stable/Animal Shelter on lots of 40,000 square feet and greater 1       825[k]  => 40,000
[p]                                                                           [h]     square feet
Animal Shelter on lots less than 40,000 square feet [p]               1       200  �=> 28,000
                                                                                      sf.
                                                                              (o)     >40,000 sf.
All Other Accessory Buildings                                         1       825     18,000-
                                                                              650     40,00 0 sf.
                                                                                      <18,000 sf.
                                                                              (o)     >40,000 sf.
Cumulative of all Accessory Buildings [l]                             2       825     18,000-
                                                                              650     40,000 sf.
                                                                                      <18,000 sf.
 
"<" = Less than
">" = Greater than   
"=>" = Equal or Greater
Footnotes for Table 10A
   General standards in this table apply except where regulations herein
applicable to a specific kind of accessory structure provide a greater or
lesser standard.
*   Maximum eave height shall not exceed: (i) 16 feet on lots measuring 80,000
square feet or greater, (ii) 12 feet on lots measuring 40,000 square feet or
greater, up to 80,000 square feet, and (iii) 10 feet on all other lots. The
eave height shall be the vertical dimension between finished floor and the top
of the lowest edge of roof plywood.
**   Accessory buildings exceeding these maximums may be approved by the Zoning
Board of Appeals under provisions for Variances in this Ordinance.
[a]:   Or height of principal building, whichever is less.
[b]:   Cumulative for all accessory structures in rear yard. Excludes areas
occupied by open patios and decks, chicken coops, and swimming pools.
[c]:   Percentage of coverage applies to area of actual rear yard when it is
smaller than area of required rear yard.
[d]:   Minimum setback between shed less than 120 square feet in area and
detached garage may be reduced to 0 feet in cases when such shed is placed on
the side of the garage facing interior and rear yards only.
[e]:   Except fences, walls, landscape screens, berms, and hedges. Structures
are subject also to the yard requirements of
Table 10B, which may impose greater setbacks from lot lines for certain
structures.
[f]:   Architectural entrances to a development are permitted at street
entrances on lots of 1 acre or more or on smaller lots included within a
development containing 25 or more lots.
[g]:   Garages, carports, and open parking and loading areas as accessory uses
shall be subject to applicable provisions under the Off-Street Parking and
Loading section herein.
[h]:   Or 200 square feet per llama, whichever is greater.
[i]:   Roadside stands selling nursery, garden, or farm products raised on the
same lot are permitted on lots of 5 acres or more of which the principal use is
agriculture.
[j]:   On residential lots in any Single-Family Residential District. Not
applicable to Multi-Family Districts or to non-residential uses such as farms
and schools located in Single-Family Districts.
[k]:   Or 275 square feet per horse, whichever is greater.
[l]:   Excluding horse stables and animal shelters on lots less than 40,000
square feet.
[m]: Setback/encroachment shall be as specified in
Table 10B.
[n]:   The maximum size of any accessory structure on any residential lot
greater than 40,000 square feet in size, is the lot size multiplied by 2.5% up
to a maximum size of 3,000 square feet.
[o]   The maximum ground floor area of any accessory building and cumulative
for all accessory buildings is 3,000 square feet.
[p]   The permitted horse stable/animal shelter square footage can be combined
with the permitted square footage of other accessory buildings provided the
total ground floor area of such combined accessory buildings does not exceed
3,000 square feet and the lot is the required size.
[q]   Any open canopy/carport or similar such structure that is attached to an
accessory building shall be considered as part of the building and is counted
as part of the overall allowable square footage of the accessory building. Any
such attached open structure is calculated at a discounted rate of 1 square
foot is equal to 0.5 square feet.
[r]   Accessory structures associated with non-residential uses in or adjacent
to residential districts shall also be subject to requirements of Section
1.C.2 Non-Residential Uses in or Adjacent to Residential Districts of this
ordinance.
[s]   Basketball hoops on residential lots with residential use may be
installed with a 0' setback from the interior side property line.
[t]   See Section
10.A.3.D of the Zoning Ordinance for solar energy system height and setback
regulations
(Ord. 1817, 3-23-2000; amd. Ord. 1906, 4-18-2001; Ord. 2068, 6-18-2003; Ord.
2231, 7-21-2005; Ord. 2346, 12-15-2006; Ord. 2517, 6-1-2009; Ord. 2533, 8-5-
2009; Ord. 2536, 8-18-2009; Ord. 2539, 9-9-2009; Ord. 2625, 1-4-2011; Ord.
2770, 4-3-13; Ord. 2821, 1-6-2014; Ord. 2894, 11-3-2014; Ord. 2916, 4-6-2015;
Ord. O2017-36, 6-5-2017; Ord. O2019-34, 6-17-2019; Ord. O2023-17, 4-17-2023;
Ord. O2025-10, 3-17-2025)
Table 10B: Permitted Obstructions of Required Yards[b]
Projection                        Interior  Corner Side            Maximum
or Accessory Front Yard Rear Yard Side Yard Yard        Court Yard Encroachment
Use                                                                in Feet [c]
Projection or      Front           Interior  Corner               Maximum
Accessory Use      Yard  Rear Yard Side Yard Side Yard Court Yard Encroachment
                                                                  in Feet [c]
Arbors & trellises X     X         X         X         X          -
Awnings & canopies X     X         X         X         X          3
Balconies, open    X     X         -         -         X          4
Bay windows        X     X         -         -         X          3
Bee hives for
beekeeping as home -     X         -         -         -          -
occupation
Cable TV headends  -     X         -         -         -          -
Chicken coop/            X
chicken run
Chimneys, attached X     X         X         X         X          2
Cornices, sills    X     X         X         X         X          1.5
Deck/patio,
enclosed and       -     X         -         -         -          10
attached to
principal building
Deck/patio/
pergola, open and
detached from      -     X         -         -         -          -
principal building
[d]
Deck/patio/gazebo,
enclosed and       -     X         -         -         -          15
detached from
principal building
Deck/patio/porch/
breezeway/p ergola
open and attached  X     X         -         X         -          10
to principal
building [d]
Devel. entr.       X     -         -         X         -          -
structures [a][b]
Dish antennas      -     X         -         -         X          -
Dog runs, enclosed -     X         -         -         -          -
[a]
Drives, internal   X     X         X         X         X          -
circulation
Eaves & gutters    X     X         X         X         X          2
Electric vehicle
charging stations  X     X         X         X         X          X
[f]
Emergency backup   -     -         -         -         X          -
generators
Fences, hedges,    X     X         X         X         X          -
walls
Fire escapes       X     X         X         X         X          3
Fireplaces,        -     X         -         -         -          -
outdoor
Flagpoles [b]      X     X         X                   X          -
Garages or         -     X         X         -         -
carports [b]   
Gardens, vegetable -     X         X         X         X          -
Greenhouses        -     X         X         -         -          -
Heating,
ventilation & air
conditioning:
   Window units X     X         -         X         X          2
   Central unitsX     X         -         X         X          6
Laundry drying     -     X         -         -         -          -
equipment
Lawn furniture     X     X         X         X         X          -
Light standards,   X     X         X         X         X          -
ornamental
Loading, off-      -     X         -         -         -          -
street, open [a]
Non-single family
residential        -     -         -         -         X          -
refuse/dumpster
enclosures
Other accessory    -     X         -         -         -          -
uses
Parking, off-      X     X         X         X         X          -
street, open [a]
Patios, enclosed   -     X         -         -         -          15
[a]
Porches/
breezeways, open   X     X         -         X         -          10
[a][d]
Privately owned
ground mounted     -     -         -         -         X          -
electrical switch
gear/transformer
Recreational       X     X         X         X         X          -
equipment
Sheds & storage    -     X         -         -         -          -
buildings [b]
Signs [a]          X     X         X         X         X          X
Solar Energy       See Footnote [e]
Systems
Stables for
horses/llama       -     X         -         -         -          -
shelters [b]
Stairways, steps,  X     X         X         X         X          3
stoops
Stands, roadside   X     -         -         X         X          X
[b]
Swimming pools,    -     X         -         -         -          -
private [b]
TV/radio towers,   -     X         X         X         -          -
antennas
Tennis courts,     -     X         -         -         -          -
private
Trees, shrubs, &   X     X         X         X         X          -
flowers
Window wells       X     X         X         X         X          3
 
X = Permitted
[a] See separate regulations herein
[b] Subject to requirements of
Table 10A
[c] Maximum allowable encroachment or projection into yards indicated herein
[d] No encroachment is allowed within a corner side building setback in R-5 in
cases where the required corner side setback is reduced to 15 feet per footnote
[l] of
Table 4A
[e] See Section
10.A.3.D of the Zoning Ordinance for regulations regarding solar energy systems
[f]   Permitted obstruction regulations only apply to EVCSs on non-single-
family residential properties. EVCSs are not a permitted obstruction in any
required yard on a single-family residential property.
(Ord. 2049, 4-25-2003; amd. Ord. 2276, 4-18-2006; Ord. 2346, 12-15-2006; Ord.
2536, 8-18-2009; Ord. 2539, 9-9-2009; Ord. 2625, 1-4-2011; Ord. 2770, 4-3-2013;
Ord. 2894, 11-3-2014; Ord. 2916, 4-6-2015; O2019-34, 6-17-2019; Ord. 1018, 3-
11-2021; Ord. O2025-21, 4-21-2025)
11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
A. INTENT AND APPLICABILITY
1. INTENT
The landscaping and screening requirements specified herein are intended to
foster aesthetically pleasing development which will protect and preserve the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the community.
These regulations are intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses
requiring a buffer or screen between uses and, in doing so minimize the harmful
impact of noise, dust and other debris; motor vehicle headlight glare or other
artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts
conducted or created by an adjoining or nearby use.
2. APPLICABILITY
A City-approved Landscape Plan shall be required before the City will issue a
building permit for all projects requiring Site Plan Review, except
construction of individual one-and two-family residences on previously
subdivided lots.
B. PROCEDURES FOR LANDSCAPE PLAN APPROVAL
As noted in Section
11.B.2. of this Chapter, no development, land clearing, filling, or any land
alteration work shall take place until the required landscape plan has been
reviewed and approved by the City unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council in the Special Development Zoning District.
The steps in the process of submittal, review, and approval of a required
landscape plan are as follows:
1. LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW
The Final Landscape Plan (see Section
C. of this Chapter) will be reviewed by the Community Development Director or
his/her designated representative. A courtesy copy of the Landscape Plan will
be forwarded to the Environmental Advisory Commission. (Ord. 2392, 8-20-07)
2. APPROVAL OF LANDSCAPE PLAN
   a.   When the Community Development Director or his/her designated
representative is satisfied that the final landscape plan satisfies all
requirements of this Chapter, he/she will grant formal written approval of the
Final Landscape Plan. Subsequent changes to an approved Plan are subject to
review as described in Section
O. of this Chapter.
   b.   If the Community Development Director or his/her designated
representative determines the Final Landscape Plan does not satisfy all
requirements of this Chapter, landscape relief may be requested and will be
processed in accordance with the Appeals Approval Process for Zoning
Applications outlined in
Table 2C of the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance and will be subject to
review under the Approval Criteria for Variations outlined in
Table 7A of the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
3. INSPECTIONS
Natural areas/landscaping inspections may be conducted by the City before,
during, and after commencement of site work, as described in Section
N. (Supervision and Inspection Requirements) of this Chapter.
4. RECORDING OF LANDSCAPE COVENANT AGREEMENT
Landscape Covenant Agreement shall be required for all properties requiring
Site Plan Approval. Landscape Covenant Agreement shall set forth the owner's
responsibility to maintain the property in accordance with the approved
Landscape Plan, Landscape Maintenance Plan and Landscape Maintenance Calendar.
The Landscape Covenant Agreements shall be submitted to and processed by the
Community Development Department. All approved and owner-executed Landscape
Covenant Agreements shall be (i) in the form periodically approved by the
Warrenville City Council and (ii) recorded against the owner's property in the
office of the recorder of deeds, DuPage County, as permanent record of the
maintenance obligations that will be assumed by the current and future owner of
the property. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
C. CONTENT OF LANDSCAPE PLAN
All Landscape Plans submitted for approval shall contain or have attached
thereto the following information:
1. CONCEPT STATEMENT
A statement of the concept and intent of the proposed landscaping, including
the cost of landscape improvements in absolute terms, including statement of
whether costs are wholesale or retail, and as a percentage of total project
costs. The authority responsible for maintenance shall also be identified.
2. STATEMENT OF AWARENESS OF ORDINANCE
A statement that the Developer is aware of this ordinance.
3. DISCUSSION AND DETAILED PLANS OF EXISTING AND PROPOSED CONDITIONS
The Developer's characterization of existing and proposed conditions shall
include grading plans showing the existing and proposed land conditions
including elevations, drainage, artificial features (including, but not limited
to, the items listed under "Inventory of Artificial Features" below), and
natural features (including, but not limited to, the items listed under
"Inventory of Natural Features" below).
All existing trees with a trunk diameter of 3 (three) inches or more must be
located on the grading plan unless due to the particular conditions of the
property involved the Community Development Director has specifically waived
this requirement in writing.
4. INVENTORY OF ARTIFICIAL FEATURES
Plans, supported by tabular and textual data as appropriate, showing the
following existing and proposed improvements, as a minimum:
   a.   Building outlines-existing and proposed
   b.   Utility fixtures, meters and boxes
   c.   Light standards
   d.   Walls
   e.   Fences
   f.   Parking areas (spaces delineated, including handicapped spaces)
   g.   Driveways
   h.   Walks
   i.   Bike paths
   j.   Recreational facilities
   k.   Sign elevations
   l.   Public rights-of-way
   m.   Building-site coverage, paved-area coverage, landscaped area in square
feet.
   n.   Refuse disposal areas
   o.   Storage Areas
   p.   Detention and Retention Ponds
5. SURVEYING LAYOUT
   a.   Road profiles and pedestrian-circulation system, existing and proposed.
   b.   Property lines
   c.   Easements
   d.   Building setback lines
   e.   Zoning districts
   f.   Common areas, with their covenants
6. INVENTORY OF NATURAL FEATURES
Plans, supported by tabular and textual data as appropriate, showing the
following natural features of the site (as a minimum), under both existing and
proposed conditions. Developers are encouraged to design plans which preserve
and enhance the natural area features of the site. The inventory of natural
features shall include the following:
   a.   Landscaping materials:
      (1)   Location and condition of existing plant materials to be retained.
      (2)   Location and spacing of proposed new plant materials.
      (3)   Types of materials identified by botanical and common names and
listed on a plant material schedule, with method of transplant specified. All
trees to be removed shall be noted.
      (4)   Size of materials in diameter and height or area coverage, at
installation and at maturity.
      (5)   Copy forwarded to the Warrenville Environmental Advisory
Commission, so that trees, especially street trees, can be included on the
City's Tree Inventory. (Ord. 2392, 8-20-07)
   b.   Proposed treatment of all ground surfaces, including, but not limited
to, paving, turf, gravel, walkways, grading, and preservation and/or
replacement of topsoil. Included in this discussion shall be a detailed
description of topsoil across the site, indicating topsoil type, depth, and
condition.
   c.   Separate listing that specifies the quantity of each of the planting
and artificial materials to be used, and specifies the minimum size of planting
materials that will be installed.
   d.   Method of protecting onsite and adjacent vegetated areas, topsoil, and
water features, including sediment and erosion control plans.
   e.   Irrigation plan, if appropriate, or water outlets.
   f.   Grading and drainage plan, showing spot elevations and/or cross
sections.
   g.   Locations of watercourses, lakes, and ponds.
   h.   A description of existing topsoil across the site, indicating, type,
depth, and condition of existing topsoil.
7. TITLE BLOCK
   a.   Name(s) and address address(es) of property owner(s)
   b.   Person(s) drawing landscape plans
   c.   Person(s) responsible for installing materials
   d.   Scaling data
   e.   North arrow
   f.   Zoning district
8. ELEVATIONS AND CROSS SECTIONS TO INDICATE
   a.   Texture
   b.   Material
   c.   Color of exposed surfaces
   d.   Planting in relation to buildings
   e.   Photos, models and/or renderings (as requested by the Plan Commission)
of the intended landscape effect and also including the design and style of
site details such as:
      (i.)   light standards
      (ii.)   benches
      (iii.)   fences
      (iv.)   walls
      (v.)   signage
      (vi.)   other site details
9. CALCULATIONS CONFIRMING COMPLIANCE
Either separately or on the Landscape Plan, calculations shall be provided to
confirm compliance with the various quantitative requirements of this Chapter
(i.e. "One tree for every 40 (forty) lineal feet of parcel-to-right-of-way
boundary", "not less than 10% of the interior of a parking lot shall be devoted
to landscaping", etc.
10. LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE PLAN AND CALENDAR
A detailed site landscape maintenance plan and calendar shall be prepared by a
qualified landscape architect or designer and submitted to the City for review
and approval. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
D. SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS
1. SELECTION
Planting materials used in conformance with the provisions of this Section
shall be of good quality, species normally grown in Northeastern Illinois, and
capable of withstanding the extremes of individual site microclimates. Size and
density at the time of planting and at maturity are additional criteria which
must be considered when selecting plant materials. See the Arboricultural and
Open Space Manual for recommended and unacceptable plant materials. Plants
which clearly show signs of disease shall not be permitted and must be replaced
at the owner's expense.
   a.   Shade Trees
      All shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of 2-1/2 (two and one-
half) inches in diameter as measured one foot above the established ground
level upon installation.
   b.   Ornamental Trees
      Ornamental trees should be used, especially in small areas. These trees
shall have a minimum trunk size of 2 (two) inches in diameter as measured one
foot above the established ground level upon installation, or be a clump form
at a height of at least 7-8 (seven to eight) feet.
   c.   Evergreen Trees
      Evergreen trees should be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a
site, particularly in those areas screening parking lots from dedicated public
rights-of-way or property zoned for residential use. All evergreen trees shall
have a minimum height of 6 (six) feet at planting.
   d.   Shrubs
      Shrubs should be used extensively throughout the development. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of 2-1/2 (two and one-half) feet in height when measured
after planting, except for dwarf shrubs which do not reach this height at
maturity. Dwarf shrub size shall be approved by the Community Development
Director. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous,
unbroken, solid visual screen within 1 (one) year after time of planting.
2. INSTALLATION
All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance with the planting
procedures set forth in the Arboricultural and Open Space Manual.
3. MAINTENANCE
   a.   Responsibility
      The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers, including
refuse disposal areas, as may be required by the provisions of this Chapter, in
accordance with the approved Landscape Plan, Landscape Maintenance Plan and
Landscape Maintenance Calendar for as long as the use/development for which the
landscape plan was approved is in existence. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
      b.   Landscaping Materials
         All landscaping materials, including mulch, shall be maintained in
good condition and shall be replaced when necessary so as to present a healthy,
neat and orderly appearance, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
      c.   Fences and Walls
         Fences, walls and other barriers shall be maintained in good repair.
      d.   Planting Beds
         Planting beds should be mulched with shredded bark, wood chips, or
other similar materials.
      e.   Top Soil
         A cover of at least 6 (six) inches of topsoil shall be provided in
turfed areas. A cover of at least 9 (nine) inches of topsoil shall be provided
in all planting beds.
4. RESTRICTED PLANTING MATERIALS
(Ord. 2346, 12-15-06)
The following plant species shall not be used to satisfy minimum planting
requirements of Chapter 11, Landscaping and Screening:
   a.   Ash tree
   b.   Scots (Scotch) pine
   c.   Austrian pine
E. DESIGN CRITERIA
1. SCALE AND NATURE OF LANDSCAPE MATERIAL
The scale and nature of landscape material should be appropriate to the site
and structures. Large scale buildings, for example, should generally be
complemented by larger scale plants.
2. SELECTION OF PLANT MATERIAL
Plant material should be selected for its form, texture, color, concern for its
ultimate growth, durability, maintenance requirements and contribution to local
ecosystem. See the Arboricultural and Open Space Manual for lists of plant
materials recommended and not acceptable for planting. The use of native and
adapted to northern Illinois plants is encouraged.
Native (or indigenous) plants have been described as having "evolved and
adapted to local conditions over thousands of years." In North America, the
term often refers to plants growing in a region prior to the time of settlement
by people of European descent.
Adapted (or introduced) plants have been described as those that "reliably grow
well in a given habitat with minimal winter protection, pest control,
fertilization, or irrigation once their root systems are established."
Native and adapted plants are low maintenance plants. Since they have adapted
to the regional climate without benefit of irrigation or chemical fertilizers,
they require less water and no chemicals and, as a result, cost less to
maintain. They also cost less to maintain because they have developed a
resistance to most pests and diseases and generally do not require the
application of pesticides. The cost of labor to control weeds is also reduced.
Unlike many landscape plants that are selected almost exclusively for their
aesthetic appeal, native plants are not only attractive, but also enrich the
local ecosystem by providing food and shelter to many birds, butterflies and
other animals. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
3. SOFTENING OF APPEARANCE OF WALLS AND FENCES
Groupings of plant materials should be placed intermittently against long
expanses of building walls, fences and other barriers to create a softening
effect.
4. ENERGY CONSERVATION
In order to help conserve energy, the following landscaping measures are
encouraged, where feasible:
   a.   Deciduous trees, shrubs, and vines should be placed on the south and
west sides of buildings and plaza areas to provide shade from the summer sun.
   b.   Evergreens and other plant materials should be concentrated on the
north side of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds.
5. BERMING
Earthen berms and existing topography should, wherever practical, be
incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site. Slopes should be no
greater than 1 (vertical) in 3 (horizontal) gradient.
F. RIGHT-OF-WAY LANDSCAPING
1. APPLICABILITY
Where a parcel abuts a dedicated public right-of-way, landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
2. TURF
The unpaved portion of a public right-of-way abutting a parcel shall be fine-
graded and sodded. In instances where any of the following conditions are
present, the Community development Director or his/her designated
representative may approve the use of hydro seeding or a seed and blanket
combination in lieu of sod: (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
   a.   No foot traffic expected
   b.   Limited access to source of water for regular application
   c.   Steeply sloped area
3. STREET TREES
Street trees shall be planted on private property unless the property owner,
development Homeowners' Association, or developer of a subdivision executes a
"Landscaping License Agreement' substantially in the form of the agreement
provided in Appendix A of the Arboricultural and Open Space Manual and said
agreement is approved by the Warrenville City Council in which case parkway
trees may be planted in the parkway of streets under City of Warrenville
jurisdiction.
   a.   Selection
      See the Arboricultural and Open Space Manual for acceptable and
unacceptable tree species for right-of-way planting, species diversity
requirements, and nursery stock size and grade requirements.
   b.   Number of Trees Required
      (i.)   The minimum number of street trees required shall be either one
tree for every 40 (forty) linear feet of parcel-to-right-of-way boundary, or
one tree per 800 (eight hundred) square feet of parkway area, whichever is
larger.
      (ii.)   When the parcel is subdivided into lots, at least I (one) street
tree for each lot shall be provided.
   c.   Location and Spacing
      Street tree plantings that are not evenly spaced may be grouped, with a
minimum spacing of at least 15 feet between trees. See the Arboricultural and
Open Space Manual for additional street (parkway) tree location and spacing
requirements.
4. OTHER RIGHT-OF-WAY PLANTINGS
With the execution and approval of a Landscaping License Agreement
substantially in the form of Appendix A, shrubs and perennial plants and
grasses, especially native prairie or savannah plantings, may be used in
addition to street trees. See the Arboricultural and Open Space Manual for
additional right-of-way planting size and location requirements.
G. PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
1. APPLICABILITY
All developments with 10 (ten) or more parking spaces shall provide Perimeter
Parking Lot Landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this Section. All
developments with 20 (twenty) or more parking spaces shall provide Interior
Parking Lot Landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
2. INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
   a.   Coverage
      Not less than 10 (ten) percent of the interior of a parking lot shall be
devoted to landscaping. Landscaping areas located along the perimeter of a
parking lot as required in Subsection G.3 of this Chapter shall not be included
toward satisfying this requirement. Moreover, foundation landscaping areas, as
specified in Section H of this Chapter shall not be included toward satisfying
the interior parking lot landscaping requirements.
   b.   Landscaping Areas
      (i.)   Area - Interior landscape peninsulas within the parking lot shall
be a minimum of 162 square feet in area, and 9 feet in width based on linear
dimensions measured from back of curb to back of curb. All other planting
islands in the middle of back to back rows of parking spaces shall be not less
than 9 feet in width and 324 square feet in size. The area covered by paved
pedestrian pathways within an interior landscape peninsulas and planting
islands shall not exceed one-third of the landscaped area.
      (ii.)   Spacing - Planting islands and/or peninsulas shall be located not
less than every 10 spaces and at the end of every row of parking spaces.
      (iii.)   Alternative Design - Larger landscape islands with bioswales,
where appropriate, may be provided in lieu of interior parking lot landscape
planting islands and/or peninsulas every 10 parking spaces. Such alternative
interior parking lot landscaping shall be authorized by the City through either
the preliminary and/or final PUD Plan review and approval process and shall not
trigger the need for a public hearing or the approval of a Site Specific
Amendment or Site Specific exception.
      (iv.)   Visibility - Visual sight lines at intersections, including
intersections within the parking area, shall not be impeded by landscaping
material. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
   c.   Landscaping Material
      (i.)   Type - The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots
shall be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade.
Ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges, and other live planting materials may be
used to supplement the tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution
to the landscaping. No gravel, concrete, or other artificial surface cover is
allowed in interior planting islands, except as paving for pedestrian pathways.
      (ii.)   Quantity - Trees shall be planted with a spacing of not less than
75 (seventy-five) feet and so that at least one tree is located in the area
occupied by each 20 (twenty) parking spaces. One shade tree shall be provided
for every 120 (one hundred twenty) square feet of landscaped area. Each
planting area shall contain at least one shade tree.
3. PERIMETER PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
   a.   Front and Corner Side Yards Across from Residential Property
      (i.)   Landscaping - Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated
public right-of-way from property zoned for residential use, continuous
landscaping of evergreen or dense deciduous shrubs shall be provided across 100
(one hundred) percent of the street frontage. "Continuous landscaping" shall be
achieved with a planting rate equal to 1 (one) shrub every 5 (five) lineal
feet. Shrubs shall be installed at a height of no less than 2-1/2 (two and one-
half) feet, and shall reach a mature height of at least 4 (four) feet. The
height of such shrubs may be reduced if berming is provided so that the
combined height of shrubs and berming is not less than 4 (four) feet. Spacing
between adjacent shrubs in such shrub masses shall not exceed 5 (five) feet.
         Other landscaping materials, including ornamental trees, evergreens,
shrubs, and/or other live planting material, are encouraged at appropriate
locations along the street frontage.
      (ii.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all landscaping
areas located in front and comer side yards shall be sodded or planted with
native or adapted plant materials. In instances where any of the following
conditions are present, the Community Development Director or his/her
designated representative may approve the use of hydro seeding or a seed and
blanket combinations in lieu of sod: (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
         (a.)   No foot traffic expected
         (b.)   Limited access to source of water for regular application
         (c.)   Steeply sloped area
   b.   Front and Comer Side Yards Across from Non-Residential Property
      (i.)   See above Subsection G.3. a. (i.) Landscaping.
      (ii.)   See above Subsection G. 3. a. (ii.) Turf.
   c.   Rear and Interior Side Yards
      Where the provisions of Section I. (Transitional Yard Landscaping) do not
apply, landscaping shall be provided to conform with the following
requirements.
      (i.)   Planting Materials - Where a parking lot abuts property zoned for
non-residential use, landscaping of evergreen or dense deciduous shrubs shall
be provided across 50% (fifty percent) of that portion of the parking lot
abutting the property line. This requirement shall be achieved with a planting
rate equal to one (1) shrub every ten (10) lineal feet. Shrubs shall be
installed at a height of no less than 2-1/2 (two and one-half) feet, and shall
reach a mature height of at least 4 (four) feet. The height of such shrubs may
be reduced if berming is provided so that the combined height of shrubs and
berming is not less than (four) feet. Spacing between adjacent shrubs in such
shrub masses shall not exceed 5 (five) feet. Other landscaping materials,
including ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, and/or other live planting
material, are encouraged at appropriate locations along the property line.
      (ii.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all side and rear
yard perimeter landscaping areas shall be sodded, planted with native or
adaptive plant materials, or planted with a seed and blanket combination. (Ord.
2770, 4-3-13)
H. FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING
1. SETBACK
Except in those areas providing direct paved pedestrian or vehicular access to
a building, a landscaping area a minimum of 5 (five) feet in width shall be
located around Transitional Office Zoned structures, 10 (ten) feet in width
shall be located around the perimeter of all non-residential buildings and 20
(twenty) feet in width around attached single-family, multiple-family
(apartments), and hotels.
Where the required foundation landscaping (both the width of landscape area and
the number of plantings) cannot be installed because direct paved pedestrian
(i.e. sidewalks) or vehicular access (i.e. drives serving overhead doors) into
the building and across the required foundation landscape area is proposed, up
to a 50% reduction to the required foundation landscaping is permitted. Unless
otherwise authorized by a landscape plan approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, required foundation landscaping shall not be reduced by more than 50%.
In considering whether or not such a reduction should be authorized, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider how effective the displaced foundation
landscaping area and plantings have been relocated and added to other required
landscaping as described in this section. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
2. COVERAGE
Required foundation landscaping areas shall remain open and free of all paving
except where walks to buildings and other similar paving are required.
3. LANDSCAPING MATERIALS
Unless otherwise authorized by a landscape plan approved by the Plan
Commission, foundation landscaping shall be provided for all buildings. Such
landscaping shall consist of shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery,
hedges, turf, and/or other live planting materials. A maximum of 50 (fifty)
percent of such planting area shall be turf, with the remainder devoted to
planting beds. Particular attention shall be paid toward screening mechanical
equipment, bicycle parking areas, and loading docks; softening large expanses
of building walls; and accenting entrances and architectural features. Planting
beds shall contain a sufficient quantity of plants to provide full ground
coverage at plant maturity. For purposes of this subsection, annuals are
considered to be mature in the same year they are planted, perennials at 2
(two) years after planting, and shrubs and evergreens at 4 (four) years after
planting. Mulch shall be maintained at least until the plants completely cover
the ground in the planting beds.
4. TURF
Except where occupied by planting beds, all foundation landscaping areas shall
be either sodded or planted with native or adapted plant materials. (Ord. 2770,
4-3-13)
I. TRANSITIONAL YARD LANDSCAPING
1. APPLICABILITY
All non-residential and multiple-family developments shall provide landscaping
in transitional yards along the property line of the development in accordance
with this Section.
2. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
   a.   Requirements for Transitional Landscape Yards
      Wherever a lot used for multi-family residences abuts a lot in the R1,
R2, R3, R4, or R5 Districts, or a lot in the R6 District used for single-family
residences, a transitional landscape yard 10 (ten) feet in depth shall be
provided along such lot line.
   b.   Landscape Improvements:
      Within required transitional landscape yards, the following improvements
shall be required:
      (i.)   Evergreen/Shade Trees - Trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of 50' (fifty) feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly.
      (ii.)   Other Planting Materials - Shrub masses, at least two rows deep
and with shrubs alternately spaced, shall be provided along at least 75
(seventy-five) percent of the abutting property line. Shrubs shall be installed
at a height of no less than 2- 1/2 (two-and-one-half) feet, and shall reach a
mature height of at least 6 (six) feet. The height of such shrubs may be
reduced if berming is provided so that the combined height of shrubs and
berming is not less than 6 (six) feet. Spacing between adjacent shrubs in such
shrub masses shall not exceed 5 (five) feet. Other landscaping materials,
including ornamental trees, shrubs, and/or other live planting material, are
encouraged at appropriate locations along the abutting property line.
      (iii.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all transitional
yard landscaping areas shall be sodded, planted with native or adapted plant
materials, or planted with a seed and blanket combination. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
3. B2, B4, TO, O1 DISTRICTS AND RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTIES IMPROVED WITH
NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
   a.   Wherever a lot in the B2, B4, TO or O1 zoning district or a lot in a
residential zoning district improved with a non-residential building such as,
but not limited to, a school or church, abuts a lot in the R1, R2, R3, R4, R5,
or R6 District, a transitional landscape yard of at least ten feet (10') in
depth shall be provided along such lot line. (Ord. 2061, 5-30-03)
   b.   Landscape Improvements
      Within required transitional landscape yards, the following improvements
shall be required:
      (i.)   Screening - A solid fence, 6 (six) to 8 (eight) feet in height,
and in a material and design satisfactory to the Plan Commission, shall be
provided along the length of the abutting property line to the front building
setback line of the abutting residential property. Such fence shall be located
not less than 8 (eight) feet from the lot line. A continuous evergreen or dense
deciduous hedge extending the entire length of the fence in the transitional
landscape yard shall be planted on the outside of the fence. The hedge shall be
installed at a height of no less than 2-1/2 (two and one-half) feet, and shall
reach a mature height of at least 6 (six) feet. The height of such shrubs may
be reduced if berming is provided so that the combined height of shrubs and
berming is not less than 6 (six) feet. Spacing between adjacent plants in such
hedges shall not exceed 5 (five) feet. Hedge plants shall be planted not less
than 5 (five) feet on center from the lot line. Continuous landscaping, a
minimum of 2-1/2 (two and one-half) feet in height at planting, and in a design
satisfactory to the Plan Commission, shall be provided along that portion of
the abutting property line from the front building setback line of the abutting
residential property to the front lot line of the abutting residential
property. Such landscaping shall consist of berms, if feasible, trees,
evergreens, shrubs, and/or other live planting materials.
      (ii.)   Evergreen/Shade Trees - Trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of 50 (fifty) feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly.
      (iii.)   Other Planting Materials - Other landscaping materials,
including berms, if feasible, ornamental trees, shrubs, and/or other live
planting material, are encouraged at appropriate locations along the abutting
property line.
      (iv.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all transitional
yard landscaping areas shall be sodded, planted with native or adapted plant
materials, or planted with a seed and blanket combination. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
4. O2 DISTRICT
   a.   Requirements for Transitional Landscape Yards
      Wherever a lot in the 02 District abuts a lot zoned for residential use,
a transitional landscape yard 30 (thirty) feet in depth shall be provided along
such lot line.
   b.   Landscape Improvements
      Within required transitional landscape yards, the following improvements
shall be required:
      (i.)   Screening - All service areas visible from the abutting
residential property shall be screened by a solid fence, 6 (six) to 8 (eight)
feet in height, and in a material and design satisfactory to the Plan
Commission. Such fence shall be located along the inside edge of the
transitional landscape area.
      (ii.)   Evergreen/Shade Trees - Trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of 50 (fifty) feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly.
      (iii.)   Other Planting Materials - Shrub masses, at least two rows deep
and with shrubs alternately spaced, shall be provided along at least 75
(seventy-five) percent of the abutting property line. Shrubs shall be installed
at a height of no less than 2-1/2 (two-and-one-half) feet, and shall reach a
mature height of at least 6 (six) feet. The height of such shrubs may be
reduced if berming is provided so that the combined height of shrubs and
berming is not less than 6 (six) feet. Spacing between adjacent shrubs in such
shrub masses shall not exceed 5 (five) feet. Other landscaping materials,
including ornamental trees, shrubs, and/or other live planting material, are
encouraged at appropriate locations along the abutting property line.
      (iv.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all transitional
yard landscaping areas shall be sodded, planted with native or adapted plant
materials, or planted with a seed and blanket combination. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
5. M1 AND M2 DISTRICTS
   a.   Requirements for Transitional Landscape Yards
      Wherever a lot in the M1 or M2 Districts abuts a lot zoned for
residential use, a transitional landscape yard 30 (thirty) feet in depth shall
be provided along such lot line.
   b.   Landscape Improvements
      Within required transitional landscape yards, the following improvements
shall be required:
      (i.)   Screening - A solid fence, 6 (six) to 8 (eight) feet in height,
and in a material and design satisfactory to the Plan Commission, shall be
provided along the length of the abutting property line to the front building
setback line of the abutting residential property. Such fence shall be located
along the inside edge of the transitional landscape area.
      (ii.)   Evergreen/Shade Trees - Trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of 50 (fifty) feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be
clustered or spaced linearly.
      (iii.)   Other Planting Materials - Shrub masses, at least two rows deep
and with shrubs alternately spaced, shall be provided along at least 75
(seventy-five) percent of the abutting property line. Shrubs shall be installed
at a height of no less than 2-1/2 (two-and-one-half) feet, and shall reach a
mature height of at least 6 (six) feet.
         The height of such shrubs may be reduced if berming is provided so
that the combined height of shrubs and berming is not less than 6 (six) feet.
Spacing between adjacent shrubs in such shrub masses shall not exceed 5 (five)
feet. Other landscaping materials, including ornamental trees, shrubs, and/or
other live planting material, are encouraged at appropriate locations along the
abutting property line.
      (iv.)   Turf - Except where occupied by planting beds, all transitional
yard landscaping areas shall be sodded, planted with native or adapted plant
materials, or planted with seed and blanket combination. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
J. PERIMETER LANDSCAPING
1. APPLICABILITY
All lots except those in the R1, R1A, R2, R3, R4, or R5 Districts and lots in
the R6 District used for detached single- family residences shall provide
perimeter landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
requirements of this section shall not apply where the provisions of Sections
G (Parking Lot Landscaping) or
I (Transitional Yard Landscaping) are applicable. (Ord. 1817, 3-23-00)
2. REQUIRED LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
Landscaping around the perimeter of a lot shall be located within a landscape
yard not less than 5 (five) feet in width and shall conform with the following:
   a.   Shade Trees
      Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent of 75 (seventy-five) feet
apart along the abutting property line. Such trees may be clustered or spaced
linearly.
   b.   Other Planting Materials
      Other landscaping materials, including berms, if feasible, ornamental
trees, evergreens, shrubs, and/or other live planting material, as determined
necessary by the Plan Commission, shall be provided at appropriate locations
along the abutting property line.
   c.   Turf
      Except where occupied by planting beds, all transitional yard landscaping
areas shall be sodded, planted with native or adapted plant materials, or
planted with seed and blanket combination. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
K. RETENTION AND DETENTION PONDS AND BASINS
1. APPLICABILITY
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with this section for all ponds and
basins for holding storm water either temporarily or permanently. The
requirements of this section in instances where the provisions of Subsections
I. or J. are also applicable, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. The
requirements of Subsections K., I. and J. are not intended to be cumulative.
2. REQUIRED LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
Landscaping for retention and detention ponds shall be provided in conformance
to the following requirements. Detention/Retention dimensions shall be defined
as the perimeter dimension measured at the designed high water level.
   a.   Trees and Planting Beds
      The quantity of required landscaping improvements shall be based upon the
length of the perimeter of the retention or detention pond area which is
subject to this Section. For every 50 (fifty) linear feet along the perimeter
of the detention or retention pond area, the following landscaping shall be
provided:
      (i.)   1 (one) shade tree, or
      (ii.)   3 (three) ornamental trees, or
      (iii.)   A planting bed or beds containing deciduous or evergreen shrubs
and/or perennials, covering at least 125 (one hundred twenty five) square feet
of area. Planting beds shall contain a sufficient quantity of plants to provide
full ground coverage at plant maturity. For purposes of this subsection,
perennials are considered to be mature at 2 (two) years after planting, and
shrubs at four (4) years after planting. Mulch shall be maintained at least
until the plants completely cover the ground in the planting beds. The required
total area of planting beds may be divided among several beds in a practical
and aesthetically pleasing manner.
         A mixture of all three landscaping elements - shade trees, ornamental
trees, and planting beds - is strongly recommended. Such landscaping elements
may be clustered or spaced linearly. They may be provided near the shoreline
(for retention ponds), or at the perimeter or on the upper slopes of retention
or detention areas, as long as they are of species appropriate for the moisture
conditions expected at the planting site. Other landscaping materials,
including wildflowers and other live planting material, are encouraged at
appropriate locations within and along the perimeter of the detention or
retention area. Guidelines for species selection may be found in the
Arboricultural and Open Space Manual.
   b.   Turf
      Except where occupied by planting beds or permanently covered by water,
all pond or basin perimeters shall be sodded, seeded, or planted with native
and adapted plant materials such as prairie, meadow, and wetland plants as
required under the Stormwater Management and Flood Plain Ordinance. Selection
of appropriate species will depend on the extent, frequency, and duration of
inundations of the area. (Ord. 2770, 4-3-13)
3. SLOPES
Safety slopes with a 1 (vertical) in 3 (horizontal) maximum gradient shall be
incorporated into the landscape treatment of detention and retention areas.
L. SCREENING OF REFUSE DISPOSAL AREAS, EXTERIOR GROUND INSTALLED EMERGENCY
BACK-UP GENERATORS, GROUND MOUNTED NON-SINGLE FAMILY HVAC EQUIPMENT, AND
PRIVATELY OWNED GROUND MOUNTED NON-SINGLE FAMILY ELECTRICAL SWITCH GEAR/
TRANSFORMERS
   1.   Refuse Disposal Areas/Enclosures: All non-single family refuse disposal
areas shall be screened on all four (4) sides by a solid wood fence or an
equivalent material to a height of not less than six (6) feet but not more than
eight (8) feet. A 100% enclosed chain link fence with polyethylene "plastic"
slats is an acceptable substitute when approved by the Plan Commission. Tall
shrubs, evergreen trees and other plantings shall also be provided to soften
the aesthetic impact of these areas on adjacent properties and from adjacent
public rights-of-way.
   2.   Exterior Ground Installed Emergency Back-up Generators and Non-Single
Family HVAC Equipment: A solid screen wall shall be provided around these types
of improvements when located in or adjacent to residentially zoned property.
Said screen wall shall be of a height equal to or greater than the equipment it
is installed to screen. Tall shrubs and evergreen tree landscaping shall be
installed to soften the aesthetic and noise impact of these areas on adjacent
properties and from adjacent public rights-of-way.
   3.   Exterior Ground Installed Non-Single Family Electrical Switch Gear/
Transformers: Tall shrubs, evergreen trees and other plantings shall be
provided to soften the aesthetic impact of these areas on adjacent properties
and from adjacent public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2276, 4-18-06)
M. INNOVATIVE LANDSCAPING
Innovative landscaping treatments are encouraged and shall be considered as a
positive attribute in connection with any request for a variation from the
requirements of this Ordinance.
N. SUPERVISION and INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
The Community Development Director or his/her designated representative at any
time before, during, or within 2 (two) years of construction, will make
inspections of the site, plant material, installation practices, etc. to
determine Developer/Contractor compliance with current guidelines, regulations,
and ordinances.
O. CHANGES TO APPROVED LANDSCAPE PLANS
   1.   Any change or deviation to an approved landscape plan, which conforms
to this Ordinance, shall require the written approval of the Community
Development Director or his/her designated representative.
   2.   Any change or deviation to an approved landscape plan which does not
conform to this Chapter shall be subject to the Approval Criteria for
Variations outlined in
Table 7A of the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance and shall be processed in
accordance with the Appeals Approval Process for Zoning Applications outlined
in
Table 2C of the City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
P. VIOLATIONS
The Developer is responsible for the implementation of natural areas protection
measures in accordance with the City-approved Landscape Plan. Failure to abide
by these measures constitutes a violation of this Ordinance. Such violations
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   Tree removal not called for in Landscape Plan.
   Trenching not called for in Landscape Plan.
   Protective fences not in place.
   Materials stored inside fenced areas.
   Vehicles within fenced areas.
   Evidence of grade change or soil disturbance inside an area required to be
protected by fences.
   Site vehicular ingress and egress not called for in Landscape Plan.
   Material stockpiles not called for in Landscape Plan.
   Vehicles parked in other than indicated locations in Landscape Plan.
   Paint or other chemicals improperly disposed of.
Any such violation shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Chapter 12
(existing Chapter 11) of the Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this Ordinance, the
injury, mutilation, or death is caused to a tree, shrub, or other plant located
on City-owned property, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub,
or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value
of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision
of A Guide to Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and
Evergreens, published by the International Society of Arboriculture. (Ord.
1018, 3-11-21)
12. ADMINISTRATION
A. PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
In addition to other certificates and permits authorized elsewhere in this or
other City ordinances, the following certificates and permits are hereby
established.
1. BUILDING PERMIT
It shall be unlawful to commence the construction, alteration, or repair of any
structure in the City without obtaining a Building Permit from the City as
provided in the City Building Code.
2. ZONING CERTIFICATE
No Building Permit shall be issued by the City unless the Zoning Administrator
has certified on a Zoning Certificate that the plans for the property for which
the Permit is sought comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance
and with other applicable codes and ordinances of the City.
3. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any structure, land, water, or premises
in the City, or change the occupancy or use thereof, in whole or in part,
without obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy from the City.
The Zoning Administrator shall issue no Certificate of Occupancy for a new or
remodeled premises unless he or she has inspected or caused to be inspected the
premises after completion of all construction and has certified that the
premises is in conformity with the plans on which the Building Permit was
based. He or she shall likewise issue no Certificate of Occupancy for a change
of occupancy without certifying that the proposed occupancy will be in
conformance with all applicable regulations herein.
The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a Certificate of
Occupancy:
   1.   Land used for agricultural cultivation.
   2.   Residential buildings in which there is a change of occupancy that does
not involve a change to a different Permitted or Special Use.
A temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a period not to exceed 6 months may be
issued, consistent with the safety of the occupants, for occupancy or partial
occupancy pending completion of construction or alterations.
The Zoning Administrator shall either issue or deny a Certificate of Occupancy
within 14 days of application therefor. The Administrator shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for any denial. A Certificate for a
property that is nonconforming shall specify the nature of the nonconformity.
(Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
B. VIOLATION, PENALTY, AND ENFORCEMENT
The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this
Ordinance. Upon determining a violation, he or she shall direct the property
owner in writing to eliminate the violation within 10 days. Any party that
violates any provision of this Ordinance shall upon conviction be fined not
less than 50 nor more than 500 dollars for each offense. Each day or portion
thereof that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. PLAN COMMISSION
1. AUTHORITY
The Plan Commission of the City of Warrenville is the Plan Commission referred
to herein.
The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the power and responsibility to:
   a.   Prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan, any
additional plans for the development and redevelopment of the City, changes to
any City plan, and proposals to carry out such plans
   b.   Conduct hearings and make either final determinations on, or advisory
recommendations to the City Council on, approval, conditional approval, or
denial of applications as provided in Tables
2C and
2D and other provisions herein
   c.   File an Annual Report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its
transactions and recommendations
   d.   Adopt by-laws and any other procedural rules consistent with this and
other City ordinances and state statutes
   e.   Recommend to the City Council the employment of such professional
planning, legal, engineering, or administrative staff or consulting assistance
as is necessary to fulfill its responsibilities
   f.   Advise the Zoning Board of Appeals on plan provisions and other
planning factors related to the Board's review of zoning petitions
   g.   Carry out any other function concerning land subdivision or other
matters that may be conferred upon it by the City Subdivision Regulations or
any other City ordinance or state statute, and discharge any other duties
referred or assigned to it by the City Council
The concurring vote of five members of the Commission shall be required to take
any action.
2. APPOINTMENTS
   a.   The Plan Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, which may
include up to three members from the same ward, provided that each ward of the
City shall be represented by at least one member, and one member may be from
the unincorporated area contiguous to the City. (Ord. 1906, 4-18-01) (Ord.
2233, 8-3-05) (Ord. 2894, 11-3-14)
   b.   The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the City Council:
      (1)   appoint all members;
      (2)   appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of any member whose
place has become vacant; and
      (3)   appoint the Chairman of the Commission.
   c.   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall have the power
to remove any member for cause after a public hearing. A copy of the charges
against said member shall be delivered to the member at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. The member shall be given an opportunity to answer such
charges.
   d.   The members shall annually elect a member to serve as a Vice Chairman,
who shall serve as Acting Chairman in the Chairman's absence.
   e.   Members serving terms in effect on January 1, 2025 shall serve for five
years; provided that:
      (1)   For the terms immediately succeeding each of the terms in effect on
January 1, 2025, each member shall serve for a term expiring on the May 1st
that is four (4) full calendar years after the commencement of their term; and
      (2)   Subsequent to the immediately succeeding terms described in
subsection (e)(1) of this section, each member will serve for four (4) years,
beginning on May 1 and ending on April 30.
      For example, if a term is in effect on January 1, 2025 and expires on
November 16, 2025, the member appointed for the immediately succeeding term may
serve from November 17, 2025 to April 30, 2029. The member appointed to the
next succeeding term will serve for four (4) years commencing May 1, 2029 and
ending April 30, 2033.
   f.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C.2.f., in the event that
a Plan Commission member is also appointed as a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, upon the appointment or re-appointment, of such Plan Commission
member, said commissioner's term shall coincide with the corresponding vacant
term on the Zoning Board of Appeals so that the Plan Commission member's term
of office to the Plan Commission shall expire at the same time as his/her term
of office to the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Ord. 2894, 11-3-14)
3. MEETINGS
All meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Commission shall determine and shall be open to the public except when
an executive session is authorized by law. No meeting shall be conducted in the
absence of a quorum, which shall consist of five members.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall show
the vote, or absence or abstention, of every member upon every official action,
and shall be a public record on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. O2025-25, 5-19-2025)
D. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. AUTHORITY
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Warrenville is the Zoning Board of
Appeals referred to herein.
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the power and responsibility
to:
   a.   Conduct hearings and make either final determinations on, or advisory
recommendations to the City Council on, the approval, conditional approval, or
denial of applications as provided in Tables
2C and
2D and other provisions herein.
   b.   File an Annual Report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its
transactions and recommendations
   c.   Adopt by-laws and any other procedural rules consistent with this and
other City ordinances and state statutes
   d.   Recommend to the City Council the employment of such professional
zoning, legal, engineering, or administrative staff or consulting assistance as
is necessary to fulfill its responsibilities
   e.   Carry out any other function that may be conferred upon it by any other
City ordinance or state statute and discharge any other duties referred or
assigned to it by the City Council.
The concurring vote of 4 members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
required to take any action.
2. APPOINTMENTS
   a.   The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall all be
residents of the City.
   b.   The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the City Council:
      (1)   appoint all members;
      (2)   appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of any member whose
place has become vacant; and
      (3)   appoint the Chairman of the Board.
   c.   The Mayor shall, with the consent of the City Council, have the power
to remove any member for cause after a public hearing. A copy of the charges
against said member shall be delivered to the member at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. The member shall be given an opportunity to answer such
charges.
   d.   The members shall annually elect a member to serve as a Vice Chairman,
who shall serve as Acting Chairman in the Chairman's absence.
   e.   Members serving terms in effect on January 1, 2025 shall serve for five
(5) years; provided that:
      (1)   For the terms immediately succeeding each of the terms in effect on
January 1, 2025, each member shall serve for a term expiring on the May 1st
that is four (4) full calendar years after the commencement of their term; and
      (2)   Subsequent to the immediately succeeding terms described in
subsection (e)(1) of this section, each member will serve for four (4) years.
Appointments shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30.
      For example, if a term is in effect on January 1, 2025 and expires on
November 16, 2025, the member appointed for the immediately succeeding term may
serve from November 17, 2025 to April 30, 2029. The member appointed to the
next succeeding term will serve for four (4) years commencing May 1, 2029 and
ending April 30, 2033. (Ord. 2894, 11-3-14)
3. MEETINGS
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine and shall be open
to the public except when an executive session is authorized by law. No meeting
shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum, which shall consist of 4
members.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall show the
vote, or absence or abstention, of every member upon every official action and
shall be a public record on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
E. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
The Zoning Administrator of the City shall be such person as the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint.
The Zoning Administrator shall be charged with the enforcement of this
Ordinance. In discharging this responsibility, he or she or his or her designee
shall:
   1.   issue Zoning Certificates, Certificates of Occupancy, Conditional Use
Permits, Special Use Permits, and Temporary Use Permits
   2.   conduct inspections of uses to determine compliance with this Ordinance
   3.   notify in writing any party believed to be responsible for violating a
provision of this Ordinance and order action within 10 days to correct the
violation
   4.   require that construction work in violation of this Ordinance be
stopped
   5.   prepare and cause to be published on or before March 31 of each year a
Zoning District Map as amended through the preceding December 31
   6.   receive, determine completeness and compliance with this and other
applicable ordinances of, and forward to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals as appropriate all applications and notices required by this Ordinance
and determined to be in compliance therewith
   7.   maintain records of applications filed, public hearings held, permits
and certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or
orders issued under the provisions of this Ordinance, and make such records
available for public inspection
   8.   request the assistance and cooperation of other City officials,
departments, boards, or commissions, or other agencies as necessary in the
discharge of his or her duties
   9.   advise the City Attorney of violations and other matters requiring
legal action and be entitled to rely on his or her opinion as to the
interpretation or legal application of this Ordinance
   10.   procure such engineering, planning, or legal assistance from technical
experts outside the City government as may be necessary to discharge his or her
duties and as is authorized by the City Council
   11.   discharge such other duties as may be placed on him or her by this
Ordinance or by the Mayor or City Council. (Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
13. DEFINITIONS
For purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms are defined as indicated in this
section. These definitions and all other provisions of this Ordinance are
subject to the following rules of interpretation:
   1.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
tense the present.
   2.   The singular number includes the plural number and vice-versa.
   3.   The word "shall" is mandatory.
   4.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   5.   All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of
measure, and if a fraction is one-half or greater, the next highest integral
unit shall be used.
   6.   The term "person" shall refer to any person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, or organization of any kind.
   7.   Any term not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the
Municipal Code or, if not defined elsewhere in the Code, as defined in Black's
Law Dictionary, or, if not defined therein, as defined in Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary.
ACCESSORY      SEE BUILDING, ACCESSORY
BUILDING:
ACCESSORY      SEE BUSINESS, ACCESSORY
BUSINESS:
ACCESSORY      SEE STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE:
ACCESSORY USE: SEE USE, ACCESSORY
               Any commercial or recreational establishment from which minors are at all times
               excluded from admittance by virtue of their age, including adult bookstores,
               adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult drive-in
ADULT USE:     theaters, adult massage parlors, adult modeling studios, and eating and drinking
               places with sexually-oriented entertainment. Eating and drinking establishments
               that at no time have entertainment that is obscene or harmful to juveniles as
               defined by the Illinois Revised Statutes Chapter 38 Sections 11-20 (b) and 11-21
               (b)(1) are not considered to be adult uses.
ADULT USE      A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
CANNABIS       Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport, and perform
CULTIVATION    other necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to
CENTER:        cannabis business establishments or dispensaries.
               A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the
               Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation or successor to
               acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower, processing
ADULT USE      organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of selling or dispensing
CANNABIS       cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related
DISPENSARY:    supplies and educational materials to purchasers or to qualified medical cannabis
               patients and caregivers, including a registered medical cannabis organization as
               defined in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or its
               successor Act.
               The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture,
               floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
AGRICULTURE:   accessory uses for packing, treating, and storing the produce but not including
               the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals; provided
               that the operation of accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal
               agricultural activities.
               Any public or private land area or other facility designed for the landing and
AIRPORT:       take-off of aircraft, including all taxiways, hangars, airport buildings, and
               other related structures and open spaces.
ALLEY:         A public or private right-of-way not constituting a street used primarily for
               secondary motor vehicle access to property abutting on a street.
ALTERATION:    Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a structure.
ALTERATION,    SEE STRUCTURAL ALTERATION
STRUCTURAL:
ANIMAL         A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, and
HOSPITAL:      medical treatment of animals commonly used as household pets.
ANTENNA        The height of an antenna measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level
HEIGHT:        within three feet of any part of the antenna.
APARTMENT      SEE HOTEL, APARTMENT
HOTEL:
               The document "Arboricultural and Open Space Manual for the City of Warrenville,
ARBORICULTURAL Illinois". This manual is prepared and maintained by the Warrenville
and OPEN SPACE Environmental Advisory Commission. It sets forth regulations and standards for
MANUAL:        the selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, or other
               plants upon City-owned property. (Ord. 2392, 8-20-07)
               Rental of passenger cars, passenger vans, and trucks; provided however, that (a)
               all automobiles and trucks for rent must be parked and stored within a completely
AUTOMOBILE &   enclosed building; and (b) vehicles offered for rent shall not include (i)
TRUCK RENTAL   vehicles more than 20' in length; trucks equipped with dump, flat beds, or stake
(INDOOR ONLY): beds, (ii) boom trucks, (iii) semi-trailers, (iv) semi-trucks, (v) earth moving
               vehicles, (vi) tractors, (vii) motorized farm vehicles, or (viii) recreation
               vehicles, including boats.
               Rental of passenger cars, passenger vans, and trucks; provided, however, that (a)
AUTOMOBILE &   all vehicles offered for rent are parked or stored on a paved surface and not
TRUCK RENTAL   within any off-street parking or loading space required pursuant to this Code;
(WITH OUTDOOR  and (b) vehicles offered for rent shall not include (i) vehicles more than 20' in
STORAGE):      length; trucks equipped with dump, flat beds, or stake beds, (ii) boom trucks,
               (iii) semi-trailers, (iv) semi-trucks, (v) earth moving vehicles, (vi) tractors,
               (vii) motorized farm vehicles, or (viii) recreational vehicles, including boats.
AUTOMOBILE     A business establishment where collision service such as body, frame, or fender
BODY SHOP:     straightening or repair, painting of more than 10 percent of the surface of a
               vehicle, or upholstering is conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
               A business establishment that makes aftermarket modifications to motor vehicles
AUTOMOBILE     or parts of motor vehicles within a completely enclosed building, including, but
DETAILING      not limited to, vinyl wrapping, painting, and other aesthetic modifications, but
SHOP:          specifically excluding those services or other activities that constitute an
               AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP, AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION, or AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP.
AUTOMOBILE     A business establishment where the storage of passenger vehicles, completely
INDOOR         enclosed within buildings, is the principal use.
STORAGE:
AUTOMOBILE     A permanent commercial facility where motor vehicles are washed--by hand, by
LAUNDRY:       mechanical devices, or both--excluding temporary car washes organized for civic
               or charitable purposes.
               A facility or premises primarily used for retail sale of fuels or oils for
AUTOMOBILE     automobiles, trucks, or boats and which may include as a secondary activity
SERVICE        retail sale of tires, batteries, and similar accessories and the making of
STATION:       repairs to vehicles or parts thereof that do not normally require storing such
               vehicles on the premises overnight.
               A premises primarily used for the commercial repair, rebuilding, or
               reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, wholly within enclosed
AUTOMOBILE     buildings, including repairs that normally require vehicles being repaired to be
REPAIR SHOP:   stored on the premises overnight. Automobile repair shops include transmission
               shops, muffler shops, brake shops, rustproofing shops, auto glass shops, and the
               like.
AUTOMOBILE     SEE WRECKING YARD
WRECKING YARD:
AVERAGE GROUND The average elevation of the natural grade along the exterior of the building
LEVEL:         taken at four equally spaced points at the building line, as illustrated on the
               "Average Ground Level Calculation Illustration" attached hereto as an Appendix.
               That portion of a structure located partly underground but having less than half
BASEMENT:      its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the mean average grade of the adjoining
               ground.
BED AND        SEE TOURIST HOME
BREAKFAST:
               Any private room in a dwelling unit suitable for regular use for sleeping
               purposes. Bedrooms include rooms designated on development floor plans as dens,
BEDROOM:       studies, or libraries but exclude living rooms, family rooms, dining rooms,
               kitchens, bathrooms, laundry rooms, and mud rooms. Any room designated as other
               than a bedroom but which in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator would
               normally be usable for sleeping purposes shall be considered a bedroom.
BERM:          A raised mound of earth planted with vegetative cover and used for landscaping,
               screening, noise reduction, or other purposes.
               A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and
BLOCK:         public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines
               of waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BOARDING       SEE ROOMING HOUSE
HOUSE:
               Penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar that is generally permanent in
BODY PIERCING: nature. "Body piercing" does not include practices that are considered medical
               procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear using a
               pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing system.
BREW PUB:      A restaurant that produces beer or ale from malt and hops by infusion, boiling,
               fermentation for on-premises consumption only.
BUILDING:      Any structure permanently affixed to the land and constructed or used for the
               shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING,      A building that is an accessory use.
ACCESSORY:
BUILDING,      A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other
COMPLETELY     buildings or structures by a permanent roof and by party walls or exterior walls
ENCLOSED:      having only windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING,      A building surrounded by open space.
DETACHED:
               In subdivisions approved prior to January 1, 2000, or approved without an overall
               engineered grading plan that establishes top of foundation elevations: the
               vertical distance measured from the average ground level at the front building
BUILDING       line of a principal or accessory building to the highest point, vertex or ridge
HEIGHT:        line of a roof.
               In subdivisions approved after January 1, 2000: the vertical distance measured
               from six inches below the top of foundation elevation illustrated on the approved
               overall subdivision engineered grading plan to the highest point, vertex or ridge
               line of a roof.
BUILDING LINE: The straight line parallel or nearly parallel to a lot line that separates all
               parts of a building from the open space adjacent thereto on the same lot.
BUILDING,      A non-accessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on
PRINCIPAL:     which it is located.
BUILDING,      A building that is established for a period of less than one year or such other
TEMPORARY:     period as may be approved by the City Council and is removed within that time
               period.
BUSINESS,      A commercial use housed or operated within a structure located outside of the
ACCESSORY:     principal structure on the lot and is not staffed by on-site employees.
               A special or exclusive type of planned business area designed and equipped to
BUSINESS PARK: accommodate a community of manufacturing, showroom, warehousing, research, or
               similar industrial uses together with substantial office development related
               thereto.
CABLE          A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors,
TELEVISION     convectors, and other equipment for producing, receiving, amplifying and
SYSTEM         distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave, or other means audio or
FACILITIES:    visual signals to and from subscribers.
               Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as including any
               parts of the plant cannabis sativa and including derivatives or subspecies, such
               as indicia, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds
               thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any compound,
               manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds,
               or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced
CANNABIS:      cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction;
               however, "cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
               produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
               compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature
               stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber, oil or cake, or the
               sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does
               not include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp
               Act. "Cannabis" also means concentrate and cannabis-infused products.
               A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
CANNABIS CRAFT Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis
GROWER:        and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a
               dispensing organization, use at a processing organization, or recreational
               cannabis dispensary.
CANNABIS       A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
PROCESSING     Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis
ORGANIZATION   concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product.
or INFUSER:
CANNABIS       A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
PROCESSING     Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or
ORGANIZATION   compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis
or PROCESSOR:  concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product.
CAR WASH:      SEE AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY
               A standardized, reusable vessel, designed without an axle or wheels, which was
CARGO          originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the packing,
CONTAINERS:    shipping, movement or transportation of freight, article, goods or commodities,
               and/or designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
               movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
               That portion of a building located partially or wholly underground and having
CELLAR:        more than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the mean average grade of
               the adjoining ground.
CEMETERY:      A parcel of land used for the interment of human or domestic pet remains,
               including crematories, mausoleums, and columbariums.
               A small building-like structure, cage, or enclosure for keeping chickens. May be
CHICKEN COOP:  connected to or contiguous with a chicken run (see "chicken run"). A chicken coop
               is not considered a building for the purposes of this Ordinance.
               An enclosed cage structure that provides a safe space for chickens to roam.
CHICKEN RUN:   Chicken runs must be accompanied by a chicken coop (see "chicken coop") so as to
               create one enclosed space.
               Property within the city limits of the City of Warrenville, Illinois, and (1)
CITY-OWNED     owned by the City in fee simple absolute, or (2) implied or expressly dedicated
PROPERTY:      to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian
               traffic.
               A place where 2 or more physicians, dentists, or similar professionals provide
CLINIC:        care, diagnosis, and treatment of persons needing medical, dental, or surgical
               attention but where in-patient care is not provided.
               Any establishment providing physical culture or health services, including health
CLUB, HEALTH:  clubs, racquetball or tennis clubs, reducing salons, tanning salons, or massage
               salons.
CLUB OR LODGE, A non-profit association of persons who are bonafide members paying dues which
PRIVATE:       owns or leases premises the use of which is restricted to members and their
               guests.
               A (i) motorized vehicle other than a passenger car, passenger van, or
               recreational vehicle used by a household for non-commercial personal or family
               transportation, for recreation, or for van pooling or ride-sharing use that
               requires a State vehicle license greater than Class "B," (ii) tow trucks, (iii)
COMMERCIAL     vehicles equipped with dump, lift bodies, flat beds, or stake beds, (iv) extended
VEHICLE:       wheel base limousines, (v) boom trucks, (vi) step vans, sprinter vans, panel
               trucks, and box trucks, (vii) buses, (viii) tractors, (ix) semi-trailers, (x)
               motorized farm vehicles, (xi) earth-moving equipment, and (xii) open, enclosed,
               or dump trailers used to haul commercial vehicles or contractors equipment and
               supplies. See Appendix for graphic illustrations of different forms of Commercial
               Vehicles.
COMMON OPEN    SEE OPEN SPACE, COMMON
SPACE:
COMMUNITY      Any facility located at least in part on public property that for hire receives,
ANTENNA        amplifies, and distributes television signals to subscribers, but excluding
TELEVISION     systems that serve fewer than 50 subscribers or serve only a single development
SYSTEM:        under common ownership or management.
COMMUNITY      A building together with its accessory uses used for recreation or cultural
CENTER:        activities, not operated for profit, and available to all residents of a specific
               geographic area.
               A single piece of land where plants are grown and maintained by an organized
COMMUNITY      group of individuals in the community. Community gardens may produce food for
GARDEN:        individual consumption or food for sale/donation, may be designed for
               beautification of the community, and/or may be used for educational purposes.
COMPREHENSIVE  The officially adopted plan for the physical development, conservation, and
PLAN:          redevelopment of the City of Warrenville.
               An accessory use consisting of the neat and orderly outdoor storage of goods,
CONTRACTORS    materials, and/or equipment commonly used by the building trade/construction
STORAGE YARDS: contractor operating as a principal use from a building located on the same
               property. Said outdoor storage shall be enclosed with a solid 8' tall screening
               fence.
CORNER LOT:    SEE LOT, CORNER
CORNER SIDE    SEE LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE
LOT LINE:
CORNER SIDE    SEE YARD, CORNER SIDE
YARD:
COURT:         Any open space other than a yard bounded on two or more sides by the walls of one
               or more buildings.
               The height of the established street curb abutting a street line measured at the
               midpoint of such line. Where no curb has been established, the curb level shall
CURB LEVEL:    be considered to be the established level of the surface of the street abutting
               the street line measured along the street center line opposite the midpoint of
               the street line. On lots abutting more than one street line, the average of the
               measurements at the midpoints of all street lines shall determine the curb level.
CURRENT PLAT   SEE PLAT OF SURVEY, CURRENT
OF SURVEY:
               A facility that receives more than 8 children at any one time for daytime care
               and that provides personal care, protection, supervision, training, and other
               programs. Child day care centers exclude:
               1.   kindergartens and other programs run by public or private schools or
DAY CARE       churches
CENTER, CHILD: 2. centers conducted on federal, state, or local government premises
               3.   facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or other facilities
               where children are cared for while their parents or custodians are in the
               vicinity and readily available
               4.   special activities conducted periodically by civic, charitable, and
               government organizations.
DECK,          A deck protected from the weather with a roof, and enclosed on the sides with
ENCLOSED:      windows, screens, doors and/or walls.
DECK, OPEN:    A deck, with or without a roof, that is open to the weather. An open deck is not
               enclosed on the side with windows, screens, or walls.
DECK/PATIO/
PORCH/         A deck/patio/porch/breezeway protected from the weather with a roof, and enclosed
BREEZEWAY,     on the sides with windows, screens, doors and/or walls.
ENCLOSED:
DECK/PATIO/
PORCH/         A deck/patio/porch/breezeway with or without a roof, that is open to the weather.
BREEZEWAY,     An open patio is not enclosed on the side with windows, screens, or walls.
OPEN:
               The number of dwelling units per acre of land. GROSS DENSITY refers to the number
DENSITY:       of units per acre of the total land to be developed. NET DENSITY refers to the
               number of units per acre of land devoted to residential use.
DETACHED       Any structure having no party wall or common wall with another structure, but
STRUCTURE:     which may share a bridge, tunnel, breezeway, or similar facility with another
               structure.
DETENTION      An area intended to hold surface runoff rainwater for relatively brief periods of
POND:          time (typically from a few hours to one or two days); also called a "dry-bottom
               pond.
DIAMETER:      The diameter in inches of a tree's trunk measured at one foot above the existing
               grade.
               EV battery charging that uses DC power to refuel Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV)
               at various amperage levels and voltage levels, most commonly 480 VAC, with power
DIRECT CURRENT outputs ranging between 25 and 175 kW of power and provides 50 to 500 range miles
FAST CHARGING  per hour connected. DCFCs convert Alternating Current (AC) from facility power
(DCFC):        and output Direct Current (DC) and Volts Direct Current (VDC), which then
               delivers DC power to the BEV through a standard connector. DCFCs are sometimes
               referred to as Level 3 EV Chargers.
DOG KENNEL:    SEE KENNEL
DOG RUN,       An outdoor area enclosed on all sides by a fence for the exclusive purpose of
ENCLOSED:      continuous or occasional confinement of one or more animals commonly kept as
               household pets.
DOG TRAINING,  A place of business providing dog training and obedience lessons in an indoor
INDOOR:        setting with no outside on premise training (e.g., dog run).
DOUBLE-FRONTAG SEE LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE
E LOT:
               An establishment at which patrons may be served without leaving their motor
DRIVE-IN       vehicle. Any restaurant, bank, dry cleaning establishment, or other business
ESTABLISHMENT: having drive-up or curb service facilities shall be considered a drive-in
               establishment.
DRIVE-IN       SEE RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN
RESTAURANT:
               A building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence, including model
DWELLING:      homes but excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing homes, motels, hotels,
               tourist homes, cabins, tents, and recreational vehicles.
DWELLING,      SEE EFFICIENCY UNIT
EFFICIENCY:
DWELLING,      A building consisting of exactly four dwelling units.
FOURPLEX:
DWELLING,      A building other than a hotel, motel, tourist home or bed and breakfast facility,
GROUP          or single- or multi-family dwelling that contains living facilities for 5 or more
QUARTERS:      persons not related to the ownership or management of the premises.
DWELLING,      A building consisting of three or more dwelling units.
MULTI-FAMILY:
DWELLING,      A residential building consisting of exactly one dwelling unit.
SINGLE-FAMILY:
DWELLING,      A single-family dwelling attached to one or more other single-family dwellings by
SINGLE-FAMILY  one or more common vertical walls with each dwelling located on a separate lot.
ATTACHED:
DWELLING,
SINGLE-FAMILY  A single-family dwelling separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DETACHED:
DWELLING, TWO- A building consisting of exactly two dwelling units.
FAMILY:
DWELLING,      A dwelling unit that is attached to one or more other dwelling units on the same
TOWNHOUSE:     lot and that has an individual private ground-level entrance to the outside and
               no portion of which is located above or below any other unit or portion thereof.
               Space within a building designed or used exclusively as living quarters for one
DWELLING UNIT: family, not more than 2 household employees, and not more than 2 boarders,
               roomers, or permanent paying or non-paying guests, and which includes cooking,
               bathing, and toilet facilities.
EDUCATIONAL    SEE INSTITUTION, EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION:
EFFICIENCY     A dwelling unit consisting of just one principal room together with bathroom,
UNIT:          kitchen, hallways, closets, and/or dining alcove, and which does not include a
               bedroom as defined herein.
               equipment designed to safely supply and manage power into electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC       Electric vehicle charging stations include hard-wired electric vehicle charging
VEHICLE        stations and electric vehicle charging stations that plug in to standard wall
CHARGING       outlets and may also integrate communication, metering, GPS, and other features
STATIONS       that assist electric vehicle drivers and the host facility. All electric vehicle
(EVCS):        charging stations shall be maintained in an operable manner, free from cosmetic
               or structural damage (see 12.B Violation, Penalty, and Enforcement for penalties
               and enforcement).
ELECTRICAL
TRANSMISSION   An electrical transmission line which provides electrical service on a regional
REGIONAL       basis and is capable of transmitting electricity at a voltage of 34 KV or more.
SERVICE LINE:
EMPLOYEE:      Any person working full- or part-time at an establishment, including owners and
               managers, at any one time during the largest shift.
ERECT:         To build, construct, locate, hang, attach, manually place, suspend, or affix,
               including the initial painting of all signs.
EV CAPABLE:    The condition of a facility having properly installed conduit and electrical
               panel capacity to meet future demand EVCS demand.
               The condition of a facility having properly installed conduit, wiring, electrical
EV READY:      service panels, power capacity, and electric vehicle charging infrastructure to
               meet future demand.
EV INSTALLED:  The condition of EV Ready with an EVCS connected to power and operational.
               A highway that is part of the federal system of interstate and defense highways
EXPRESSWAY:    under the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 or any other highway designated as an
               expressway in the City Comprehensive Plan.
               One or more persons who live together in a single dwelling unit and constitute a
FAMILY:        single household in which members share common kitchen facilities and have access
               to all parts of the dwelling.
               An artificially constructed barrier of any material or materials erected to
FENCE:         enclose, screen, or decorate areas of land. Fences include walls, hedges, and
               earth berms meeting this definition.
FENCE HEIGHT:  The height of a fence, hedge, or wall measured from the ground level at the
               lowest grade level within three feet of either side thereof.
               A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the
FENCE, OPEN:   surface area of any segment of such fence contains at least 70 percent open
               spaces and 30 percent or less solid materials.
FENCE, SOLID:  A fence that is not an open fence.
               The sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained on all floors measured in
               square feet from the exterior walls of each building, or from the center line of
               party walls separating two buildings. Floor area includes space in accessory
               buildings; all cellar, basement, and attic space; and space for stairs,
FLOOR AREA:    elevators, maintenance areas, and equipment areas except as provided in the
               definitions herein of FLOOR AREA, GROSS and FLOOR AREA, NET. For grain elevators,
               liquid storage tanks, and other similar structures devoted to bulk storage of
               materials, every 10 feet of building height shall be considered as one floor for
               purposes of calculating floor area.
               A measure of floor area, as defined herein, used for purposes of calculating
               floor area ratio, conversions of existing structures, and maximum size of
               business establishments. Gross floor area is floor area excluding only:
FLOOR AREA,    1.   areas devoted to off-street parking or off-street loading, including aisles,
GROSS:         ramps, and maneuvering space
               2.    attic or half-story space having headroom of 7.5 feet or less
               3.    exterior balconies
               4.    space on the roof used for mechanical equipment.
               A measure of floor area as defined herein used for purposes of calculating off-
               street parking and off-street loading requirements. Net floor area is floor area
               excluding only:
FLOOR AREA,    1.   areas devoted to off-street parking or off-street loading, including aisles,
NET:           ramps, and maneuvering space
               2.   areas devoted primarily to storage and not located within selling or working
               spaces, except for facilities such as warehouses where the principal use is
               storage.
FLOOR AREA     The total floor area, as defined herein, of all buildings on a lot divided by the
RATIO:         area of the lot.
FOURPLEX:      SEE DWELLING, FOURPLEX
FREIGHT        SEE TERMINAL, FREIGHT
TERMINAL:
FRONTAGE:      The length of any street line.
FRONT LOT      SEE LOT LINE, FRONT
LINE:
FRONT SETBACK: SEE YARD, FRONT
FRONT WALL:    SEE WALL, FRONT
FUNERAL HOME:  SEE MORTUARY
               Any premises where there are available to the public more than 2 coin-operated
GAME ROOM:     amusement devices, excluding vending machines that do not incorporate gaming or
               amusement features and excluding coin-operated musical devices.
               A structure or part thereof used or designed to be used primarily for the
               enclosed parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles, boats, or trailers,
               but excluding:
GARAGE:        1.   exhibition areas, showrooms, or other facilities for display of such
               vehicles in shows or exhibits or in connection with their being offered for sale,
               rent, or lease
               2.   sale, lease, or rental of vehicles or of parts or equipment
               3.   repair or servicing thereof.
GARAGE,        A garage where more than one vehicle is stored for compensation.
PUBLIC:
GARAGE SALE:   SEE YARD SALE
GARAGE,        A garage used only for the housing of vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements
STORAGE:       and not by transients.
GARBAGE:       The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
               and consumption of food.
GRADE:         The average level of the finished surface of the ground within 20 feet of a
               building or structure.
GROUND-FLOOR   The lot area covered by a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior
AREA:          walls but excluding open porches, patios, or terraces, garages, or carports.
               A non-hospital residential facility housing more than three persons not related
               by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner who need protective custody or
GROUP HOME:    psychological counseling or treatment and that are provided 24-hour supervision
               or care while on the premises, or a home providing temporary shelter or
               protection operated by a bona fide non-profit organization recognized by the
               Internal Revenue Service.
GRUBBING:      The selective removal of under story vegetation from the site.
HABITABLE      The height of the highest space in any existing or future building that is
ELEVATION:     designed for use as a residence or working area. Used to measure odor for
               conformance with Performance Standards.
HALF STORY:    SEE STORY, HALF
               A continuous belt of trees or shrubs, in one or more rows, maintained at a
HEDGE:         uniform height, which presents both a barrier to movement and a continuous visual
               screen from ground level to the height of the hedge.
HEIGHT,        SEE BUILDING HEIGHT
BUILDING:
HEIGHT, FENCE: SEE FENCE HEIGHT
HOME FOR THE   SEE NURSING HOME
AGED:
HOME           A gainful pursuit conducted by one or more members of a family within their place
OCCUPATION:    of residence located in a Residential District that is subject to the provisions
               herein concerning home occupations.
               An establishment that provides accommodations, facilities, and services over a
               continuous period of 24 hours or more for observation, diagnosis, and care, of
HOSPITAL:      two or more individuals not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the
               operator, who are suffering from illness, injury, deformity, or abnormality, or
               from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical, or surgical services.
               A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining room, a common
               entrance lobby, halls and stairways; and where each lodging room does not have a
HOTEL:         doorway opening directly to the outdoors except for emergencies; and where more
               than 50 percent of the lodging rooms are for rent to transient guests for a
               continuous period of less than 30 days.
HOTEL,         An establishment having the character of a hotel but in which at least 50 percent
APARTMENT:     of the accommodations are for occupancy by guests staying 30 consecutive days or
               more.
INDUSTRIAL     An industrial use engaged in the assembly or fabrication of finished or partially
ASSEMBLY USE:  finished products from pre-made component parts produced off-site. Such processes
               shall occur entirely within an enclosed building. No outdoor storage is allowed.
INDUSTRIAL     A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area designed and equipped to
PARK:          accommodate a community of industries.
INSTITUTION,   A public or private school, college, university, seminary, museum, library, or
EDUCATIONAL:   similar educational or cultural establishment.
INSTITUTION,
PHILANTHROPIC  An office or meeting hall used exclusively by a non-profit public service
AND            organization.
CHARITABLE:
INSTITUTION,   A church, synagogue, temple, convent, monastery, or other premises devoted to
RELIGIOUS:     religious or church-connected activities.
INSTITUTION,   A public or private facility for group recreational or social activity, including
RECREATIONAL:  private clubs, lodges, recreation buildings, and community centers.
INTERIOR LOT:  SEE LOT, INTERIOR
               An open area where waste or used or second-hand materials are bought, sold,
               exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including scrap iron
JUNKYARD:      and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A wrecking yard is
               considered a junkyard, but uses carried on entirely within enclosed buildings and
               establishments engaged only in the processing of scrap metal to be sold for the
               manufacture of steel are not considered junkyards.
               Any lot or premises on which four or more animals commonly used as household pets
KENNEL:        that are more than four months of age are regularly bred, groomed, boarded,
               sheltered, trained, or sold for commercial or humane purposes, including animal
               shelters.
LABORATORY,    A facility for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation of
RESEARCH:      which no more than 50 percent is used for administrative offices and no more than
               15 percent for ancillary manufacturing, storage, or service.
               Those operations in which trees and vegetation are removed and which occur
LAND CLEARING  previous to the construction of building. This includes, but is not limited to,
STAGE:         road right-of-way excavation and paving, lake and drainage system excavation,
               utility excavation, grubbing, and any other clearing operations.
LANDSCAPE      The portion of a lot free from buildings, structures and pavement, but inclusive
COVERAGE:      of water bodies and detention and retention areas. Landscape coverage is
               expressed as a percentage of lot area.
               A retail business providing coin-operated self-service facilities for washing,
LAUNDROMAT:    drying, dry cleaning, or ironing of apparel and domestic linens that employs 4 or
               fewer employees, and that provides no pick-up or delivery service.
               EV battery charging that uses 208 to 240 VAC supply power, with a range from 3.3
LEVEL 2 EV     kW to 19.2 kW, and provides 16 to 80 range miles per hour connected. Level 2 EV
CHARGING (L2): chargers are supplied with Alternating Current (AC) and in turn provide AC power
               to the EV through a standard connector.
               The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods or materials using processes
               which do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety
LIGHT          hazards outside the building. Such processes shall occur entirely within an
INDUSTRY:      enclosed building. No outdoor storage is allowed. Light manufacturing generally
               includes processing and fabrication of finished products, predominantly from
               previously prepared materials.
               A process of producing alcohol beverages by way of distilling, rectifying,
               fermenting, brewing, making, mixing, concocting, processing, blending, bottling
LIQUOR         or filling an original package with an alcoholic liquor, whether for oneself or
MANUFACTURING: for another, and includes blending, but does not include the mixing or other
               preparation of drinks for serving by those persons authorized and permitted in
               the Liquor Control Act of 1934, to serve drinks for consumption on the premises
               where sold.
LOADING SPACE, A completely off-street space or berth located on the same lot, except as
OFF-STREET:    otherwise permitted herein, for the loading or unloading of freight carriers,
               having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
               A room or suite rented for use by a single individual, family, or group as
LODGING ROOM:  sleeping or living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without
               an individual bathroom.
               A parcel of land under the same ownership or control (whether legally so
               described or subdivided as one or more contiguous parcels or parts of parcels)
LOT:           located within a single block, occupied by or suitable for occupancy by one
               principal building, and having its principal frontage upon a dedicated public
               street. In a PUD a lot may have multiple buildings, and principal frontage may be
               upon a private street if approved as part of the PUD plan approval.
LOT AREA:      The area of a lot within its front, rear, and side lot lines.
               A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, or a lot located at the
               point where the alignment of a single street curves or changes; provided that an
LOT, CORNER:   interior angle of not more than 135 degrees is created by the right-of-way lines
               of the abutting street or streets or, in the case of a curving right-of-way, by
               straight lines projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection
               between the curve and the lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE:  The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory structures.
LOT DEPTH:     The mean average of the lengths of the side lot lines on either side of a lot.
LOT, DOUBLE-   A through lot abutting only two streets.
FRONTAGE:
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
               A property boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion of a lot
LOT LINE:      extends into an abutting street or alley the lot line shall be deemed to be
               established at the existing street or alley right-of-way line.
LOT LINE,      Any street line that is not a front lot line.
CORNER SIDE:
               1.   The only street line bordering a lot, or
               2.   otherwise, if the lot is a through lot, every street line, or
               3.   otherwise, if the lot is a corner lot:
               a.   the shortest street line
               b.   otherwise, if more than one street line is the shortest:
LOT LINE,      (1) the lot line designated as the front lot line on a plat of dedication or plat
FRONT:         of subdivision
               (2) otherwise, the lot line designated as the front lot line by the Zoning
               Administrator, or
               4.   otherwise, if the lot has no street line or if the lot is a reserve/flag lot
               as described in Footnote (j) to Table 4A, the lot line that faces the access to
               the lot.
               That lot line which is most distant from and is, or is approximately, parallel to
LOT LINE,      the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if
REAR:          the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
               ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from
               the front lot line.
LOT LINE,      Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
SIDE:
               A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which was recorded in the office
LOT OF RECORD: of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land the deed to which was
               recorded in the office of said Recorder, prior to the adoption of this Ordinance
               or of any applicable amendment thereto.
LOT, REVERSED  A corner lot that is a reversed frontage lot.
CORNER:
LOT, REVERSED  A lot with a front lot line at right angles or approximately right angles to the
FRONTAGE:      general pattern of front lot lines in the block.
LOT, THROUGH:  An interior lot with frontage on more than one street.
               The width of a lot measured along a line parallel to the front lot line located
LOT WIDTH:     at the setback line established by the applicable front yard requirement of this
               Ordinance.
               A factory-produced dwelling unit, sometimes called a "mobile" or "sectional"
               home, designed and used exclusively for long-term residential occupancy that is
               built on a permanent chassis, is transportable in one or more sections, and is
MANUFACTURED   ready for occupancy at the building site except for minor and incidental
HOME:          unpacking, assembly, and connection operations.
               This term shall not include units using prefabricated sub elements requiring
               major on-site combination or installation that do not otherwise meet the
               requirements of this definition, such as "modular," "component," "panelized," or
               "prefabricated" dwellings.
MANUFACTURED   Any lot or tract of land other than a manufactured home subdivision or
HOME PARK:     manufactured home sales or storage lot upon which 3 or more manufactured homes
               used for long-term residential occupancy are located.
MASSAGE        A place of business where one or more persons licensed by the State of Illinois
ESTABLISHMENT: Department of Regulation practices massage.
               Any institution providing in-patient or outpatient care or therapy for the
MENTAL HEALTH  mentally ill, developmentally disabled, alcoholics, abusers of controlled
CENTER:        substances, or others needing psychological therapy but which does not serve as a
               residence for such individuals.
MICRO BREWERY: A brewery that produces less than 30,000 barrels (35,200 hectoliters) of beer or
               ale per calendar year from malt and hops by infusion, boiling and fermentation.
MINIATURE      A horse that is no more than 38 inches tall at the last hairs of the mane, which
HORSE:         are found at the withers.
MOBILE HOME:   SEE MANUFACTURED HOME
               A building or portion thereof within or adjoining a development arranged and
               displayed temporarily for purposes of selling or renting of residential or
MODEL HOME:    business real estate, which may include a temporary sales or leasing office and
               which is suitable for subsequent conversion to a Permitted or Special Use allowed
               in the zoning district.
MORTUARY:      An undertaking establishment or funeral parlor, which may include a single
               residence as an accessory use.
               A building containing lodging rooms that is designed primarily for transient
MOTEL:         automobile travelers with a parking space on the lot for each lodging unit and
               where more than 50 percent of the lodging rooms are for rent for a continuous
               period of less than 30 days.
MOTOR FREIGHT  SEE TERMINAL, FREIGHT TERMINAL
TERMINAL:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of
               persons or goods along public streets.
MOTOR VEHICLE  SEE TERMINAL, MOTOR VEHICLE
TERMINAL:
MULTI-FAMILY   SEE DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLING:
NET FLOOR      SEE FLOOR AREA, NET
AREA:
NET LOT AREA:  SEE LOT AREA
               Any characteristic of a use, building, structure, or lot that was lawful prior to
NONCONFORMITY: the effective date of this Ordinance or of any amendment thereto but which does
               not conform to all applicable requirements therein.
NONCONFORMITY, Any activity or function lawfully carried on at the premises at the time of
USE:           enactment of this Ordinance but that is not thereafter allowed by the Permitted
               and Special Uses of the zoning district in which the premises are located.
               The design or intended use of all or substantially all of a premises for any use
NONCONFORMITY, not allowed by the Permitted and Special Uses of the zoning district in which it
DESIGN:        is located, irrespective of the nature of the activities carried on at that
               premises.
NONCONFORMITY, Any Nonconformity other than a Use or Design Nonconformity.
STANDARDS:
               An establishment providing full-time convalescent or chronic care or both for
NURSING HOME:  three or more individuals not related by blood, adoption, or marriage to the
               operator and which does not provide care for surgical or medical cases commonly
               treated in hospitals.
OBSTRUCTION:   Any building, structure, or object, or part thereof, located in the way of any
               yard or open space required by this Ordinance, excluding trees and shrubs.
OFF-TRACK      An inter-track wagering establishment permitted under the Illinois Horse Racing
ENTERTAINMENT  Act (230 ILCS 2/i et. seq.) operated in conjunction with a full service
COMPLEX:       restaurant and which may also include a hotel and related facilities.
OPEN FENCE:    SEE FENCE, OPEN
               Open land that is used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
OPEN SALES     merchandise, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, nursery
LOT:           plants or supplies, or monuments, or for the storing of same prior to sale
               thereupon, and that is provided with a surface of asphalt, concrete, or the
               equivalent and is drained to dispose of all surface water.
OPEN SPACE:    Uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
               Net site area in a Planned Unit Development that is not covered by buildings or
               pavement that is permanently set aside for the common use and enjoyment of the
               residents or businesses within a development or for the community at large and
OPEN SPACE,    the preservation and perpetual maintenance of which is assured by dedication to
COMMON:        the City or other satisfactory legal arrangement. Common open space may include
               parks, playgrounds, and tot lots; parkway medians; landscaped green space;
               natural lakes, ponds, and streams; and 75 percent of dry and 50 percent of wet
               stormwater retention or detention basins. Common open space shall not include
               street rights-of-way or parking or loading areas.
ORNAMENTAL     A tree which is planted primarily for its ornamental assets (flower, form,
TREE:          foliage color, etc.) rather than for shade or screening purposes.
OUTDOOR        A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service,
ADVERTISING    entertainment, person, cause, event, or organization conducted, sold, offered,
SIGN:          operating, or having premises elsewhere than on the lot on which the sign is
               located, and only incidentally, if at all, on such lot.
               The neat and orderly storage of goods, materials, and equipment outside of any
OUTDOOR        building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency
STORAGE:       nature of the open storage of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish and garbage shall at
               all time be disposed of in a clean and sanitary manner in an approved container.
PARKING        An area in which off-street parking is prohibited, although driveways, turn
SETBACK:       aisles and sidewalks are permitted when needed to provide reasonable access.
PARKING SPACE  The longer of the two dimensions of a rectangular parking space. In the case of a
DEPTH:         space that is not rectangular, the depth shall be the length of the largest
               imaginary rectangle that can fit within the space.
PARKING SPACE  The shorter of the two dimensions of a rectangular parking space. In the case of
WIDTH:         a space that is not rectangular, the width shall be the width of the largest
               imaginary rectangle that can fit within the space.
PARKING SPACE, An area outside of any public street or alley right-of-way that is adequate for
OFF-STREET:    parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides together with
               maneuvering room and properly related access to a public street or alley.
PARKWAY:       The unpaved portion of a dedicated public right-of-way between a parcel's
               property line and a public street or highway.
PARKWAY TREE:  A tree planted in a parkway.
PARTICULATE    Material, other than steam or water vapor, suspended in or discharged into the
MATTER:        atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure
               and temperature.
               A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all
PARTY WALL:    stories to or above the roof that separates one building from another and that is
               in joint use by each building.
               Short-Term Loan or Payday Loan Business: A business that provides short-term
               loans upon which interest is charged at an annual percentage rate exceeding 36
PAY DAY LOAN   per cent and which loans are for a term of not more than 30 days in the case of a
STORES:        non-title-secured loan or for a term not more than 60 days in the case of a
               title-secured loan. A title-secured loan as used herein means a loan wherein, at
               commencement, an obligor provides to the obligee at that time, as security for
               the loan, physical possession of the obligor's title to a motor vehicle.
PERFORMANCE    A criterion to control objectionable noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter,
STANDARD:      vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare, heat, or other effects generated by
               or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMIT,        A permit required for the use of land, water, or buildings as a Special Use
SPECIAL USE:   received only after approval by the Plan Commission of an application for a
               Special Use.
PERMITTED      SEE USE, PERMITTED PUBLIC
PUBLIC USE:
PERMITTED USE: SEE USE, PERMITTED
PHILANTHROPIC
AND CHARITABLE SEE INSTITUTION, PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE
INSTITUTION:
               A tract of land initially under the same ownership or control that is or shall be
PLANNED UNIT   developed as an integral unit based on a plan that allows for more flexible
DEVELOPMENT:   standards than would normally apply in order to provide a higher quality of
               design and amenity than would otherwise be possible.
               A plat prepared by a licensed surveyor containing the legal description of the
               premises thereon and showing:
PLAT OF        1.   the boundary lines of the property, and
SURVEY,        2.   the locations of all improvements and monuments thereupon, and
CURRENT:       3.    all encroachments, and
               4.    the boundaries of all existing streets, easements, rights-of-way, and areas
               dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the property as all of the foregoing
               exist as of the date of filing.
PREMISES:      Any improved or unimproved property.
PRINCIPAL USE: SEE USE, PRINCIPAL
PUBLIC PAPER   A container designed for paper recycling materials drop off by the general public
RECYCLING BIN: and operated as an accessory use in accordance with the provisions of this
               Ordinance.
REAR LOT LINE: SEE LOT LINE, REAR
RECREATIONAL   Equipment associated with outdoor recreational and sport facilities, including
EQUIPMENT:     but not limited to protection fences, tennis court nets, volleyball nets,
               basketball hoops, football goals, tetherball poles, bleachers, etc.
RECREATIONAL   SEE INSTITUTION, RECREATIONAL
INSTITUTION:
               Vehicles which are (1) primarily designed as temporary living quarters in
               conjunction with recreation, camping, or travel use that either have their own
RECREATIONAL   motive power or are drawn by another vehicle and/or (2) Seasonal Recreational
VEHICLE:       Vehicles. Recreational Vehicles include travel trailers, camping trailers, truck
               campers, boats on or off trailer, motor homes, similar vehicles and Seasonal
               Recreational Vehicles. Multiple pieces of equipment such as snowmobiles on a
               single trailer shall be considered a single Recreational Vehicle.
               The temporary daily or weekly storage of a recreational vehicle during periods of
RECREATIONAL   common use. "Periods of common use" shall mean from March 15th through November
VEHICLE        15th for travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, boats, motor homes,
PARKING:       jet skis, all-terrain vehicles and similar vehicles and from November 16th
               through March 14th for snowmobiles and similar vehicles.
RECREATIONAL   Storage of one or more recreational vehicles that have not been used or moved for
VEHICLE        8 consecutive weeks. The parking of recreational vehicles before or after periods
STORAGE:       of common use shall be considered Recreational Vehicle Storage (see Recreational
               Vehicle Parking definition for explanation of "periods of common use").
RECREATIONAL   Vehicles, either self-propelled or capable of being towed, which are used
VEHICLE,       primarily for seasonal recreational activities, including but not limited to jet
SEASONAL:      skis, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, and horse trailers.
REFUSE:        All waste products resulting from human activity except sewage.
RELIGIOUS      SEE INSTITUTION, RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTION:
RESTAURANT,    A restaurant that is a drive-in establishment as defined herein.
DRIVE-IN:
REST HOME:     SEE NURSING HOME
               A sale of merchandise to end users, for use/consumption by the purchaser.
               Retail uses include, but are not limited to the following:
                  1.   Food, health and beauty
                  2.   Clothing, shoes and accessories
RETAIL:           3.   Electronics, books, audio, video and games
                  4.   Home improvement/decor, travel, garden and hardware
                  5.   Toys, kids and baby
                  6.   Sporting goods
                  7.   Crafts, art and stationery
                  8.   Discount department retailers, resale and antique stores.
RETENTION      An area intended for the permanent maintenance of storm water; also called a "wet
POND:          bottom" pond.
REVERSED       SEE LOT, REVERSED CORNER
CORNER LOT:
REVERSED       SEE LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE
FRONTAGE LOT:
               A strip of land used for passage of motor vehicles, railroads, or pedestrians or
RIGHT-OF-WAY:  for the location of utility or communications lines. An access easement shall not
               be considered a right-of-way.
               A right-of-way as defined herein dedicated to or owned by a public body and
RIGHT-OF-WAY,  available for use by the general public. In the case of public streets, the
PUBLIC:        right-of-way normally includes the curbs, lawn strips, and lighting and drainage
               facilities.
ROADSIDE       A structure of no more than 600 square feet of floor space and other than a tent
STAND:         used for the display and sale of agricultural products grown on the same property
               and that contains no space for customers within.
               A building or part thereof that is not a hotel, motel, or tourist home and that
ROOMING HOUSE: provides lodging rooms to three or more paying guests who are not members of the
               keeper's family and mainly to non-transients.
               Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall
               include the residue from burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible
RUBBISH:       materials, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
               trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral materials, glass, crockery and dust and
               other similar materials.
SANITARY       A site used for disposal of refuse from more than one residential premises or one
LANDFILL:      or more non-residential premises in which refuse is covered daily with compacted
               earth or other suitable cover material.
SCREENING:     A structure erected or vegetation planted to wholly or partially conceal the area
               behind it.
               The shortest horizontal distance between a lot line and the closest part or
SETBACK:       projection thereof of any structure or area. If no lot line is specified, the
               applicable lot line shall be the street line(s).
SETBACK,       SEE YARD, FRONT
FRONT:
SHED:          A subordinate structure or building with a building footprint greater than fifty
               (50) square feet used primarily for storage purposes.
               A group of three or more retail or personal service commercial uses characterized
               by any one or more of the following:
               1.   Uses are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on
               the same lot
               2.   Contiguous uses occupy premises that are under common ownership or
               management
SHOPPING       3.   Uses are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies, or other structural
CENTER:        members to form one continuous structure
               4.   Uses are located in separate buildings but are interconnected by walkways or
               access ways designed to facilitate customer interchange between the uses
               5.   Uses share a common parking area, other than through Shared Parking
               arrangements as provided herein
               6.   Uses otherwise present the appearance of a single continuous commercial
               development.
               Any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally, in the northeastern
SHRUB:         Illinois area, grows at maturity to an overall height of less than 15 (fifteen)
               feet.
SIDE LOT LINE: SEE LOT LINE, SIDE
SIDE YARD:     SEE YARD, SIDE
SINGLE-FAMILY  SEE DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLING:
SINGLE-FAMILY
ATTACHED       SEE DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED
DWELLING:
SINGLE-FAMILY
DETACHED       SEE DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
DWELLING:
SITE AREA,     The acreage of land excluding the rights-of-way of streets within and bordering a
NET:           development.
SOLAR ENERGY   A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical
SYSTEM:        energy.
SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEM,        A solar energy system mounted on the ground and not attached to any other
GROUND-        structure other than structural supports.
MOUNTED:
SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEM,        A solar energy system that is mounted on the façade and/or roof of either a
STRUCTURE-     principal or accessory structure.
MOUNTED:
SOLID FENCE:   SEE FENCE, SOLID
STABLE,        An accessory structure to a dwelling for housing horses for the private use of
PRIVATE:       the residents thereof.
STABLE,        A structure on at least 20 acres of land housing horses for remuneration, hire,
PUBLIC:        or sale.
STORAGE        SEE GARAGE, STORAGE
GARAGE:
STORAGE TENT:  A temporary structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable
               material supported by any manner except by air or the contents that it protects.
               That portion of a building included between the top surface of any floor and the
               top surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no floor above, the ceiling
STORY:         next above. A split-level story shall be considered a single story if the
               difference in elevation between the floors thereof does not exceed 4 feet. A
               basement shall be counted as a story but a cellar shall not.
               A space under a sloping roof where the line of intersection of roof decking and
STORY, HALF:   wall on at least 2 opposite exterior walls is not more than 4.5 feet above the
               top floor level.
               A public or private right-of-way as defined herein that affords a primary means
               of motor vehicle access to abutting property and/or provides for the movement of
STREET:        traffic.
               Principal Arterial, Minor Arterial, Collector, Minor, and Marginal Access Streets
               shall be as designated in the Warrenville Comprehensive Plan.
STREET,        Any street owned by a unit of government.
PUBLIC:
               All appurtenances to streets and sidewalks located on or above the ground,
STREET         including light standards, utility poles and wires, traffic signs and signals,
FURNITURE:     tree guards, waste receptacles, telephone booths, bus shelters, benches,
               planters, canopies, and barricades.
               The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the right-of-way of
STREET LINE:   a contiguous existing or dedicated street or planned street included in the
               Thoroughfare Plan of the City.
STRUCTURAL     Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a
ALTERATION:    building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
               Anything erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on
               the ground or attachment to something having such a location. A sign, if detached
STRUCTURE:     or projecting, shall be construed to be a separate structure. Structures also
               include buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, decks, sheds, patios and
               swimming pools.
STRUCTURE,     A structure that is an Accessory Use.
ACCESSORY:
STRUCTURE,     A structure that is established for a period of less than one year or such other
TEMPORARY:     period as may be approved by the City Council and is removed within that period.
STUDIO         SEE EFFICIENCY UNIT
APARTMENT:
               Any artificially constructed body or open tank of water usable for swimming or
               bathing, whether in or above the ground, that:
SWIMMING POOL: a.   contains or is normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point
               greater than 2 feet, and
               b.   has a surface area of 250 square feet or more.
TATTOO AND     Premises where a body piercing operation, a tattooing operation, or a combination
BODY PIERCING  of both operations is performed.
ESTABLISHMENT:
               Making permanent marks on the skin of a live human being by puncturing the skin
               and inserting indelible colors. "Tattooing" includes imparting permanent makeup
               on the skin, such as permanent lip coloring and permanent eyeliner. "Tattooing"
               does not include any of the following:
TATTOOING:     a.   The practice of electrology, as defined in the electrology Licensing Act.
               b.   The practice of acupuncture, as defined in the acupuncture Licensing Act.
               c.   The use, by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches,
               of colors, dyes, or pigments for the purpose of obscuring scar tissue or
               imparting color to the skin for cosmetic, medical, or figurative purposes.
TEMPORARY      SEE BUILDING, TEMPORARY
BUILDING:
TEMPORARY      The temporary use of land for installation, maintenance, and operation of
CONSTRUCTION   facilities used by contractors in the ordinary course of construction.
YARD:
TEMPORARY      An air-inflated, air-supported, cable, or frame-covered structure or a temporary
MEMBRANE       structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable material and not
STRUCTURE:     otherwise defined as a tent, or canopy.
TEMPORARY      A temporary structure, enclosure, or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable
STORAGE        materials supported by any manner, except by air or the contents it protects, and
CANOPY:        is open without sidewalls or drops on 75 percent or more of the perimeter.
TEMPORARY      SEE STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY
STRUCTURE:
TEMPORARY USE: SEE USE, TEMPORARY
               A use engaged in the staging, packaging and loading of bulk freight onto trucks
               for shipment elsewhere. Freight terminals are principally engaged in the short-
TERMINAL,      term handling and short-term storage of freight as an intermediate phase of its
FREIGHT:       transport, as opposed to long term storage for warehousing. Freight terminals are
               often characterized by a large number of loading berths in proportion to enclosed
               building area, storage of trailers on site and storage of shipping containers on
               site.
TERMINAL,      A building or premises the principal use of which is the receipt of freight for
MOTOR FREIGHT: forwarding or trans-shipment or the dispatching of freight by motor vehicle.
TERMINAL,      A facility which includes equipment and garage for the maintenance, storage, and
MOTOR VEHICLE: refueling of motor vehicle fleets used for commercial purposes.
               An establishment operated by a not-for-profit corporation registered in the State
               of Illinois that offers therapeutic riding programs in which individuals with
THERAPEUTIC    cognitive, emotional, social, physical and/or developmental disabilities or other
EQUESTRIAN     special needs are taught horsemanship by instructors specifically trained and
FACILITY:      certified to work with people with disabilities or special needs, and where the
               keeping of horses is subject to the provisions of Section 10 - Accessory Uses and
               Yards.
THROUGH LOT:   SEE LOT, THROUGH
               A building or part thereof other than a hotel, motel, or rooming house where
TOURIST HOME:  lodging is provided by a resident family to more than two paying guests and
               mainly to transients.
TOWING &
VEHICLE        A building, property, use or activity which involves the retrieving, removal or
RELOCATION     securing of distressed, disabled, trespassing or illegally parked motor vehicles.
SERVICE:
TOWNHOUSE:     SEE DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE
               Any liquid, solid, semi-solid, or gaseous substance or mixture thereof which if
               discharged into the environment could, alone or with other substances likely to
               be present in the environment, cause or threaten to cause bodily injury, illness,
TOXIC MATTER:  or death to members of the general public through ingestion, inhalation, or
               absorption through any body surface. Substances that are corrosives, irritants,
               strong sensitizers, or radioactive substances shall be considered toxic
               substances.
               Any portable structure or vehicle designed to be towed or hauled by another
TRAILER:       vehicle in highway travel and used on a short-term or interim basis for living,
               sleeping, hauling, or commercial purposes.
               Any site under single ownership or control other than a construction site,
TRAILER PARK:  trailer service or repair facility, trailer manufacturing plant, trailer sales,
               rental, or storage lot, or wrecking yard on which 2 or more trailers or
               recreational vehicles are located in the open.
TRANSPLANT:    The digging up by a property owner of a tree from one place on his property and
               the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property.
               Any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally, in the northeastern
TREE:          Illinois area, grows at maturity to an overall height of at least 15 (fifteen)
               feet.
               A use engaged in the staging, packaging and loading of bulk freight onto trucks
               for shipment elsewhere. Truck freight terminals are principally engaged in the
TRUCK FREIGHT  short term handling and short storage of freight as an intermediate phase of its
TERMINALS:     transport, as opposed to long term storage for warehousing. Truck freight
               terminals are often characterized by a large number of loading berths in
               proportion to enclosed building area, storage of trailers on site and storage of
               shipping containers on site.
TURF:          An area planted exclusively with grasses which form a dense mat completely
               covering the soil surface.
TWO-FAMILY     SEE DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
DWELLING:
UNIT:          SEE DWELLING UNIT
UNIT GROUPING: A single detached building consisting of multiple dwelling units.
USE:           The purpose or activity for which land or structures thereon are designed,
               arranged, or intended or for which they are occupied or maintained.
               A subordinate land use located on the same lot or parcel as a Principal Use
USE,           (except for such off-street parking or off-street loading facilities as may be
ACCESSORY:     permitted to be located on a separate lot) and serving a purpose customarily
               incidental to that of the Principal Use.
USE AREA:      An area of land within an SD District designated for a particular range of uses
               and subject to special design standards under SD Development Control Regulations.
USE,           A use allowable generally within a zoning district without a Special Use Permit.
PERMITTED:
USES,          Poles, towers, tunnels, conduits, wires, cables, vaults, laterals, pipes, drains,
PERMITTED      mains, valves, hydrants, and similar distribution equipment for public services
PUBLIC:        or utilities; fire alarms and police call boxes; traffic signals; and pay
               telephones.
USE,           The main use of a parcel as distinct from an Accessory Use.
PRINCIPAL:
               A use that because of its special character cannot be allowable generally in a
USE, SPECIAL:  particular zoning district but which may be allowed under special conditions and
               which is therefore subject to the prior approval of a Special Use Permit.
               The use of property other than as Permitted Public Uses as defined herein by a
USE, SPECIAL   public utility, railroad, or governmental body for the provision of public
PUBLIC:        safety, government administration, transportation, and communications, utilities
               or services, including sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas, fire stations.
USE,           A Principal or Accessory Use that is established for a period of less than one
TEMPORARY:     year or such other period as may be approved by the City Council and is
               discontinued within that period.
               A modification of the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with the
               provisions herein concerning variances in cases where strict enforcement would
VARIANCE:      cause undue hardship as a result of special circumstances affecting an individual
               property that do not generally affect other properties in the same zoning
               district.
               A modification of the provisions of this Ordinance of 10 percent or less in
VARIANCE,      accordance with the provisions herein concerning variances in cases where strict
MINOR:         enforcement would cause undue hardship as a result of special circumstances
               affecting an individual property that does not generally affect other properties
               in the same zoning district.
               The triangular area located at the at-grade intersection of streets, railroads,
VISION         driveways, or any combination thereof, formed by the centerlines of driving lanes
CLEARANCE      on the streets and driveways or the center of the railroad tracks with the length
TRIANGLE:      of these two legs defined by the table and illustration provided in Section
               10.B.7, and by a straight line between the ends of these two legs.
WALL, FRONT:   The wall of a building nearest the front lot line that is parallel to or most
               nearly parallel to said line.
WAREHOUSE/     A use within an entirely enclosed building engaged in the storage of goods/
DISTRIBUTION:  materials awaiting shipment to a retail or wholesale uses, or to another
               warehouse. This use shall not include truck freight terminals.
WAREHOUSE,     One or more one-story structures providing individual storage compartments that
MINI:          afford individual grade-level access thereto to the renters thereof.
WHOLESALE      An establishment primarily devoted to sale of merchandise in gross for resale.
ESTABLISHMENT:
               Any place where there are stored in the open two or more motor vehicles--
               including automobiles, trucks, and construction and farm implements--or trailers,
WRECKING YARD: boats, or manufactured homes, which are not in operating condition and have not
               been restored to operation within 30 days of their arrival, or where parts
               thereof are stored in the open, including any building or structure used for the
               wrecking or storing of such vehicles or parts.
               An open space on a lot other than a court that either is ("Actual Yard") or is
               required hereunder to be ("Required Yard") unoccupied and unobstructed above
YARD:          ground level by any structure or part or projection thereof other than those
               permitted in yards herein. An Actual Yard may be larger than the corresponding
               Required Yard. Where a yard is not specified herein to be a Required Yard or an
               Actual Yard, it shall be construed to be a Required Yard.
               A yard extending between a corner side lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto
YARD, CORNER   at a distance therefrom equal to that established by the corner side yard
SIDE:          requirements of the Ordinance ("required corner side yard") or the building line
               ("actual corner side yard") and also extending the full depth of the lot but
               excluding any area included in a front yard.
               A yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot line as defined
YARD, FRONT:   herein and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that
               established by the front yard requirements of this Ordinance ("required front
               yard") or the building line ("actual front yard").
               A yard extending between an interior side lot line and a line drawn parallel
YARD, INTERIOR thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that established by the interior side
SIDE:          yard requirements of this Ordinance ("required interior side yard") or the
               building line ("actual interior side yard") and also extending the full depth of
               the lot but excluding any area included in a front or rear yard.
               A yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line and a line
YARD, REAR:    drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that established by the
               rear yard requirements of this Ordinance ("required rear yard") or the building
               line ("actual rear yard") but excluding any portion of a corner side yard.
               A temporary sale open to the public and conducted as an accessory use to a
               residential premises at which more than 5 items of personal household property
YARD SALE:     owned and used by members of the household living thereupon are offered for sale
               and at which no merchandise purchased for resale or obtained on consignment is
               offered.
YARD, SIDE:    A corner side yard or an interior side yard.
 
(Ord. 1817, 3-23-00; Ord. 1906, 4-18-01; Ord. 1963, 2-25-02; Ord. 2103, 12-2-
03; Ord. 2144, 6-23-04; Ord. 2190, 2-9-05; Ord. 2191, 2-9-05; Ord. 2231, 7-21-
05; Ord. 2335, 11-7-06; Ord. 2339, 11-27-06; Ord. 2379, 5-24-07; Ord. 2386, 7-
6-07; Ord. 2392, 8-20-07; Ord. 2533, 8-5-09; Ord. 2539, 9-9-09; Ord. 2593, 6-
21-10; Ord. 2621, 12-21-10; Ord. 2625, 1-4-11; Ord. 2821, 1-6-14; Ord. 2977, 2-
1-16; Ord. O2017-26, 5-15-17; Ord. O2018-15, 5-21-18; Ord. O2019-34, 6-17-19;
Ord. O2019-62, 12-2-19; Ord. 1018, 3-11-21; Ord. O2023-22, 6-5-23; Ord. 2023-
39, 9-18-2023; Ord. O2024-07, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-35, 9-3-2024; Ord. O2024-47,
11-18-2024; Ord. O2025-21, 4-21-2025)
APPENDIX
The graphic materials to follow are intended to aid in the understanding of the
City of Warrenville Zoning Ordinance.
They are illustrative only and are not to be considered part of the Ordinance
for interpretation or legal purposes.
Types of Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2286.png]
LOT
See Lot definition in Definition Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2288.png]
Yards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2290.png]
Required Yards & Actual Yards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2292.png]
Parking in Yards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2294.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2296.png]
Recreational Vehicle Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2298.png]
Locations established in the regulations for recreational vehicle parking on
residential lots are, in order of preference: (Grey shaded area indicates
permitted recreational vehicle parking areas.)
   1.   in a garage
   2.   On the driveway behind the actual building line, 3' from garage or
principal building, 5' from property lines.
   3.   On the driveway in front of the actual building line, 3' from garage or
principal building. 5' from unfenced property iines and 1' from side and rear
property lines with solid fencing.
Recreational Vehicle Storage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2300.png]
Locations established in the regulations for recreational vehicle storage on
residential lots are, in order of preference:
   1.   In a garage
   2.   On the driveway behind the actual building line a minimum of 3' from
garage or principle structure and 5' from all rear and side property lines
   3.   A non-paved surface behind the actual building line and a minimum of 3'
from garage and principle structure and 5' from unfenced side and rear property
lines, and 1' from side and rear property lines with solid fence.
   4.   All street legal motorized travel trailers shall be stored on the
driveway or the widening thereof.
AVERAGE GROUND LEVEL CALCULATION ILLUSTRATION
   See Average Ground Level definition in Definitions Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2302.png]
Parking Space Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2304.png]
Arterial Lot Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2306.png]
   F.   MUST BE LESS THAN 150 FEET
Floor Area Ratio
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2308.png]
See Floor Area Ratio definition in Definitions section
Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2310.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2312.png]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAT ARTERIAL ROAD DESIGNATIONS
Principal Arterials
   Illinois Route 59
   Illinois Route 56
Minor Arterials
   Batavia Road, east of Route 59
   Winfield Road
   Ferry Road, east of Route 59
   Diehl Road
   Warrenville Road, east of Batavia Road
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2314.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2316.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2318.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2320.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2322.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2324.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2326.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2328.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2330.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2332.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/94335732524225301d2a63afe215629057f118d0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2334.png]
(Ord. 1018, 3-11-21)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISION CONTROL
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-4: Rules And Definitions
11-1-5: General Provisions1
11-1-6: Procedures For Subdivision Approval
11-1-7: Subdivision Design Standards
11-1-8: Administration And Enforcement
11-1-9: Appendices
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
   This chapter shall be known and may be designated as the “Subdivision
Regulations for the City of Warrenville, Illinois.”
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
   While it is obvious that the regulations are needed to assure orderly
extension of the city streets, the other purposes of these regulations are:
   A.   To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth, and to safeguard the interest of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the City.
   B.   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the City.
   C.   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs.
   D.   To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
   E.   To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be
caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development.
   F.   To provide common grounds of understanding and sound working
relationship between the City and the subdivider.
   G.   To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
   H.   To provide for adequate light and air.
   I.   To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, storm water
management, sewerage and schools, and other public necessities.
   J.   To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided
land.
   The regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the
character of the City with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon
the land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation. It
is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in the
Building Code, Official Map Regulations, Zoning Ordinance, and the Official
City Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
   The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Warrenville, Illinois, shall apply
to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the City of
Warrenville and entirely or in part within the unincorporated area within one
and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City, in accordance
with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12 of the Illinois Municipal Code. Preliminary and final
subdivision plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures
relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the
regulations herein.
   Until preliminary plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
   A.   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land.
   B.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered
for sale, nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or given.
   C.   No improvements-such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage,
sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading,
paving, or surfacing of streets-shall hereafter be made by any owner or owners
or his or their agent, or by any public service corporation at the request of
such owner or owners or his or their agent.
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   A.   Rules: The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
      1.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
      2.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      3.   The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   The word "lot" shall include the words "piece," "parcel," and
"plot."
      5.   The phrase "designed for" shall include the phrases "arranged for"
and "intended for."
      6.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "maintained for" and
"occupied for."
      7.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
      8.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof. Synonyms of certain words or terms in common usages are shown
parenthetically.
      9.   All measured distances shall be the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half (1/2) foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be
taken.
   B.   Definitions:
ADT:          Average Daily Traffic.
              A dedicated, minor public right-of-way, not less than twenty (20) feet in width,
ALLEY:        which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property along a side or
              rear property line and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
AREA:         The measure of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines
              of a lot or parcel of land.
AREA, GROSS:  The total area (in acres) in fee ownership, which excludes right-of-way already
              dedicated but includes non-residential land uses and private streets.
              The area (in acres) of the actual tract of land upon which the dwelling units or
              other buildings or structures are located or are proposed to be located. This
AREA, NET:    area shall include the site for all principal and accessory buildings, associated
              parking areas, and common open space or recreational facilities, but does not
              include the vehicular circulation system, either private or public, or other non-
              residential uses.
              The elevation determined from the elevation of the flood crest profile of the one
BASE FLOOD    hundred (100) year flood (certified HUD Flood Insurance Studies [FIS]) where
ELEVATION:    information is available or the highest flood of record as determined by the
              Warrenville City Engineer from the best available sources of information.
              A tract of land bounded by street rights-of-way, or by a combination of one or
BLOCK:        more street rights- of-way and public parks, cemeteries, railroad and utility
              rights-of way, bulkhead lines, shore lines or waterways, or corporate boundary
              lines.
BORINGS,      Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific parcel of land
SOIL:         by drilling.
              Any structure, with a permanent roof, separated on all sides from adjacent open
BUILDING:     space, or from other buildings or other structures, by exterior or party walls,
              built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
              moveable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the ground.
BUILDING      The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot, establishing the minimum
LINE:         open space to be provided between the front line of a building or structure and
              the street right-of-way line. (See SETBACK LINE.)
BUILDING      A permit issued by the City of Warrenville for the construction, erection, or
PERMIT:       alteration of a structure or building.
CITY:         Refers to the City of Warrenville, Illinois.
CITY CLERK:   The City Clerk of the City of Warrenville, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: The legislative body of the City of Warrenville, Illinois.
CITY          The City Engineer of the City of Warrenville, Illinois or the duly authorized
ENGINEER:     representative.
              The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the official
COMPREHENSIVE Comprehensive Plan of the City of Warrenville or a segment thereof, in the form
PLAN:         of plans, maps, charts, text or reports, implementing ordinances, and the
              Official Map as adopted by the Warrenville City Council.
CORINGS,      Examination and analysis of the completed surface and/or sub-surface of a
PAVEMENT:     finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
CROSSWALK:    A public right-of-way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to
              adjacent streets or alleys.
CURB:         The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular
              travelway from the landscaped parkway.
DETENTION     A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive accumulation of
BASIN:        stormwater so as to reduce peak flow in a stormwater drainage system.
              Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not
              limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
              paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the City of Warrenville
              or its area of planning jurisdiction.
              Development shall not include:
              A.   Maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or
              resurfacing roads;
DEVELOPMENT:  B.   Repairs made to a damaged building that do not change the building's
              exterior dimensions and that are valued at less than fifty (50) percent of the
              value of the building before the damage occurred. Existing buildings not
              compatible with present or requested zoning, or with the site plan or concept
              plan, should be removed;
              C.   Gardening, plowing or similar agricultural practices that do not involve
              filling, grading or construction of levees; or
              D.   Agricultural development activities on farms including farm residences as
              exempted by law.
DRAINAGE      A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth.
SWALE:
EASEMENT:     An authorization or grant by a property owner for the use by another and for a
              specific purpose, of any designated part of his property.
ELEVATIONS:   The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the datum plane.
              Except as hereinafter provided, "excavating and/or filling" shall mean any
              changing of the grade or sub-grade of a tract of land by cutting, scraping,
              grading, trenching, digging, filling in, or otherwise reshaping the natural
EXCAVATING-   contour of the ground.
FILLING:      The following shall not be construed as excavating-filling:
              A.   Any cutting grading, trenching, digging, or back filling of any foundation
              of a building approved for construction.
              B.   Top dressing in an area of existing homes, provided that the top dressing
              does not change the drainage patterns.
              The land area adjacent to the surface water bodies or waterways that is subject
              to periodic inundation when greater than normal water flows are experienced. The
              flood plain may be identified according to the frequency of the flood flow that
FLOOD PLAIN:  inundates it. For example, the portion of flood plain inundated by the flow which
              is equaled or exceeded once in ten (10) years is the ten (10) year flood plain.
              The flood plain inundated by a hundred year storm is the one hundred (100) year
              flood plain.
              The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that
FLOODWAY:     must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood waters without cumulatively
              increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of one (.01) foot.
GRADE:        The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE,        The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or
EXISTING:     filling.
GRADE,        The final elevation of the ground surface after development.
FINISHED:
GRADE,        The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made
NATURAL:      alterations.
GRADING:      (See Excavating-Filling.)
LOT:          A parcel of land, which is either a Lot of Record or Zoning Lot.
              A lot situated at an intersection of two (2) or more streets, where the interior
LOT, CORNER:  angle of such intersection coterminous with the right-of-way lines of such street
              does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT,          Any lot other than a corner lot.
INTERIOR:
LOT, NON-     A lot of record, legally created prior to the date of this chapter or amendments
CONFORMING:   hereto, which does not comply with all of the requirements set forth in this
              chapter for the district and uses into which it is classified.
              A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded
LOT OF        in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois; or a single
RECORD:       parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of said
              Recorder of Deeds, prior to October 1, 1973, pursuant to Chapter 109 (Plats Act),
              paragraph 1. (b).
              Any lot which fronts upon two (2) substantially parallel streets, or which fronts
LOT, THROUGH: upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. On a
              through lot, both street lines shall be designated front lot lines, and front
              yards shall be provided on both street frontages as required.
              A single tract of land, which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract
              to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or
              control. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or any occupancy use permit,
              the zoning lot shall be converted into a lot of record by resubdividing according
LOT, ZONING:  to the requirements of Section
              11-1-6 of this chapter. Zoning lot lines shall not cross zoning district boundary
              lines unless otherwise permitted in this chapter. A single-family home site shall
              not be required to be resubdivided but shall follow the requirements of Section
              11-1-5E. (Ord. 927, 11-18-1987)
              The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and
OFFICIAL MAP: established by law and any amendments or additions thereto resulting from the
              City Council action or the approval of subdivision plats.
              Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other
OWNER:        legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
              subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this
              resolution.
PARCEL:       A continuous area or acreage of land, which can be described as provided for the
              Plats Act (Illinois Revised Statutes).
PARKWAY:      That portion of right-of-way which is from back of curb or edge of shoulder to
              right-of-way line to be developed in a park-like manner.
PEDESTRIAN    A right-of-way or easement however designed, across or within a block for use by
WAY:          pedestrian traffic; and shall include but not be limited to sidewalks and
              crosswalks.
              Any natural person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois
PERSON:       and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its
              agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, offices, or employee of
              any of the foregoing.
PLAN          The Plan Commission of the City of Warrenville, Illinois.
COMMISSION:
              A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its
              own character controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in
              common agreement as to control, to be developed as a single entity; the character
              of which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning
              district or districts in which it is located; the developer or developers may be
PLANNED UNIT  granted relief from specific land use regulations and design standards, and may
DEVELOPMENT:  be granted a variation in return for assurances of an overall quality of
              development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional benefit
              to the community as a whole and which would not otherwise be required by the
              Subdivision Ordinance.
              A.   Specify termination date for P.U.D.
              B.   Any deviation from approved plans shall require council action.
              A plan, map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision
PLAT:         of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in
              final form.
              A plan, map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan for the subdivision
PLAT, FINAL:  of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in
              final form.
PLAT,         The drawings and documents presented for final approval as described in Section
PRELIMINARY:  11-1-6F of this Code.
PLATS ACT:    765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
              Items/improvements, which are required by Title 11 Subdivision Regulations and/or
              the Storm Water Management Ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
              following:
              A.   Pavement (or Easements) Within Public R.O.W.: All roadway pavement or other
              paved areas, including base course, binder course, surface course, curb and/or
              curb and gutter.
              B.   Pavement (or Easements) Outside Public R.O.W.: All roadway pavement or other
              paved areas, but only when the pavement is used for storm water detention (e.g.,
              a parking lot used for storm water detention).
              C.   Earth Excavation: The excavation which is necessary to construct storm water
              detention facilities and/or grading which conveys storm water runoff (swales or
              ditches) and the excavation of public roadways.
              D.   Storm Sewer: All storm sewers and appurtenances thereto, including all
              culverts, manholes, catch basins, and inlets, but only when it is used to convey
              storm water runoff to a detention facility or is within a public R.O.W.
              E.   Sanitary Sewer: All sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto, including all
REQUIRED      manholes, mainline sewers (both on-site and off-site), but excluding building
PUBLIC        service lines.
IMPROVEMENTS: F.   Water Main: All water mains and appurtenances thereto, including all
              manholes and water transmission lines, but excluding building service lines.
              G.   Streetlights: All streetlights within the public right-of-way or easements,
              but excluding parking lot or building lights.
              H.   Top Soil and Seeding or Sodding: Those areas within public right-of-way or
              easements, within a detention facility shoreline, or within swales or ditches
              used to convey storm water runoff shall be sodded or hydroseeded.
              I.   Landscaping: All landscaping required in parkways or other public areas,
              including wetland mitigation and landscaping or trees which are required on
              private property pursuant to City- approved development plans.
              J.   Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways: Sidewalks or pedestrian ways, which are
              required in the public R.O.W. or easements.
              K.   Signage: Street name signage and traffic control signals and signals.
              L.   Sediment and Erosion Control Measures: Such measures shall be required when
              a sediment and erosion control plan is required by DuPage County Storm Water
              ordinance and includes soil stabilization and sediment trapping facilities. (Ord.
              1369, 3-9-1995)
              The relocation of property boundaries, or the reallocation of property in a plat
RE-           of record. The dissolution of property lines not accompanied by the relocation of
SUBDIVISION:  new property lines shall require subdivision except as permitted elsewhere in
              this chapter for a single family home site. (Ord. 927,11-18-1987)
              A strip of land dedicated to the public and occupied or intended to be occupied
              by a street, sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
              gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special
              use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes in the City
              of Warrenville shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown
RIGHT-OF-WAY: on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
              such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or
              parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains,
              sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public
              agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the Plat on which such
              right-of-way is established.
ROADWAY:      The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic,
              including all curb and gutter facilities.
              That line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line
SETBACK LINE: or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal
              building, structure or use must be erected or placed.
SIDEWALK:     That portion of the street or crosswalk way, paved or otherwise surfaced,
              intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE:         A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where work is
              performed as a single unified operation.
SITE          Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways, utilities,
DEVELOPMENT:  roadways, etc.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific land area by
              use of soil borings and/or compaction, density tests, etc.
SPOT SURVEY:  A plat of survey by a certified surveyor showing foundation location before a
              structure is built.
              A right-of-way which affords a primary means of access by pedestrians and
STREET:       vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway,
              road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated, but excepting
              driveways to buildings.
              Streets penetrating neighborhoods which collect traffic from minor streets in the
STREET,       neighborhood and channel it into the arterial systems. A minor amount of through
COLLECTOR:    traffic may be carried on collector streets, but the system primarily provides
              land access service and carries local traffic movements within residential
              neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas.
STREET, CUL-  A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and being
DE-SAC:       permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around.
              A minor street of short length with openings to traffic beginning from the same
STREET, LOOP: street, and projecting parallel to each other and connecting at their termination
              by a loop.
STREET,       A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and which
MARGINAL      provides access to abutting properties and protection to local traffic from
ACCESS:       faster moving through traffic on the arterial street.
STREET,       Streets not classified in a higher system, providing direct access to abutting
MINOR:        land and access to the higher systems. They offer the lowest level of mobility
              and have limited continuity to discourage through traffic.
              Streets interconnecting with and augmenting the principal arterial system which
STREET, MINOR provides service to trips of moderate length at a lower level of travel mobility.
ARTERIAL:     The system places more emphasis on land access and distributes travel to
              geographic areas smaller than those streets identified with the principal
              arterial system. It includes all arterials not classified as principal.
              Streets and highways serving major metropolitan activity centers, the highest
              traffic volume corridors, the longest trip desires, and a high proportion of
STREET,       total urban area travel on a minimum of street mileage. Service to abutting land
PRINCIPAL     is subordinate to the provisions of travel service to major traffic movements.
ARTERIAL:     This system carries the major portion of trips entering and leaving the
              Warrenville urban area as well as the majority of through movements desiring to
              bypass the City.
STREET,       Any arterial, collector, or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat
PUBLIC:       and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the public street.
              The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of the
SUBDIVIDER:   subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto as
              outlined in this chapter.
              A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided into two (2) or
              more lots or parcels, any of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose,
              whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development,
              including all public streets, ways for public service facilities, parks,
              playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds and all the tracts, parcels,
              lots or blocks, and numbering of all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive
              numbers, giving their precise dimensions. The term subdivision includes
              resubdivision and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the process
              of subdividing or to the land subdivided, provided, however, that the following
              shall not be considered a subdivision:
              A.   The division of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in
              size which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
SUBDIVISION:  B.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
              contiguous land; and further provided that the parcels resulting from said
              conveyance shall conform with all appropriate codes and ordinances of the City;
              C.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right-
              of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe lines
              which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
              D.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which
              does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
              E.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or
              conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
              relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use; and
              F.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances. (Ord. 2128,
              4-7-2004)
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an arterial traffic-way
              between the various districts of Warrenville and its environs.
              The triangular area located at the at-grade intersection of streets, railroads,
VISION        driveways, or any combination thereof, formed by the centerlines of driving lanes
CLEARANCE     on the streets and driveways or the center of the railroad tracks with the length
TRIANGLE:     of these two legs defined by the table and illustration provided in Section
              10.B.7 of the Zoning Ordinance of this Code, and by a straight line between the
              ends of these two legs. (Ord. 2144, 6-23-2004)
WATER LEVEL,  The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at all times within a
CONSTANT:     retention basin.
WATER LEVEL,  The maximum depth of water designed to be contained within a retention or
OCCASIONAL:   detention basin during periods of peak storm water flow.
WATER SUPPLY: A water supply in the City of Warrenville shall be defined as follows: City of
              Warrenville public supply or as regulated by DuPage County.
              As defined in the DuPage Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance adopted
WETLANDS:     pursuant to Section
              8-13-1 of this Code.
ZONING        The Zoning Ordinance, as amended, of the City of Warrenville, Illinois, adopted
ORDINANCE:    pursuant to
              Appendix A of Title 10-1-1 of this Code.
 
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Interpretation:
      1.   Minimum Standards Established: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
      2.   Higher Standards Govern: Where the conditions imposed by any
provisions of this chapter upon the subdivision of land are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
      3.   Easements Or Covenants Not Abrogated: This chapter is not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided
that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
      4.   Existing Subdivisions: No subdivision of land, which was not
lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, shall be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter; and, to the extent
that said subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the
requirements of this chapter, said subdivision of land remains unlawful
hereunder.
   B.   Separability: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City
Council of the City of Warrenville that the several provisions of this chapter
be separable in accordance with the following:
      1.   Separability Of Parts: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in said
judgment.
      2.   Separability Of Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a
particular subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application
of said provision to any other subdivision of land, not specifically included
in said judgment.
   C.   Unsuitable Land:
      1.   Subdivision Of Unsuitable Land: No land shall be subdivided for any
use which is determined by the City Council after investigation by the City
Engineer, to be unsuitable for such a use by reason of the presence of flood
plain, poor drainage or wetland areas, adverse earth and rock formation or
topography, or any other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety or
welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision or of the
community, except under the following conditions:
         a.   Unsuitable land located within areas of special flood hazard may
be subdivided only if the subdivider has complied with Ordinance No. 1189,
Chapter 8-5 Municipal Code, Flood Plain And Storm Water Management.
         b.   Variances for land within areas of special flood hazard shall be
subject to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1189; Chapter 8-5 Municipal Code.
         c.   Unsuitable land located outside areas of special flood hazard may
be subdivided only if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will
make the area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage
and storm water detention facilities.
         d.   Where the developer or subdivider of land outside areas of
special flood hazard can show in writing and with appropriate documentation
that the strict adherence to the design standards set forth causes an
unnecessary hardship, the City Council may approve a variance. Such variance
may be granted after recommendation by the Plan Commission, and where
topography and conditions peculiar to the site or surrounding area substantiate
a variance without destroying the intent of the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Prohibition From Subdividing: The City Council may, when it deems it
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage,
and sanitary facilities, prohibit subdivision of any portion of the property
which lies within the flood plain of any stream or drainage course. These flood
plain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting
from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps. (Refer
to Ordinance No. 1189, Chapter 8-5 Municipal Code.)
   D.   Plan Commission Guidelines:
      1.   Particular Attention Of The Plan Commission: The Plan Commission, in
the examination of subdivision plans for approval, and in the application of
this chapter, shall take into consideration the requirements of the community
and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be
given to width and location of streets, suitable sanitary utilities, storm
water drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, as well as local requirements such
as parks and playgrounds, schools and recreation sites, and other public uses.
      2.   Conformity With Comprehensive Plan: The Plan Commission shall
especially require that all subdivisions conform to the provisions and
conditions of the Comprehensive Plan. Plat approval may be withheld if a
subdivision does not conform to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
      3.   Area Plan Required: Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision
is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the City as a
whole, the Plan Commission may, before recommending approval, request that the
subdivider submit a plan for the entire area or neighborhood to be used by the
Plan Commission as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
      4.   Storm Water Provisions Required: The Plan Commission shall not
recommend for approval by the City Council any plat of subdivision which does
not make adequate provisions for storm or flood water runoff channel or basins.
      5.   Preservation Of Natural Features: In all subdivisions due regard
shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large trees,
watercourses, historical sites or structures, and similar features.
      6.   Engineering Standards And Specifications: The Plan Commission shall
require that all subdivisions conform to the Engineering Standards and
Specifications of the City of Warrenville.
   E.   Dedication Of Land For Public Use:
      1.   Acceptance Of Designated Land: When a final plat of a subdivision
has been approved by the City Council and all other required approvals are
obtained and the plat is recorded, that approval shall constitute acceptance
for the purpose designated on the plat of all lands shown on the plat as
dedicated to the public, excepting, street dedications which shall be accepted
only after inspection and recommendation by the City Engineer.
      2.   Refusal Of Designated Land: Whenever a preliminary plat includes a
proposed dedication of land to public use and the Plan Commission finds that
such land is not required or not suitable for public use, the Plan Commission
may either refuse to approve such dedication or require the rearrangement of
lots in the proposed subdivision to include such land.
      3.   Minimum Dedication: For minimum dedication of land for public use
exclusive of public dedicated roads refer to City of Warrenville Code, Section
8-12-1, Dedication of Land or Cash Contribution.
      4.   Contribution Of Sites Or Funds Required: No final plat shall be
approved until such time as the subdivider shall have fully complied with the
provisions of City of Warrenville City Code, Section
8-12-1.
   F.   Vacation Of A Plat Of Subdivision:
      1.   Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein or before any
improvements have been made to any lot, by a written instrument, to which a
copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the- same to be vacated. Except
in the case of a single-family home site, the written instrument of vacation
shall also include a plat of resubdivision in accordance with Section
11-1-6 of this chapter.
      2.   The written instrument of vacation shall be considered by the City
Council in like manner as plats of subdivision. The City Council may reject any
such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its
streets or public utility easements. Such instrument shall be reviewed and
approved by the Plan Commission; executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded, or filed in the like manner as plats of subdivisions; and, being duly
recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such
plat or part of plat.
      3.   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner
herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution
of such written instrument of vacation.
   G.   Land Divisions Other Than Subdivisions:
      1.   Interpretation And Scope: Any division, land, sale or exchange of
parcels of land, and/or conveyance of land that is exempt from the subdivision
requirements of this chapter by virtue of the definition of a "Subdivision" (as
identified in Section
11-1-4B.) shall be subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1605, 8-19-
1997)
      2.   Preliminary Consultation Required: Prior to the submission of the
certified Plat of Survey required herein, the divider shall meet the Plan
Commission for the purpose of minimizing the risk of objections to, or
rejection of, the prepared Plat of Survey, and for the purpose of ascertaining
the problems and requirements affecting his property.
      3.   Procedure For Approval: The owner or divider shall file with the
City Clerk the original and ten (10) contact prints of a certified Plat of
Survey showing the proposed division of such lots, blocks, parcels, or tracts
of land. The original and ten (10) prints of the Plat of Survey shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission at least ten (10) days before the next meeting
of the Plan Commission.
Not more than fifteen (15) days after the meeting at which the Plat of Survey
is referred to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission shall approve, approve
conditionally, or reject the proposal. The City Council shall be notified in
writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
The Chairman of the Plan Commission shall notify the owner or divider whether a
new street or easement of access is required. In the event that a new street;
or easement of access is required, the notice shall stipulate that an
application for final plat approval containing such maps, certifications and
supporting documents as required by the Plan Commission shall be filed with the
City Clerk for processing as herein set forth in this chapter.
      4.   Requirements For Approval:
         a.   Compliance With This Chapter: To the extent reasonably
practicable, the division of land shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter governing general requirements, design standards, and required
improvements.
         b.   Survey: The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a
Registered Illinois Land Surveyor.
         c.   Monuments: All corners shall be monumented as follows:
            (1)   All corners shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at
least twenty-four (24) inches long and one (1) inch in diameter, or by round or
square iron bars at least twenty-four (24) inches long.
            (2)   The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be
monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and one
(1) inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least thirty (30)
inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of
the river or stream lot line with a meander line established not less than
twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or stream.
      5.   Certificates And Affidavits:
         a.   Affidavits Required: The survey map shall include the affidavit
of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered, or
reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink, giving a clear and concise
description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with
some corner marked and established in the U.S. Public Land Survey or some
corner providing reference to a corner marked and established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey. Such affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor
to the effect that he has fully complied with the requirement of this section.
         b.   Certificates Required: The certificate of approval of the Plan
Commission shall be typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading
black ink on the face of the original survey map.
      6.   Filing Of The Survey Map: The City Clerk shall retain a copy of the
approved survey map and any supporting documents as required by the Plan
Commission for the City records. The City Clerk shall also record the original
of the approved survey map with the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County.
   H.   Resubdivision (Ord. 927, 11-18-1987): No building, structure or use
shall be permitted on a zoning lot which consists of more than one lot or parts
of more than one lot of record until the zoning lot shall have been
resubdivided into one lot of record. This requirement shall not apply to a
single-family home site on which interior parcel lines may be removed by a plat
of vacation.
(Ord. O2024-19, 5-6-2024)
11-1-6: PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
   A.   Preliminary Consultation: Prior to the submission of the preliminary
plat of any proposed subdivision within the jurisdiction of this chapter, the
subdivider must make known the subdivider’s intentions to the Community and
Economic Development Director, Mayor, City Clerk and Plan Commission. During
this preliminary or pre-application stage, the following actions will be taken:
      1.   Recovery Of City Consultant Costs For Consultative Services:
         a.   For subdivision applications that also include requests for
zoning relief, the subdivider must establish the recoverable cost escrow and
comply with the recoverable cost provisions of section 2.C.2 of the Warrenville
zoning ordinance.
      2.   Action By The Subdivider: The subdivider shall meet with the Plan
Commission for the purpose of presenting a general outline of his proposal,
including but not necessarily limited to the following:
         a.   Written Notification: Written notification in the form of a
letter of intent from the subdivider to the Plan Commission establishing the
subdivider’s intent to develop the land.
         b.   General Subdivision Information: General subdivision information
that shall describe or outline the existing conditions of his site and the
proposed development. This information shall include data on existing
covenants; land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities. Information describing the subdivision proposal shall include number
of residential lots and units broken down by type; typical lot width and depth;
business areas; school, playground and park areas; other public areas; and
proposed utilities and street improvements.
      3.   Action By The Plan Commission: The Plan Commission shall discuss the
proposed subdivision with the subdivider and so advise him of any City plans or
projects which might affect the proposed subdivision, the procedural steps,
design and improvement standards, and the general planning requirements.
      4.   Action By The Subdivider: If required by the Plan Commission, the
subdivider shall supply to the Plan Commission ten (10) copies of the general
subdivision information described in B-2 above. The subdivider shall also
prepare ten (10) copies of the following information for presentation to the
Plan Commission: Tentative engineering proposals regarding water supply,
sewerage disposal, storm water drainage, and street improvements.
      5.   Action By The Plan Commission: The Plan Commission in conjunction
with the City Staff and consultants shall review the general subdivision
information and tentative engineering proposals and proceed with the following
investigations:
         a.   Zoning Check: Check the existing zoning of the tract and advise
the subdivider if a zoning change is necessary or desirable.
         b.   Public Facility Impact: Check the adequacy of existing or
proposed schools, parks, and other public spaces in the vicinity of the
proposed subdivision.
         c.   Site Inspection: Inspect the site or otherwise determine its
relationship to major streets, utility systems, and adjacent land uses, and
determine any unusual problems in regard to topography, utilities, flooding,
etc.
         d.   School Sites: Advise the developer of the potential acreage
allotment, or funds in lieu thereof, to be donated and utilized for public
school sites based upon the developer’s estimates of the number and type of
dwelling units to be constructed, the potential needs of each affected school
district, and the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map of the City of
Warrenville. Refer to City of Warrenville City Code, Section
8-12-1.
         e.   Comprehensive Plan Conformity: Advise the developer of the
Comprehensive Plan which delineates the areas to be served by either public
and/or private water and/or sanitary sewer service. This will determine the
feasibility of the proposed subdivision, the sizes of the utilities, and the
lots therein.
         f.   Location Of Flood Plains And Wetlands, if any, as defined and
required by the DuPage Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance adopted
pursuant to Section
8-13-1 of this Code.
      6.   Plat Requirements Determined: During the Preliminary Consultation
phase the Plan Commission shall determine the submission requirements for
subsequent phases of the subdivision process, including, but not limited to,
the number of copies to be submitted and the need for a school demographic
study. The Plan Commission shall notify the City Clerk of the subdivision
requirements for each subdivision proposal.
   B.   Procedures For Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Action By The Subdivider: The subdivider shall submit a preliminary
plat, which said plat shall include all of the property owned or controlled by
the applicant which properties are adjacent to or considered to be contiguous
to the proposed subdivision together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as specified, to the City Clerk, with written
application for approval. In preparing this plat, due regard shall be given to
the preservation of natural features such as large trees, water courses,
historical and similar community assets. Accompanying this preliminary plat, if
required by the Plan Commission, shall be a School Demographic Study, prepared
in accordance with City of Warrenville City Code, Section 8-12-1. The required
number of copies of the preliminary plat, all required documentation and the
required filing fee shall accompany the application which shall be filed with
the City Clerk no later than twenty-one (21) days before a regular meeting of
the Plan Commission.
      2.   Action By The Community Development Department: The Community
Development Department shall refer the preliminary plat to the Plan Commission
at least ten (10) days prior to a regular meeting of the Plan Commission.
   The City Clerk shall also distribute copies of the preliminary plat as
determined by the Plan Commission with a request for a review and comments to
be received no less than three (3) days prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Plan Commission.
      A distribution list shall include:
      Mayor
      City Clerk
      Appropriate School District(s)
      Appropriate Park District(s)
      Appropriate Fire Protection District(s)
      Warrenville Zoning Board of Appeals
      City Engineer
      Public Works Director
      Warrenville Plan Commission (5 copies)
      DuPage County Superintendent of Highways
      DuPage County Health Department
      3.   Action By The Plan Commission: The City Engineer shall be requested
to cooperate with the Plan Commission in assembling standards for the design
and construction of streets and other such public improvements as are required
by this chapter or any other ordinance. The Plan Commission and the City Staff
and consultants shall review the preliminary plat for compliance with these
regulations and other ordinances of the City of Warrenville and the above
revisions and comments. The Plan Commission shall, within one (1) month from
the first regularly scheduled meeting following referral:
         a.   Make Recommendation: Approve or disapprove the proposed
preliminary subdivision plat and submit a written report of its actions, which
shall include the recommendations of the City Engineer and the Public Works
Director, to the City Council.
         b.   Changes, Additions, Or Corrections To Preliminary Plat: If the
Plan Commission finds that changes, additions or corrections are required on
the preliminary plat, the Plan Commission shall so advise the subdivider in
writing. The subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plat to the Plan
Commission, without paying an additional fee, for its consideration in the next
regular meeting of said Commission. The Plan Commission shall at said meeting
approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and submit a written report of its
actions, which shall include the recommendations of the Engineer, to the City
Council and the subdivider.
         c.   Notification To Subdivider: The Plan Commission shall notify the
owner or subdivider in wilting as to the time and place of the Plan Commission
meeting at which he will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
         d.   Qualifications Of Approval: The following qualifications shall
govern approval of the preliminary plat:
            (1)   Approval of a preliminary plat by the Warrenville Plan
Commission is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the
layout as submitted.
            (2)   The Warrenville Plan Commission may require such changes or
revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of the needs of the
community.
            (3)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a
maximum period of three (3) months.
         e.   Notice Of Approval Required: Upon approval of the preliminary
plat by the Plan Commission the following Notice of Approval shall be stamped
upon five (5) prints thereof, and required signatures affixed:
   NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown hereon
has received approval by the Plan Commission of the City of Warrenville,
Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of
qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plats and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Plan Commission will
receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in
such form and within such time as required by the Subdivision Ordinance of
Warrenville.
The Plan Commission of the City of Warrenville, Illinois.
Date                                   , by
                                           
                     Chairman, Plan Commission
   4.   Distribution Of Approved Plat: The Plan Commission shall retain one (1)
print of the approved preliminary plat and shall send a cover letter and four
(4) copies of said plat to the City Clerk for distribution.
   The City Clerk shall make copies of said cover letter and shall distribute
the prints of the approved preliminary plat and the cover letter as follows:
      a.   One (1) cover letter to the Plan Commission;
      b.   One (1) print and one (1) cover letter shall be sent to the City
Engineer;
      c.   Two (2) prints and two (2) cover letters shall be retained by the
City Clerk for filing and departmental use; and,
      d.   One (1) print and one (1) cover letter shall be returned to the
subdivider.
   Copies of the cover letter which are sent to the subdivider along with his
approved preliminary plat shall also be sent to:
      Appropriate School District(s)
      Appropriate Park District(s)
      Appropriate Fire Protection District(s)
      As determined by the Plan Commission.
   C.   Preliminary Plat Requirements:
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to allow the Plan Commission and other
public bodies to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question
is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary
plat shall be prepared by a qualified professional, trained and experienced in
the layout of subdivisions.
The following graphic and descriptive items are required to be shown on the
preliminary plat and the accompanying application for approval. The lack of
information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied
by the applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat.
      1.   Application For Approval: Written application by the owner, or his
agent, for approval, on forms furnished by the City Clerk, shall accompany each
preliminary plat and contain the following information:
         a.   Name For File Identification:
            (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing
subdivision.
            (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision.
The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded
in DuPage County.
            (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen.
(This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
            (4)   No permanent subdivision identification signage shall be
erected. All subdivision identification signage shall be removed by developer
when public utilities or roads are accepted by the City.
         b.   Location And Description Of Property: Location of property by
government lot, section, township, range, and county (Permanent Parcel Number).
         c.   Basic Facts And Proposals Pertaining To The Property:
            (1)   Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square
feet.
            (2)   Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning
proposed to be requested.
            (3)   Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
            (4)   Area of lots proposed; minimum, average, and maximum.
            (5)   Proposed linkage with water and sewer facilities.
            (6)   Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be
dedicated, conveyed, or reserved for public use and the conditions proposed for
such disposal and use.
         d.   Information As To Ownership, Preparation Of Plat, And Submission:
            (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner
or agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference.
            (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements
affecting the property.
            (3)   Existing covenants on the property, if any.
            (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the
professional responsible for the subdivision design shall be shown on the
preliminary plat as submitted. Registered Professional Engineer of Illinois,
responsible for the design of public improvements, and Registered Illinois Land
Surveyor, responsible for surveys.
      2.   School Demographic Study And Determination Of Acreage Allotment: If
a school demographic study is required, it shall comply with City of
Warrenville City Code, Section
8-12-1.
      3.   Accompanying Documentation Required: If required, the preliminary
plat of subdivision shall be accompanied by:
         a.   Annexation Statement: A statement that the proposed subdivision
(where contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the City.
         b.   Preliminary Plan For Sewer And Water: Either a preliminary
engineering plan for sewer, water, and storm sewers or a written statement
setting forth general plans for such improvements and indicating the method to
be employed to overcome particular problems that may be encountered with the
development of the proposed subdivision.
         c.   Soils Analysis: A soils analysis for each proposed subdivision
shall be completed by an engineer registered in the State of Illinois and shall
be of sufficient scope to point out potential ground absorption, runoff,
flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils or of soils of such low
bearing capacity as to constitute problems for conventional construction, or
the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of
underground improvements or the provision of above ground improvements.
            (1)   Copies of the soils analysis report shall be filed with the
City Engineer and Plan Commission.
            (2)   Neither the City Engineer nor the City shall have any
liability for costs connected with the test, borings, or interpretations of
results of such work.
         d.   Protective Covenants: Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivisions and otherwise
protect the proposed development.
         e.   Other Governmental Agencies: Pursuant to Section 2 of the Plat
Act (765 ILC5 205/1 et seq.) the applicant for preliminary plat approval may be
required to file a copy of the application with:
            (1)   The Illinois Department of Transportation, if access to a
State highway is involved; and
            (2)   The local highway authority, if other than the City with
respect to all other roadway access; and
            (3)   The DuPage County Health Department, if any part of the
platted land will not be served by a public sewer system. (Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
   4.   Drawings And Data Required: The preliminary plat and accompanying maps
as required by the Plan Commission shall be drawn on reproducible medium in a
manner that is clear and so that legible prints can be made therefrom, and
shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet
(1"=100'). It shall show all existing conditions required below and shall show
all proposals including the following:
         a.   Identification And Description: Identification and description
shall be as follows:
            (1)   Name of the Subdivision: Not a duplication of a name of any
plat heretofore recorded in the City or in DuPage County, Illinois.
            (2)   Location of the Subdivision: Location by section, township,
and range, Permanent Parcel Number or by other approved legal description,
including present tract designation according to official County Records.
            (3)   Survey of the Subdivision: Boundary line survey on
accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a land surveyor registered
in the State of Illinois.
            (4)   Designer of the Subdivision: Name and address of the site
planner and/or engineer.
            (5)   Owner of the Subdivision: Name and address of the owner and/
or subdivider.
            (6)   Drawing Identification: Drawing number and date of
preparation with provision for revisions of drawing.
            (7)   North Arrow: A north arrow shall be shown on all preliminary
plats and accompanying maps.
         b.   Existing Conditions: Data required as a basis for the preliminary
plat shall include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise
specified by the Plan Commission.
            (1)   Boundary Lines: In accordance with C.1.c. Basic Facts And
Proposals Pertaining To The Property.
            (2)   Total Acreage: Within the boundary lines.
            (3)   Existing Zoning Districts: Both in proposed subdivision and
adjacent tract.
            (4)   Existing Improvements: Location, widths, and name of all
existing or previously platted streets or other rights-of-way showing type of
improvements (if any), railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other
public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures and their street address
numbers, easements, and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a
distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract.
            (5)   Utilities on and Adjacent to the Tract: Location and size of
existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract-
also indicating such data as locations and surface and invert grade elevations
of catch basins, manholes, and fire hydrants. If water mains and sewers are not
on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and the
size of, nearest usable facilities.
            (6)   Location Map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals one thousand (1,000) feet or larger, showing boundary lines of adjoining
unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial
streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than one half (1/2) mile
beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivision located beyond the City
limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignments of existing streets.
            (7)   Topographic Data: Data including existing contours at
vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet; in unusual topographical
conditions, such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined
by the City Engineer, (topographic data shall refer to United States Geodetic
Survey or adjusted City of Warrenville Datum).
            (8)   Storm Water Drainage Systems: Where drainage tiles exist,
their size and location shall be indicated on the topographical map heretofore
mentioned. The engineer's opinion regarding the adequacy of such drainage
facilities should be stated, as well as the basis for any such conclusions. If
additional tile, drainage ditches, lakes or impounding of waters, or other
structure intended to facilitate drainage are to be constructed, their size,
location, material, grade and other pertinent data shall be given, location of
which shall be shown on the topographical map.
Drainage design shall conform to the "Engineering standards for the City of
Warrenville, Illinois."
            (9)   Other Conditions on the Tract: Water courses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees six (6) inches or more in
caliper at one (1) foot above ground level, houses, barns, shacks, and other
significant features.
            (10)   Reference to Monuments: Locations of or reference to
location of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey
and grade elevation of each monument and marker.
            (11)   Proposed Public Improvements: Highway or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
            (12)   Easements: Location, width, and purpose.
            (13)   Other Conditions on Adjacent Land: With a distance of one
hundred (100) feet from the land being platted, the approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other
nearby non-residential land uses or adverse influences; and owner of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date, and number and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot
size and dwelling type).
         c.   Subdivision Design Features: Subdivision design features as
required by the Plan Commission are as follows:
            (1)   Accord with Comprehensive Plan: The preliminary plat shall be
in substantial accord with the Comprehensive Plan as amended from time to time.
            (2)   Proposed Zoning Changes: The City of Warrenville zoning
districts proposed for the subdivision shall be shown.
            (3)   Required Public Improvements: The subdivider of any proposed
subdivision within the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville, and within
one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City of
Warrenville and within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission, shall provide,
at the subdivider's expense, Required Public Improvements as defined in Section
11-1-4B. of this chapter and in accordance with the City of Warrenville
specifications, obtainable from the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 1369, 3-
9-1995)
            (4)   Layout of Streets: Showing right-of-way widths and street
names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the City or
its environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already
named street in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed
through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision and approximate
grades and gradients. The street numbering system as adopted by the City shall
be adhered to.
The subdivider, at his own expense, shall improve all existing and proposed
streets with roadway surfacing of such materials, width and thickness, and in
conformity with such design and specification as shall be required by the City
of Warrenville.
            (5)   Other Rights-of-Way: Location and width of pedestrian ways,
and utility easements.
            (6)   Location of Utilities: If not shown on other exhibits.
            (7)   Lotting: Layout, total number of lots, dimensions on the lot
containing the minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum
width and depth, lot numbers and block numbers.
            (8)   Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated: Sites, if any, to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries or other
public uses. Such sites shall be designated by letter or number.
            (9)   Setback Lines: Minimum front and side street building lines-
indicating dimensions.
            (10)   Preliminary Engineering: Proposed location of sewer lines
and storm water drains and proposed methods of sewage and waste disposal
including sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage and
detention and/or detention facilities conforming to minimum standards of the
City of Warrenville.
Such layout shall show the storm and sanitary sewers, stubs, valves, line
hydrants, water mains, and water services including size, capacity, and
location. Included with this shall be specifications for the storm and sanitary
sewers and water mains, and a written statement by the subdivider or his
engineer describing the adequacy of these proposed facilities as well as the
effect they will have on existing or future facilities.
            (11)   Sanitary Sewage Requirements: The subdivider of any proposed
subdivision which is located within the corporate limits of a Sanitary District
or within a DuPage County Wastewater Facility Planning Area shall submit to the
Plan Commission a letter from such Sanitary District or Wastewater Facility
Planning Area lead agency certifying either that:
               (A)   Wastewater treatment plant capacity and/or sanitary sewers
are available for said proposed subdivision, and the specifications and
requirements of said lead agency for the construction of sanitary sewers within
said proposed subdivision have been adequately met; or
               (B)   Wastewater treatment plant capacity does not exist to
serve the proposed subdivision and/or sanitary sewers cannot then be installed
to serve the proposed subdivision.
            (12)   Grading: The subdivider shall submit proposed grading plans
of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for -subdivision which is subject
to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities or other
topographic conditions which may increase danger to health, life, or property
or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make
improvements which will make such land safe for development and occupancy,
including construction of adequate storm water detention facilities.
Development of any flood plain or wetlands area shall be in accordance with
Ordinance No. 1189, Chapter 8-5 Municipal Code.
            (13)   Land Use Intent: Sites, if any, or multi-family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry, or other non-public uses exclusive of
single family dwellings.
            (14)   Bike Paths and Nature Trails: The subdivider shall show on
the plat any bike paths and nature trails which may be included in the
Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance No. 767 as amended.
   D.   Plans And Specifications For Required Land Improvements:
         1.   Engineering Plans Required: After the approval of the preliminary
plat and prior to filing an application for approval of the final plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk four (4) complete sets of engineering
plans and specifications for the land improvements required by this chapter
along with a single estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements. Said
plans and specifications shall bear the seal of the design engineer and shall
include the following documents:
         a.   Topographic Map: A topographic map of the proposed subdivision at
a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (1" = 200'), the
limits of which shall extend at least one hundred (100) feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development or a grading plan of proposed structures, the
direction of flow of surface runoff, the finished grade of all corners of a
lot, etc.
         b.   Construction Drawings: Construction drawings with a horizontal
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100') and a vertical
scale of one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet (1" = 10'). Existing and proposed
construction are to be shown on these drawings.
         c.   Detail Sheets.
         d.   Specifications: Complete set of specifications covering the work
to be done.
         e.   Engineering Documents Required: Prior to the submittal of a Final
Plat, final engineering documents shall be submitted for review and approval as
follows:
            (1)   Storm Water Management Facilities: The engineering drawings
showing proposed storm water facilities as required by Section
11-1-7G. shall be submitted to and must gain approval by the City Engineer, and
Public Works Director.
            (2)   Profile Study: A reproducible Mylar containing the following
information must gain approval by the City Engineer as required by the Plats
Act.
               (A)   All elevation shall be referred to the United States
Geological Survey datum.
         (B)   Existing contours at one (1) foot intervals, indicating the
locations and elevations of benchmarks used to determine said contours.
               (C)   Finished grade contours at one (1) foot intervals of the
proposed site.
               (D)   Top of foundation elevations for existing and proposed
structures.
               (E)   Rim and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
drainage structures within the development.
               (F)   Size, slope, and location of all storm sewers.
               (G)   Size, shape, invert, and location of the downstream
receiving drainage structures.
               (H)   Signature Blocks Required on Profile Study:
                  i.   Owners Surface Water Drainage Certificate, Section
11-1-6F.2.b.
                  ii.   Engineer’s Surface Water Drainage Certificate, Section
11-1-6F.2.c.
            (3)   Sewage Disposal Facilities:
               (A)   Public Sewer: The engineering drawings showing the
proposed sanitary sewer system shall be submitted to and must gain approval by
the City Engineer and Public Works Director.
               (B)   Private Septic System: The subdivider shall submit to the
DuPage County Health Department plans for the location of private septic
systems within the proposed subdivision for approval. The subdivider shall also
be required to obtain approval by the Health Officer of witnessed seepage tests
for all lots within the proposed subdivision.
            (4)   Water Supply:
               (A)   Public Water: All engineering drawings showing proposed
public water supply systems must gain approval by the City Engineer.
               (B)   Private Water Supply System: All engineering drawings
showing the locations of proposed private water supply systems must gain
approval by the DuPage County Health Department.
            (5)   Street Engineering Plans: The engineering drawings showing
proposed street improvements shall be submitted to and must gain approval by
the governing Highway Authority.
            (6)   Other Engineering Plans: Other engineering plans shall be
provided as needed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
            (7)   As-Built Drawings: As-built drawings of all improvements
shall be submitted and must gain approval by the City Engineer prior to the
acceptance of said improvements.
      2.   Engineering Plans Approval: The City Clerk shall forward two (2)
complete sets of such copies of preliminary plans and specifications for land
improvements and grading plans to the Plan Commission, one (1) such set of
plans and specifications to the City Engineer, and one (1) such set of plans
and specifications to the Public Works Director.
         a.   Review By City Engineer: The City Engineer and City Staff having
jurisdiction shall approve such engineering and specifications or set forth the
revisions necessary for approval. Based upon the conditions of approval of the
plans and specifications the subdivider shall have prepared, by a registered
engineer, final plans and specifications covering such required land
improvements. Such plans and specifications shall be approved by the City
Engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction, and such approval
shall be certified on the final plat. The Plan Commission shall not approve a
final plat and engineering plans and specifications for required land
improvements until such plans and specifications have gained approval by the
City Engineer.
         Work on the required land improvements shall not commence until
approval of the final plat by the City Council unless the City Council
specifically authorizes the issuance of a “Quick Start” Grading or
Infrastructure Installation Permit. The City Council may, within its reasonable
discretion, authorize construction of infrastructure or earth moving at the
Developer’s risk prior to the City Council’
         b.   Review Fees: The City will charge the subdivider for review of
plans for required surface and underground improvements: Prior to or
concurrently with the submission of these documents to the City Clerk, the
subdivider shall pay or shall cause to be paid to the City of Warrenville the
fee set forth in the annual fee ordinance.
   E.   Procedures For Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   Action By The Subdivider:
         a.   Application Of City Clerk: Application for approval of the final
plat, including all engineering drawings, shall be submitted in writing to the
City Clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee for engineering review as
required in these regulations. The application shall include the original and
four (4) copies of the final plat and all other required documents.
         b.   Conformance With Preliminary Plat: The final plat shall conform
to the preliminary plat as approved. If desired by the subdivider, the final
plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he
proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. Any extension of
time for approval of the remaining portion of the preliminary plat is subject
to the discretion of the Plan Commission.
         c.   Illinois Department Of Transportation Approval: In the event that
there is access from the subdivision to a State highway, the subdivider shall
demonstrate compliance with the requirements for Illinois Department of
Transportation approval as required by 765 ILC5 205/2. (Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
      2.   Action By The City Clerk: The City Clerk shall submit the final plat
and other required documents to the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendations for approval or disapproval at least ten (10) days prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting.
      3.   Action By The Plan Commission: Within two (2) months after its
regularly scheduled meeting, at which the application for approval of final
plat is reviewed, the Plan Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval.
If the Plan Commission recommends approval, it shall affix upon the plat the
certifying signature of its Chairman. If it disapproves, it shall set forth its
reasons in its own records and provide the applicant and the City Council with
a copy. Within three (3) business days after the plat is submitted for approval
to the City Council, notice shall be provided by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal delivery, to the president of the school board of
each school district in which any of the subdivided land is located that a
hearing on approval or disapproval of the plat is scheduled. The notice shall
also give the date, time, and place of the hearing before the City Council.
(Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
      4.   Action By The City Council:
         a.   Plat Submitted To The City Council: After a recommendation of
approval of the final plat by the Plan Commission and the fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations, one (1) tracing of the final plat of the
subdivision, drawn in ink on tracing cloth or Mylar drafting film not to exceed
thirty-six (36) inches by forty-eight (48) inches in size, shall be submitted
to the City Council for approval.
         b.   Action By City Council: Action must be taken by the City Council
within two (2) months after the meeting at which the final plat, engineering
specifications for required land improvements, and all other drawings, maps and
other required documents have been submitted for its approval. The applicant
and the City Council may mutually agree to extend the two (2) month period. If
the City Council disapproves the final plat, it shall provide to the subdivider
its reasons for disapproval of the final plat in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the Plan Commission.
         c.   Approved Plat Copies: Upon approval by the City Council the City
Clerk shall receive from the subdivider one (1) cloth or Mylar reproducible
print and eight (8) contact prints of the approved final plat, and eight (8)
copies of the approved supporting documents. The cost of such prints and copies
of such documents shall be paid by the subdivider.
            (1)   One (1) contact print of the final plat, when applicable, one
(1) copy of the accompanying protective covenants, and one (1) copy of the
supporting documents shall be delivered to the Plan Commission;
            (2)   One (1) contact print and all specifications, drawings and
estimates shall be delivered to the City Engineer; and
            (3)   One (1) transparency print and one (1) contact print and all
other supporting documents shall be retained by the City Clerk.
      5.   Filing Of Final Plat:
         a.   Filing With County: Upon approval by the City Council the
Registered Land Surveyor who prepared the original plat, or a person designated
by the Land Surveyor shall record the plat with the DuPage County Recorder
within three (3) months.
         b.   Filing For Local Record: The final plat in exact form as approved
by the City Council, and as filed with the DuPage County Recorder, shall be
filed for local record by the City Clerk. Such local file copy shall bear the
appropriate documentation number such as assigned by the DuPage County
Recorder.
      6.   Drawings And Data For Final Approval: The final plat shall be
accurately drawn in ink on tracing cloth or Mylar drafting film, in a manner
that is clear and legible so that transparent or contract prints or photostatic
copies can be made. The final plat shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals
one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100') on sheets not to exceed thirty-six (36) by
forty-eight (48) inches. Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several
sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large
subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in
contiguous sections satisfactory to the Plan Commission. Any changes to the
unrecorded plat must be made by the Registered Land Surveyor who prepared the
original plat.
   F.   Final Plat Requirements: The final plat shall show the following:
      1.   General Information: General information shall be as follows:
         a.   Boundary Lines: In accordance with Sub-paragraph of Section 11-1-
6C.4.b.(1). Basic Facts And Proposals Pertaining To The Property.
         b.   Layout Of Streets: Showing right-of-way widths and street names
(not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the City or its
environs unless such street is an extension of, or in line with an already
named street in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed
through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
         c.   Other Rights-Of-Way: Location and width of alleys, pedestrian
ways, utility easements and community antenna television systems. (Ord. 2825,
2-3-2014)
         d.   Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, or for the
exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision. Such areas shall be
designated by letter or number and by legal description. (Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
         e.   Accurate Dimensions: Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for
all lines, angles, radii, and arcs used to describe all boundaries including
perimeter survey of tract, streets, easements, areas to be reserved or
dedicated- for public use, and other important features. Error of closure of
boundary line surveys shall not exceed one (1) in ten thousand (10,000) (one
[1] foot for each ten thousand [10,000] feet of perimeter survey). Angular
error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (20) seconds. Lot lines shall show
dimensions in feet and hundredths, and when an angle occurs in any lot line
between lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees,
minutes, and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately the location of all
permanent lot markers as actually installed.
         f.   Control Points: True angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines and official monuments (not less than three [3]),
which shall be accurately described in the plat by location, size, and
elevation, to which all dimensions angles, bearings, and similar data on the
plat shall be referred.
         g.   Identification System: An identification system for all blocks
and lots using consecutive numbers of lots within a block and, where
applicable, a street address number in accord with current City policies.
         h.   Correlation With Existing Boundaries: Municipal, township, or
section lines accurately correlated to the lines of subdivision by distances
and angles.
         i.   Location Of Monuments: Accurate location of all monuments which
shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at intermediate points
as shall be required by the City Engineer, and installed in such a manner that
they may be located by a licensed surveyor and not be moved by frost. All
United States Geological Survey, State, County, City, or other official
benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property
shall be reserved in precise position. (Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
      Designation of the points where monuments marking the external boundaries
of the subdivision may be found. These monuments shall be placed at all
corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its
radius, at all angle points in any line and at all angle points along a meander
line, the points to be not less than twenty (20) feet back from the normal
water elevation of a lake or from the bank of a stream, except that when such
corners or points fall within a street or proposed future street, monuments
shall be placed on the right-of-way line of the street.
         j.   Covenants: Protective covenants, if any, are to be placed on the
final plat or as an accompanying document in form for recording.
         k.   Setback Lines: Proposed building setback lines on all lots and
other sites.
         l.   Name of Subdivision.
         m.   Location: By section, township, and range.
         n.   Permanent Parcel Index Number.
         o.   Address of Property or Vacant.
         p.   Title, Scale, North Arrow.
         q.   Certification: Certification by a registered land surveyor
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
         r.   Drawing Number and Date.
         s.   Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
dedications as may be required by the Plan Commission in the enforcement of
these regulations.
         t.   Certification Required: The application for approval of the final
plat shall not be deemed completed until the following certificates, where
applicable, other than City Clerk Certificate, have been duly executed:
            (1)   Owner's Certificate:
(For use in case of individual ownership*      )
STATE OF ILLINOIS                )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE            ) ss
This is to certify that the undersigned is/are the legal owner(s) of the land
described as                        in DuPage County, Illinois, shown hereon as
(Lot      Block     ) and that no other person has any right, title, or
interest in said land, and that said owners has/have caused the same to be
surveyed and subdivided as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein
set forth, and to hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the title
indicated.
Dated this            day of                       , 20      .
                                                                                   
                              Name(s)
                                                                                   
                              Address
                                                      
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:               
* Corporate owner’s certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of
acknowledgment.
            (2)   Owner's Surface Water Drainage Certificate*:
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE      ) ss
This is to certify that owner(s) of the land herein described or duly
authorized attorney certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief the
drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such
subdivision or any part thereof, or that, if such surface water drainage will
be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of
such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a
right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the
property of adjoining land owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to
the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
                                                                                   
                              Name & Title (if any)
                                                                                   
                              Address
Dated this            day of                       , 20      .
* Corporate owner’s certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of
acknowledgment.
            (3)   Engineer's Surface Water Drainage Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS         )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE         ) ss
This is to certify that I, a Registered Professional Engineer, certify that to
the best of my knowledge and belief that drainage of surface waters will not be
changed by construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that if
such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provisions have been made
for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or
drains which the subdivider has the right to use, and that such surface waters
will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such
concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the
construction of the subdivision.
                                                                                   
                              Name
                                                                                   
                              Address
                                                                                   
                              Registration Number
Dated this            day of                       , 20      .
            (4)   Notary Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE      ) ss
I,                                           , a Notary Public in and for the
residing in the County and State aforesaid, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT, personally
known to me to be as such owner(s), appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that he/they signed and delivered the plat as his/their own free
and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this         day of
                     , 20      .
                                                                                                
                        Notary Public
                        My Commission Expires:
                                 
            (5)   Surveyor's Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS         )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE         ) ss
I,                             , A Registered Illinois Land Surveyor, DO HEREBY
CERTIFY that I have surveyed and subdivided the lands shown on the plat and
described in the above caption, and that the said plat, drawn to a scale of 100
feet per 1 inch, is a true and correct representation of the said survey and
subdivision. I do further certify that I have placed iron stakes at all corners
and at all curve control points as permanent monuments from which future
surveys may be made. All measurements are shown in feet and in decimal parts of
a foot.
I further certify that the above-described property is entirely within the
corporate limits of the City of Warrenville, Illinois, which has adopted a City
plan and is exercising the special powers authorized by Division 12 of Article
11 of the Illinois Municipal Code as amended.
This is to certify that the parcels included in this record of deed (are/are
not) located in the Special Flood Hazard Area identified for the City of
Warrenville, Illinois, by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, Panel No. 170218 0001C and 0002C dated October 3, 1983.
Dated at                           . Illinois, this
          day of                     , A.D. 20       .   
                                                                                   
                              Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
                                                                                   
                              Registration No.
(Ord. 1172, 8-20-1991)
            (6)   Plan Commission Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
This is to certify that the members of the Plan Commission of the City of
Warrenville, Illinois have reviewed and approved this plat.
Dated at Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois, this         day of
              , 20     .
                                                                                   
                              Chairman
                                                                                   
                              Secretary
            (7)   City Engineer's Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                        , City Engineer of the City of Warrenville, Illinois,
hereby certify that the land improvements described in the plat, and the plans
and specifications therefore, meet the minimum requirements of said City and
have been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
Dated at Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois this          day of
                 , 20     .
                                                                                   
                              City Engineer
                                                                                   
                              Registration Number
            (8)   City Collector Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                            , Collector for the City of Warrenville,
Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or
forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have
not been apportioned against the tract, included in the plat.
Dated at Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois, this        day of
                 , 20      .
                                                                                   
                              City Collector
         (9)   City Council Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
This is to certify that the City Council of the City of Warrenville, DuPage
County, Illinois, has reviewed and approved this plat.
Dated at Warrenville, DuPage County, Illinois, this         day of
                 ,20     .
                                                                                   
                              Mayor
ATTEST:
                                                 
City Clerk
            (10)   County Clerk Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                          County Clerk of DuPage County, Illinois, DO HEREBY
CERTIFY that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid current general
taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax sales against any of
the land included in the plat.
I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with
the plat.
Given under my hand and seal of the County Clerk at Wheaton, DuPage County,
Illinois, this           day of                  ,20      .
                                                                                   
                              County Clerk
            (11)   County Recorder Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
This plat was filed for record in the Recorder's Office of DuPage County,
Illinois, on the         day of, A.D., 20     , at                o'clock
      m. as document number                 .
                                                                                   
                              County Recorder
            (12)   County Health Department Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                      , DuPage County, Illinois, do hereby certify that the
subdivision shown on this plat complies with all water and sanitary sewage
requirements of the DuPage County Health Department.
Dated at Wheaton, DuPage County, Illinois, this          day of
                , 20      .
                                                                                   
                              Name & Title
            (13)   County Engineer Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                       , County Engineer of said County, do hereby certify
that the plat has been examined by me and found to comply with the highway
requirements as set forth in a regulation governing plats of subdivision lands
adopted by the County Board of DuPage County, Illinois.
Dated at Wheaton, DuPage County, Illinois, this          day of
                , 20      .
                                                                                   
                              County Engineer
            (14)   City Clerk Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
I,                     , City Clerk of the City of Warrenville, Illinois hereby
certify that the plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the
City Council of said City at its meeting held on                 , 20     , and
that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of
the improvements required by the regulations of said City.
In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal of the City of
Warrenville, Illinois, this          day of                    , 20       .
                                                                                   
                              City Clerk
            (15)   Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits:
Except as otherwise required by statute, certification of final plats of
subdivision located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles
beyond the City limits shall be those required by the DuPage County Subdivision
Regulations, except, when the City of Warrenville Subdivision Regulations are
more restrictive, the applicable certifications contained herein shall also be
required.
If certification of the final plat is required in accordance with the DuPage
County Subdivision Regulations the following certification shall be included on
the final plat.
   PLAT CERTIFICATION
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) ss
Approved by the Board of                        , DuPage County, Illinois this
         day of                   , 20 .
                                                                                   
                              Plat Officer
                                                                                   
            (16)   School District Boundary Statement:
The undersigned, being duly sworn, upon his/her oath deposes and states as
follows:
That he/she is the owner of the property legally described on a proposed Plat
of subdivision submitted to the City for approval, which legal description is
attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein; and
To the best of the owner's knowledge, the school district(s) in which each
tract, parcel, lot or block of the proposed subdivision lies is/are:
(school district name)
(address)
Dated this           day of                      , 20        .
                                                    
Owner(s)
      2.   Utility Easement Provisions: Easements are reserved for and granted
to the City of Warrenville and to those public utility companies operating
under franchise from the City, including but not limited to, Commonwealth
Edison Company, NICOR Gas Company, AT&T, Comcast, and their successors and
assigns, over all the areas marked "Easement for public utilities" on the plat
for the perpetual right, privilege and authority to construct, reconstruct,
repair, inspect, maintain, and operate various transmission and distribution
systems, and including storm and/or sanitary sewers, together with any and all
necessary manholes, catch basins, connections, appliances, and other structures
and appurtenances as may be deemed necessary by said City, over, upon, along,
under and through said indicated easement, together with right of access across
the property for necessary workers and equipment to do any of the above work.
The right is also granted to cut down, trim or remove any trees, shrubs or
other plants on the easement. Easements are hereby reserved and granted to the
City and other governmental authorities having jurisdiction of the land
subdivided hereby, over the entire easement area for ingress, egress, and the
performance of municipal and other governmental services, including water,
storm and sanitary sewer service and maintenance. (Ord. 2825, 2-3-2014)
   G.   Construction Of Required Land Improvements:
      1.   Installation Required: The owner of subdivider shall, before the
recording of this final plat, enter into a contract with the City of
Warrenville agreeing to install street and utility improvements and other
improvements indicated on the approved preliminary plat and as approved in the
final engineering documents in accordance with specification hereinafter
provided. Such contract shall be in such form as required by Section 11-1-
6H.1.a. of this chapter.
      2.   Deeding Of Improvements: All public improvements including those
underground up to the property line shall be deeded over to the City of
Warrenville and become the property of the City after approval by the City
Engineer and when accepted by resolution of the City of Warrenville. All labor
and material for installing public improvements shall be furnished by the owner
or subdivider. All testing required for acceptance shall be done by the owner
or subdivider under the supervision of the City Engineer.
   H.   Agreements And Guarantee Of Improvements:
The requirements of this section shall be complied with prior to the execution
and recording of a final plat of subdivision.
      1.   Action By The Owner Or Subdivider: Prior to the execution and
recording of a final plat; the owner, subdivider, developer, and other related
parties shall submit the following to the City Clerk:
         a.   Subdivision Public Improvements Agreement, an executed
subdivision public improvements agreement in a form approved by the City
Administrator. The subdivision public improvements agreement shall, without
limitation, include or refer to the following minimum information:
            (1)   Terms governing the completion of the required public
improvements, including that such improvements be completed in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer and this chapter.
            (2)   Type and summary of terms of performance security for the
construction and maintenance of the required improvements.
            (3)   Methods of satisfying applicable requirements for dedicating
or paying of cash contributions for the future acquisition or development of,
public lands, in accordance with Chapter 12 of Title 8 of the Warrenville City
Code.
            (4)   Procedures governing the inspection, acceptance, and transfer
of public improvements to the City, if applicable.
            (5)   An acknowledgment by the owner, subdivider or developer, as
the case may be, that the City is not and shall not be, in any way, liable for
any damages or injuries that may be sustained as the result of the City's
review and approval of any plans or improvements for the subject property.
            (6)   Such other acknowledgments, indemnifications and hold
harmless agreements as the City Administrator, or his designee, may require.
            (7)   All other provisions deemed necessary by the City
Administrator, or his designee, in order to fulfill the purpose and intent of
this chapter. (02019-37, 7-15-19)
         b.   Security Guaranteeing Completion Of Public Improvements:
            (1)   The following forms of security shall be accepted as
completion guarantees for public improvements:
               (A)   Cash Escrow. Cash deposit or certified check in the total
amount required shall be deposited with the City Administrator.
               (B)   Letter of Credit. An irrevocable, commercial letter of
credit with any financial institution in a form acceptable to the City
Administrator and City Attorney.
               (C)   A performance surety bond, together with a payment surety
bond issued by a surety with an A.M. Best’s financial rating of AA+, A+, A, A-,
or FPR9 and in the form set forth in Appendices IV and V of the chapter.
               (D)   A letter of commitment issued by an insurance company or
financial institution with an A.M. Best's financial rating of AA+, A+, A, A-,
or FPR9. Such letter of commitment shall contain terms and conditions which are
substantively identical to the terms and conditions of the performance surety
bond (Appendix IV) and labor and material surety bond (Appendix V).
            (2)   Said security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the approved estimated cost of all required improvements as
defined in this chapter and shall be in effect until the required public
improvements have been completed, inspected, and approved.
            (3)   Surety Reduction Requests. Reductions to the outstanding
security can be approved by the City of Warrenville for up to ninety percent
(90%) of the value of complete required public improvements if (i) a written
request with supporting documentation for such a reduction has been submitted
by the developer or subdivider who posted the required surety; and (ii) said
request has been reviewed and approved by both the City Engineer and the
Warrenville City Council. One surety reduction will be processed every eight
(8) months (beginning on the date the original surety was posted) by the City
of Warrenville with no additional fees due from the developer or subdivider. A
$400.00 processing fee will be charged by the City for each additional surety
reduction request(s) during any such eight (8) month period. (Ord. 1780, 8-16-
1999; amd. Ord. 2813, 11-18-2013)
      2.   Action By The City Clerk: The City Clerk shall not certify the
approval of the Mayor and City Council on the final plat until all of the
requirements of this section have been completed.
      3.   Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits: Such agreements, as set forth
above, shall not be required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated
areas within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond the City limits when there
is evidence that agreements are entered into between the owner or subdivider
and DuPage County, except when the City standards for public improvements are
of higher quality than DuPage County standards, such agreements may be required
by the City.
   I.   Acceptance Of Required Public Improvements:
      1.   Acceptance Of Improvements By Resolution: Upon the completion of
construction of any public improvements required by this chapter, in
conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the owner or
subdivider shall prepare and submit to the City Department of Public Works four
(4) sets, plus one (1) reproducible set on Mylar of as-built plans and
certification by the City Engineer that such public improvements have been
satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and
specifications. The City Council will enact a resolution accepting said
improvements.
      2.   Final Plat Approval Not Acceptance Of Improvements: If any final
plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein
dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the City, or
all or in part outside thereof, or contains existing streets located outside of
said corporate limits, the approval of the final plat by the City Council or
the subsequent annexation of the property to the City shall not constitute an
acceptance thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer,
agent, or employee of the City with respect to such streets or improvements.
The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the
adoption of a resolution by the City Council, after there has been filed with
the City Clerk a certificate by the City Engineer certifying that all
improvements required to deconstructed or installed in or upon such streets or
thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by
the City Council, have been fully completed and the construction or
installation thereof has been approved by him.
   3.   Guarantee Of Completed Improvements: Upon completion of the
improvements covered by the security for public improvements, the owner or
subdivider shall notify the Mayor of the City of Warrenville in writing and
request inspection of the completed improvements. The owner or subdivider shall
submit, with the request for inspection, an as-built plan covering the
improvements to be accepted. Said as-built plan shall meet the requirements of
Section
11-1-6I.1. above. After the improvements have been inspected by the City and
found to be complete, but before acceptance by the City Council, the owner or
subdivider shall furnish a security that shall be in effect for a period of two
(2) years after acceptance. Said security shall be in an amount equal to at
least ten percent (10%) of the total cost of the improvements to be accepted.
The security shall be in a form as provided in Section
11-1-6H.1.b. and shall guarantee the obligations of the developer as set forth
in Section
11-1-6H.1.a. and shall secure the guarantee and warranty of the developer that
all public improvements and all improvements and vegetation within the public
right-of-way shall remain free from any and all defects of any kind, shall be
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and shall function as
intended and designed, as of the date of acceptance and for a period of two
years thereafter. Only ordinary wear and rear is excluded from the scope of
this warranty and guarantee.
   If security for public improvements is already on file guaranteeing
completion of the same improvements, the owner or subdivider need not furnish
new security before acceptance by the City Council. However, said acceptance by
the Mayor and City Council shall release an amount equal to not more than
ninety percent (90%) of the original security amount to enable the owner or
subdivider to furnish a new security for public improvements equal to ten
percent (10%) of the cost of the improvements for two (2) years after
acceptance.
(Ord. 1046, 8-9-1989; amd. Ord. 1117, 8-21-1990; Ord. 1780, 8-16-1999; Ord.
2813, 11-18-2013; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024; Ord. O2025-
25, 5-19-2025)
11-1-7: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
The subdivision of land - including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets, crosswalks, easements, sites for parks,
playgrounds, and schools or other land to be dedicated for public use - shall
conform to the Comprehensive Plan and Official Map of the City of Warrenville.
Approval of design standards shall be considered on the basis of their relation
to existing and platted streets, reasonable circulation of traffic within the
subdivision and adjacent land, topographic conditions, runoff of storm water,
public convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of
the area to be served.
   A.   Streets:
      1.   Street Arrangement: Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive
Plan, and/or Official Map, the arrangement of streets within a subdivision
shall either:
         a.   Continuity: Provide for the continuation or projection of
existing principal streets in adjacent areas; or
         b.   Conformity With Plan: Conform to a plan for the area or
neighborhood approved or adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a particular
situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets impracticable.
      2.   Street Design: All required street rights-of-way, pavement widths,
curves, gradients and sight distances shall be as shown in the Engineering
Standards and in accordance with the following:
         a.   Street Jogs: Street jogs between residential streets, minor
arterials and collector streets with centerline offsets of less than two
hundred and fifty (250) feet shall not be allowed.
         b.   Intersections: It must be evidenced that all street intersections
and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be
at or near right angles; and in no case shall a street intersect any other
street at less than sixty (60) degrees. An intersection of more than two (2)
streets shall not be permitted.
         c.   Vision Clearance Triangle Easements: At all street intersections
a vision clearance triangle easement shall be established within the vision
clearance triangle formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way as
defined by the table and illustration provided in Section 10.B.6 of the Zoning
Ordinance of this Code. (Ord. 2144, 6-23-2004)
         d.   Cul-De-Sac Street: Each cul-de-sac street shall be not more than
five hundred (500) feet in length measured along its centerline from the street
of origin to the end of Its right-of-way, unless there are not more than
fifteen (15) lots abutting the cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a
terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter of one hundred twenty
(120) feet, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
         e.   Median Strips: Median strips other than a raised center curb
separating lanes of traffic within a single right-of-way shall not be allowed.
However, where a parkway exists on a new street which is an extension of the
existing street, a median strip may be constructed not more than five hundred
(500) feet in length to provide the transition to no median strip. All such
median strips as described above shall have barrier curbs and gutters.
         f.   Access From Arterial Streets: Provisions shall be made for
vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting an arterial
street either by providing: (a) a marginal access street, or (b) by backing
lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector, minor, or cul-de-
sac street one (1) lot depth removed and with a no-access strip at least twelve
(12) feet wide along the rear lot line. These standards are established for the
purpose of providing protection for the residential properties and to provide
for traffic safety and the efficient use of the major street for its intended
function of accommodating through traffic.
         g.   Marginal Access Street: Where a subdivision borders on or
contains a railroad or major street, the Plan Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such railroad or major street, at
a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for
park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
         h.   Reserve Strips: Reserve lots (flag lots), enabling access to
interior areas of a parcel from a dedicated street only, may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   All lots shall be a minimum of one (1) acre, exclusive of the
portion of the lot used as the reserve strip;
            (2)   That, each reserve strip providing access to a lot shall be
not less than twenty (20) feet in width;
            (3)   That, not more than three (3) lots consisting of two (2)
reserve lots with reserve strips, each twenty (20) feet in width, and one (1)
key lot with a frontage of not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
wide along the dedicated street shall be permitted.
            (4)   That, all reserve lots shall be subdivided in accordance with
the Subdivision Regulations; and
            (5)   That, where more than one (1) reserve lot is created, the
reserve strips, i.e., forty (40) foot access to interior lots, shall be
dedicated and marked as private easement or access to interior lots, with only
one (1) permitted entrance to the dedicated street for both reserve lots.
         i.   Drainage Ditches: Drainage ditches on both sides of pavements
shall be designed in accordance with IDOT standards, subject to the approval of
the appropriate highway authority and shall be required in subdivisions
containing lots of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet or more in area when
curb and gutter is not used.
         j.   Unpaved Areas: All unpaved areas within the dedicated street
areas shall be graded and hydro-seeded or sodded in accordance with I-DOT’S
standards subject to the appropriate highway authority standard design and
specifications.
         k.   Street Right-Of-Way Widths: All street right-of-way widths shall
be not less than the following dimensions:
STREET TYPE RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS EASEMENT WIDTHS TOTAL WIDTHS
STREET TYPE                    RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS EASEMENT WIDTHS TOTAL WIDTHS
(1) Arterials (in conformance  100'-200'           -               100-200'
with Thoroughfare Plan)
(2) Collector Streets          80'                 -               80'
(3) Industrial Service Streets 80'                 -               80'
(4) Multiple-Family            66'                 10' (each)      86'
Residential Streets
(5) Minor (Single Family       66'                 10' (each)      86'
Residential) Streets
(6) Minor Streets, Planned     60'                 10' (each)      80'
Developments (Residential)
(7) Marginal Access Streets    60'                 10'             70'
(8) Alley (if acceptable by    20'                 -               20'
City Council)
(9) Cul-de-Sac Streets         66'                 10 (each)       86'
   Turn Arounds                                                
   (A) Industrial           75' radius                          
   (B) Residential*         60' radius                          
(10) Pedestrian Ways           12'                                12'
 
*For residential planned unit developments, a dedicated right-of-way radius of
fifty (50) feet, with a ten (10) foot utility easement may be permitted,
subject to the review and approval of the City Council.
         l.   Pavement widths: All pavement and shoulder widths shall be not
less than the following dimensions. Pavement widths on streets with concrete
curb and gutter shall be measured between the faces of the two opposing curbs.
Unless otherwise noted, the required pavement widths accommodate parallel
parking on both sides of the street.
Street Type Pavement Width1 Each Shoulder (with rural)
Street Type                                         Pavement   Each Shoulder
                                                    Width1     (with rural)
                                                              
(1) Arterials2                                      48'        10'
(2) Collector Streets3                              36'        8'
(3) Industrial Service Streets                      36'        -
(4) Multiple-Family, attached family, zero lot
line, cluster single family residential, and                   
residential cul-de-sacs over 300' long or serving   26'        -
more than 15 residential units.4                    30'        -
   (A) Parallel parking limited to one side only
   (B) Parallel parking both sides
(5) Minor single family residential and residential
cul-de-sacs less than 300' long and serving less               
than 15 residential units5                          24'        -
   (A) Parallel parking limited to one side only 30'        -
   (B) Parallel parking both sides
(6) Marginal Access Street                                     
   (A) Parallel parking limited to one side only 26'        -
(7) Alley (no parking)                              18'        -
(8) Cul-de-sacs and turn-arounds4, 5, 6                        
   (A) Industrial/commercial                     65' radius -
   (B) Residential less than 300' long           45' radius 2'
   (C) Residential more than 300' long           50' radius 2'
(9) Pedestrian ways7                                5'         -
 
1   With curb and gutter.
2   In conformance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Standards
where applicable. Parking prohibited along arterial streets with curb and
gutter.
3   An additional ten and one-half feet (10-1/2') of pavement may be required,
subject to the approval of the appropriate highway authority, for bicycle lanes
where required and shall be striped, physically separated, or otherwise marked
so as to define said areas.
4   The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be determined by measuring the
distance between the curb face on the intersecting through street and the
center point of the cul-de-sac bulb.
5   The minimum pavement width in a cul-de-sac that contains a center island
shall be 26' with no parking allowed around the outside perimeter of the cul-
de-sac pavement.
6   Other turnarounds (i.e., hammerheads) may be allowed in unique situations
with the approval of the Plan Commission and Warrenville Fire Protection
District.
7   Pedestrian ways require no curb and gutter.
(Ord. 1965, 3-6-2002; amd. Ord. 2037, 1-21-2003; Ord. 2196, 2-23-2005)
         m.   Acceleration-Deceleration, Passing And Turning Lanes: Arterials
or major collector streets shall be provided with paved acceleration and
deceleration lanes and passing or turning lanes where required by the
appropriate highway authority.
         n.   Street Levels: To assure positive drainage from residential
buildings to the street, the top foundation of homes shall be at least six (6)
inches above the level of the curb. Driveway gradients shall be no less than
one-half (1/2) percent and no greater than eight (8) percent.
         o.   Street Grading Construction Plans: Street grading construction
plans shall conform to "Engineering Standards for the City of Warrenville,
Illinois."
   B.   Easements:
      1.   Easement Design And Location: Easements not less than ten (10) feet
wide shall be provided for the construction and maintenance of public utilities
across the rear of all lots where no alleys are platted and adjacent to the
side lines of lots where necessary for continuity of such utilities from block
to block, except that easements shall not be required for water service or
sanitary service. When the rear of all lots abut public or unsubdivided lands
the easement for the construction and maintenance of public utilities shall be
not less than twenty (20) feet wide. All dedications of easements shall specify
that no building or other structures may be erected on such easements. The
Final Plat for each subdivision or resubdivision containing more than three (3)
lots or tracts shall set forth on the face thereof general restrictions or
covenants which required that all public utility structures and facilities,
whether located on public or private property, shall be constructed wholly
underground, except for transformers, transformer pads, light poles,
regulators, valve markers and similar structures approved by the City Engineer
prior or subsequent to recording of the Final Plat, and except for structures
and facilities existing prior to recording of the Final Plat. Where such public
utilities are required to be installed underground, the installation and
maintenance thereof shall be in compliance with applicable order, rules and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective, and
the owner or subdivider of any property to be served from such underground
installations shall be responsible for compliance with the rules and
regulations applicable to such underground facilities, now and hereafter
effective and filed with said Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public
Utilities Act, of any public utility whose services are required to be provided
by such underground facilities.
      2.   Continuity Of Easements: Easements shall be designed to provide
continuity from block to block.
      3.   Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a water
course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming substantially with the lines of such water course and shall
include the flood plain where applicable, plus an additional area not less than
fifteen (15) feet wide adjoining both edges of said flood plain area for
maintenance access purposes as certified by the subdivider or his Registered
Professional Engineer, or as approved by the City Engineer.
      4.   Temporary Vehicular Turn-Round Easement: The area shown as a
temporary turn-around easement is to be placed on the final plat to be
dedicated which is to read as follows: Temporary vehicular turn-around easement
may be vacated by a Plat of Vacation after street dedication, extension and
acceptance of the improved street by the appropriate highway authority.
      5.   Vision Clearance Triangle Easement: An easement to protect clear
sight distance three (3) feet above centerline grade shall be established
within the vision clearance triangle formed at the intersection of any street
right-of-way as defined by the table and illustration provided in Section
10.B.6 of the Zoning ordinance of this Code. (Ord. 2144, 6-23-2004)
      6.   No-Access Strip Easements: A twelve (12) foot, no-access strip
easement shall be provided along all through lots along arterial streets.
   C.   Blocks:
      1.   Configuration Of Blocks: The shape of blocks shall be determined by
topographical features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot
depths, and areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. In
addition to these, the lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to:
         a.   Site Adequacy: Provision of adequate building sites suitable to
the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
         b.   Zoning: Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within
the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville.
         c.   Convenience: Needs for convenient access, circulation, control
and safety of street traffic.
      2.   Length Of Blocks:
         a.   Residential: In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of
blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred and twenty (1,320) feet in
length except where required by unusual topographic conditions, nor shall they
be less than five hundred and twenty (520) feet in length unless approved by
the City Council.
         b.   Non-Residential: In manufacturing and business subdivisions,
maximum length of blocks shall be as approved by the City Council.
      3.   Non-Residential Blocks: Blocks or portions thereof intended for
commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall
show adequate off-street areas to provide for parking, loading docks, and other
such facilities.
   D.   Lots:
      1.   Configuration Of Lots: The lot size, width, depth, shape, and
orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use contemplated and, in general, lots should be as
nearly rectangular in shape as practicable.
         a.   Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Width and area of lots shall
conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance
of this Code or that of DuPage County in the unincorporated areas beyond the
City limits. Corner lots shall be increased in width in accordance with the
Zoning Ordinance of this Code except that the City Council may require a
greater lot width to provide for the proper development of intersection design
and traffic safety.
         b.   Non-Residential Lots: Width, area, and depth of lots in a
manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as approved by the City Council.
         c.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles
or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
      2.   Access To Lots: Each lot within the subdivision must have access to
a public street.
      3.   Separation From Major Streets: Double frontage and reverse frontage
lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from major streets or highways or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography, orientation, and noise.
A no-access strip easement shall be provided, the width of which shall be not
less than twelve (12) feet, for the purpose of providing a noise and sight
barrier and to prevent the right of access across the rear or side lot line of
lots abutting such highway and/or major thoroughfare. Within this easement
shall be constructed or installed an earth berm, landscape planting, or a fence
which is to be continuous if extending over three (3) or more lots.
      4.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted, except
where lots back upon a major street, upon a body of water in separate or
undivided ownership, or in manufacturing and business subdivisions when
specifically recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the City
Council.
      5.   Lots Abutting A Water Course: Lots abutting a water course, drainage
way, channel, or stream shall have an additional depth or width as recommended
by the Plan Commission and approved by the City Council.
      6.   Preservation Of Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land,
due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as
trees, water courses, historical landmarks, and similar community assets, which
if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and value of the subdivision,
neighborhood, or the community as a whole. The Plan Commission shall include in
its report its conclusions as to compliance herewith.
      7.   Building, Setback Lines: Building setback lines in all new
subdivisions shall conform to the front yard and corner side yard provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance of this Code.
      8.   All lots will be sodded to back of houses, rear yards to be seeded.
   E.   Parks, School Sites, And Public Areas: Whenever required by this
chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Warrenville, parks, school sites,
libraries and/or other public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats and
shall be of such configuration as to be acceptable to the Plan Commission, City
Council, and the concerned public agency.
   F.   Other Improvements:
         1.   Trees: Trees on private property shall be furnished by developer
or private owner as a requirement for subdivision approval. One (1) tree shall
be planted for every forty (40) feet of frontage along each street. All trees
shall have a minimum trunk diameter, measured twelve (12) inches above ground
level, of not less than two and one-half (2-1/2) inches. The planting of the
following varieties of trees shall be prohibited:
            a.   Prohibited Plan Species:
Botanic Name Common Name
Botanic Name              Common Name
Acer Negundo              Box Elder
Acer Saccharinum          Silver Maple
Atlanthus Altissima       Tree of Heaven
Betual Spp.               Birch
Juglans Nigra and Hindsii Black Walnut
Catalpa Speciosa          Catalpa
Elaeagnus Spp.            Russian Olive
Ginko Bilaba (female)     Femal Ginkgo
Macluna Pomifera          Osage Orange
Malus Spp.                Apple
Morus Spp.                Mulberry
Populus Spp.              Cottonwood, Popular Aspen
Prunus Spp.               Cherry, Plum
Salix Spp.                Willow
Sorbus Spp.               Mountain Ash
Ulmus Spp.                Elm
 
         b.   Prohibited Plant Forms:
            (1)   Multiple Stem Forms: Those forms containing more than one (1)
stem.
            (2)   Espaliers or Topiary: Forms achieved through trimming or
pruning which are distorted or contrary to the natural shape of the species.
            (3)   Flowering Shrubs: Those shrubs which typically grow taller
than three (3) feet, yet not tall enough to be under trimmed to a height of six
(6) feet.
            (4)   Topped or Dehorned Trees: Trees with most or all of the crown
removed.
   Trees may be balled and burlapped. They shall be Northern grown in a nursery
and shall be reasonably straight and free from disease and insect problems. All
trees shall be tagged and identified as to species (botanic and common name,
size and place of origin.
   Such tags shall not be removed by the developer prior to inspection by the
Landscape Advisor. Plantings should not be more than twenty (20) percent of one
(1) species.
      2.   Requirements For Underground Wiring: The subdivider shall make
arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other
similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area. Such conduits or cables shall be placed within
dedicated public ways or easements and shall be planned so as not to conflict
with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with standards of construction approved by the Illinois Commerce
Commission, and in conformance with the franchise of said utilities. All
drainage and underground utility installations which traverse on privately
owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the subdivider.
      3.   Storm Drainage System And Other Drainage Improvements: Provisions of
a storm drainage system and other drainage improvements shall be according to
plans approved by the appropriate highway authority and City Engineer, and in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City Council
under Title 8, Chapter 13 of the City Code.
         a.   Subsurface Drainage System (Sump Pump) Discharge Improvements: In
addition to the foregoing requirements, every residential lot in a single-
family residential subdivision in which storm sewer and/or storm water
management improvements are required, shall have a direct access to a
stormwater management facility or a storm sewer capable of accepting the volume
of sump pump discharge generated by each lot in the subdivision. A 4" storm
sewer stub designed to accept the subsurface connection of private sump pump
discharge pipes shall be provided to the property line of any lot in such a
subdivision that does not have direct access to a storm water management
facility. The final design and location of the storm sewer system and 4" stubs
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. Any storm sewer
improvements and/or storm water management facility used to satisfy the
requirements of this section shall be located within an easement that clearly
allows individual homes to access and drain their sump pump discharge into the
storm sewer system and/or stormwater management facility. (Ord. 2025, 10-23-
2002)
      4.   Public Water Supply And Public Sanitary Sewage Systems: Public water
supply and public sanitary sewage systems shall comply with the requirements of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the City of Warrenville.
      5.   Private Water Supply And Private Sanitary Sewage Systems: Private
water supply and private sanitary sewage systems (all systems not under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency) shall comply with
the provisions of applicable federal, state, and local codes and regulations.
      6.   Fire Protection Criteria: Fire hydrants, water supplies and other
fire protection criteria shall comply with the provisions of the City of
Warrenville and of the State of Illinois.
      7.   Public Sidewalks And Pedestrian Ways:
         a.   Public sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be included in any
proposed subdivision within the corporate limits of the City of Warrenville,
and within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City
of Warrenville at the subdivider's expense. Such sidewalks shall be not less
than four (4) feet wide. (Ord. 1965, 3-6-2002)
         b.   Sidewalks shall be require on both sides of minor streets in
residential subdivisions containing lots less than eighteen thousand (18,000)
square feet in area. Sidewalks shall be required on one (1) side only in
subdivisions containing lots eighteen thousand (18,000) or more square feet in
area.
         c.   Sidewalks may be required on both sides of all arterials and
major collector streets. For minor collector streets within residential
developments, sidewalks shall be required on both sides in subdivisions
containing lots less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area and on
one (1) side only when containing lots greater than forty thousand (40,000)
square feet in area. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of industrial
service streets.
         d.   Location of dedicated public walkway or crosswalk easements may
be required by the Plan Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to
public or private facilities such as, but not limited to, schools and parks and
where blocks exceed nine-hundred (900) feet in length.
         e.   The minimum width for right-of-way or easement for walkways shall
be twelve (12) feet.
         f.   Sidewalk ramps and depressed curbs for the handicapped shall be
provided at all intersections of public sidewalks and streets In accordance
with IDOT criteria subject to approval of the appropriate highway authority.
Information sign(s) shall not be located within any area where there is to be
handicapped movement between street pavement and public sidewalk.
      8.   Curbs Or Curbs And Gutters:
         a.   Curbs or curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with
the City of Warrenville standards and specifications. Curbs or curbs and
gutters may not be required in subdivisions where lots are eighteen thousand
(18,000) square feet or more in area.
         b.   All curb return radii shall be not less than forty (40) feet for
arterials and twenty-five (25) feet for all other commercial and residential
type streets, and subject to the approval of the appropriate highway authority.
         c.   All curb return radii shall be not less than fifty (50) feet for
industrial service type streets, and subject to the approval of the appropriate
highway authority.
      9.   Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be installed in accordance
with the City of Warrenville standards and specifications to illuminate
adequately all roadways and sidewalk surfaces. Additional lighting may be
required by the Plan Commission, with all the installation being completed
within one (1) year after completion of subdivision construction.
      10.   Street Signs: Street signs shall be erected so as to identify every
street within the subdivision and shall be so designed and constructed as to
conform with existing street signs. They shall be installed at height of not
less than seven (7) feet and shall be placed not less than one (1) foot or more
than ten (10) from the edge of the pavement. Signs to be erected before a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
      11.   Addresses: All house numbers and mailboxes to be furnished and
installed by developer before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
   G.   Storm Water Management:
      1.   Applicability: A Storm Water Management Plan shall be required for
any new single family detached residential development having a gross aggregate
area, including roads, utility rights-of- way and other dedicated lands of one
half (1/2) or more acres, and for any new multiple family, office, commercial,
industrial, office-research, institutional or utility development. No final
subdivision plat shall be approved, and no building permits shall be issued
until and unless the Storm Water Management Plan has been reviewed and
approved.
      2.   Storm Water Management Plan: The required Storm Water Management
Plan shall be in conformity with the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 13 of the
City Code.
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Organization: The following offices of the government of the City of
Warrenville are concerned with the administration of this chapter.
      1.   The City Council: The City Council is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control:
         a.   Plats: Approval or disapproval of all final plats referred to it
by the Plan Commission.
         b.   Variations: Approval or disapproval of all variations and
exceptions recommended by the Plan Commission.
         c.   Amendments: Amendments of the regulations of this chapter when
found necessary and desirable after review by the Plan Commission.
         d.   Enforcement: Initiation of appropriate proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The City Plan Commission: The Plan Commission shall administer the
provisions of this chapter, and in furtherance of said authority shall:
         a.   Maintain Ordinance: Maintain permanent and current records of
this chapter, including amendments hereto.
         b.   File Plans And Plats: Receive from the City Clerk and file all
preliminary plats and final plats (together with applications).
         c.   Liaison And Concerned Agencies: Forward copies of the preliminary
plat to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and
report.
         d.   Preliminary Plats: Approve or disapprove of all preliminary
plats.
         e.   Liaison With City Council: Forward decisions made on all
preliminary plats to City Council.
         f.   File All Checked Plats: Receive from the City Clerk and file all
final plats, and check their compliance with the preliminary plat.
         g.   Forward Plats To City Council: Forward with recommendations to
the City Council all final Plats.
         h.   Other Determinations: Make all other determinations required by
the regulations herein.
      3.   The City Engineer:
         a.   Review Of Plats: Review all preliminary subdivision plats and
make determinations in the areas of design standards and engineering
specifications, as stipulated herein.
         b.   Inspection Of Work: Inspect all improvements required by this
chapter both during construction and after completion to insure compliance with
this chapter and with good construction practice.
         c.   Conflict Of Interest: The City Engineer shall not be retained by
a subdivider or other interested party to perform engineering work in any
subdivision subject to the application of this chapter.
         d.   Engineering Standards: All Engineering Standards shall be
provided by the City Engineer.
      4.   The City Clerk: In addition to other duties which may be required by
this chapter, the City Clerk shall:
         a.   Plats Of Survey: Receive and distribute plats of survey for land
divisions other than subdivisions to the Plan Commission. Receive copies of
approved plat of survey from the Plan Commission, retain a copy of approved
plats of survey, and record same with the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County.
Collect recording fees from the owner or divider.
         b.   Preliminary Plats: Receive and distribute preliminary plats and
supporting documentation to the appropriate public facility providers and the
Plan Commission. Receive from the Plan Commission and distribute copies of the
approved preliminary plat. Collect plat review fees from the subdivider.
         c.   Engineering Plans And Specifications: Receive and distribute
final engineering plans and specifications to the City Engineer and the Plan
Commission. Collect engineering review fees from the subdivider.
         d.   Final Plats: Receive and distribute final plats and supporting
documentation to the Plan Commission. Receive from the Plan Commission and
forward copies of the approved final plat to the City Council. Receive and
distribute copies of the approved final plat from the City Council, retain a
copy of the approved final plats, and have Registered Land Surveyor, or
designee record same with the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County. Collect
recording fees from the subdivider.
         e.   Letters Of Credit: Receive from the subdivider a Letter of Credit
equal to one hundred and ten (110) percent of construction of all public
improvements in the subdivision before final action on the plat shall be taken
by the City Council. Receive from the subdivider upon completion of the
required public improvements a Letter of Credit equal to ten (10) percent of
the total cost of improvements (if a Letter of Credit is not already on file).
   B.   Enforcement:
      1.   Plat Officer To Administer Chapter: The Zoning Administrator or
designee as Plat Officer shall administer this chapter and bring any violations
or lack of compliance herewith to the attention of the City Attorney.
      2.   Compliance Required Before Sale Of Lots Or Issuance Of Building
Permit: No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor shall any public
official issue a building permit for the construction of buildings or
structures within a proposed subdivision, before the final plat of said
subdivision has been approved by the City Council, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and filed with the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage
County, Illinois.
      3.   Use Of Metes And Bounds Measure Prohibited: The subdivision of any
lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds for the purpose of
sale; transfer, or lease with the intent of evading this chapter will not be
permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the
requirements and regulations contained in this chapter.
      4.   Compliance Required Before Plat Approval: No final plat of
subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of
this chapter.
   C.   Variations And Exceptions:
      1.   Hardships: Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land
may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend
variations or exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception
shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter;
and further, provided the Plan Commission shall not recommend variations or
exception to the regulations of this chapter unless it shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
         a.   Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the variation will not
be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
         b.   Unique Conditions: The conditions upon which the request for a
variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought
and are not applicable, generally, to other property; and
         c.   Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular
physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific
property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were carried out.
      2.   Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the Plan
Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter.
      3.   Procedure: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed for
consideration by the Plan Commission. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
      4.   Recommendations: Such variations and exceptions as may be
recommended by the Plan Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council in
writing substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The City
Council may approve such variations or exceptions from the requirements of this
chapter in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do
not adversely affect the adopted Comprehensive Plan or the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
   D.   Record Of Plats: All of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have
been submitted and approved as provided in this chapter, shall be copied upon a
book of plats of said City of Warrenville and shall be filed and kept by the
City of Warrenville.
   E.   Validity: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this chapter is adjudged to be void, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
   F.   Appeals: Any person or corporation may appeal within sixty (60) days to
the City Council any final action taken by the Plan Commission. The City
Council shall act as a Board of Appeals and shall hear and decide appeals from
and review any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Plan Commission, under Title 11.
   G.   Repeal: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are, to the extent that such conflict exists, hereby
repealed.
   H.   Amendments: For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and
general welfare, the City Council may from time to time amend the regulations
imposed by this chapter. The Plan Commission may consider proposed amendments
and make recommendations thereon to the City Council.
   I.   Violations And Penalties:
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
and each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate, offense.
Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while this
chapter is in effect, any lot or lots or block or blocks, within the
incorporated limits of the City of Warrenville, or any resubdivision of any lot
or block therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and one-
half (1-1/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the City of Warrenville
before a Final Plat of Subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and
the City Council as required by this chapter, shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each lot, block, or part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale, or leased.
   J.   Fees:
      1.   Deposit For Consultative Services: See
11-1-6A1.
      2.   Fee Schedule For Planning Review: See Appendix I.
      3.   Recording Fees: In addition to the fees listed in Appendix I, the
subdivider shall also bear the cost of recording the plat.
   K.   Public Utilities Permits: Public utilities shall obtain permits from
the City Council for the installation of communications, electric power, gas,
or other utility services before any installation work is started.
(Ord 807, 11-4-1985; Ratified O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
11-1-9: APPENDICES:
APPENDIX I
SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS,
PLAT REVIEW AND RELATED ITEMS
The fees required for the following items are set forth in the annual fee
ordinance:
1.   PUBLIC HEARING FEES:
A.   Zoning Map amendment or Zoning Ordinance
   text amendment or zoning variance such as
   but not limited to side yard setbacks
B.   Special Use hearing before Plan Commission,
   including flood managemen
C.   Other variance hearings before Zoning Board
   of Appeals, including flood management and signs$390.00
D.   Transcript charges for all hearings, including all
   charges associated with the public hearing
   (recording at the County, newspaper publication,
   Court Reporter's fees, etc.) and/or public hearing
   sign removal
These fees are due two weeks prior to scheduling a public hearing.
2.   STREET AND ALLEY - VACATION PLAT
3.   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MULTIPLE FAMILY
   AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
   - SITE PLAN REVIEW
4.   SUBDIVISION OF ONE-FAMILY LOTS OR LAND
   DIVISIONS
5.   Any revised plans or plats instigated by the proprietor, an additional
charge at the Initial rate shall be levied.
6.   The cost of third-party consulting and legal services pursuant to section
2.C.2 of the zoning ordinance and section 11-1-6.A.1 of this code.
(Ord. 822, 2-18-1986; amd. Ord. 1050, 9-7-1989; Ord. 2306, 7-10-2006; Ord.
2906, 1-19-2015; Ord. O2024-06, 2-5-2024; Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024; Ord. O2025-
25, 5-19-2025)
APPENDIX II
CHECK LIST REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT OF SUBDIVISION
CITY OF WARRENVILLE
APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
SUBDIVISION NAME                                                             
INSTRUCTIONS
1.   Please print. Application must be complete before filing with the City of
Warrenville.
2.   Before making application, a copy of these Subdivision Regulations should
be obtained and reviewed, with particular attention paid to Sections
11-1-6.A, B, and C.
   Applicants should also familiarize themselves with requirements of the Plats
Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 765, 205/1 et seq.
3.   Filing Fees: Refer to Appendix I of this Ordinance or the latest fee
schedule for Plat Reviews.
4.   All items listed below in the check list and any others required by law
from time to time, must be submitted simultaneously with this application. This
application will not be forwarded to the Plan Commission for consideration
until all of such items are submitted.
5.   Proof of ownership, disclosure of beneficial interest, and authorization
to represent owner must be attached to this application.
I.
                                                                                                            
   Name of Applicant         Address         Phone No.
                                                                                                            
   Name of Owner         Address             Phone No.
                                                                                                          
   Authorized Agent      Address            Phone No.
II.   CHECK LIST OF ITEMS TO BE FILED WITH THIS APPLICATION:
   •   Preliminary plat, six (6) copies.
   •   Boundary Line Survey prepared and certified by a surveyor registered in
the State of Illinois.
   •   Written authorization of agent, if any, to represent owner, expressly
stating the extent of authority of any agent.
   •   Disclosure of beneficial ownership of land trust, if any.
   •   Proof of ownership.
   •   Soil and Water Conservation District application evidencing that
application has been made directly to the District.
   •   Topographical and profile studies, drawn to same scale as overlays to
Plat showing source of data, and certification of registered professional
engineer and owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney regarding the
drainage of surface waters as required by the Illinois Plats Act (765 ILCS 205/
1 et seq.), six (6) copies.
   •   Determination of land dedication or cash contribution in lieu of land
dedication in accordance with Section.
   •   Preliminary plan for sewer and water, either an engineering plan or a
written statement setting forth general plans for sewers, water supply, and
storm sewers, indicating methods to be employed to overcome particular problems
that may be encountered, six (6) copies.
   •   A letter from the DuPage County Waste Water Facility Planning area, lead
agency in whose jurisdiction the proposed subdivision is located certifying the
availability (or lack thereof) of wastewater treatment plant capacity and
presence of sanitary sewers to serve the proposed subdivision.
   •   Owner's or subdivider's statement that the Preliminary Plat is in
substantial accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Warrenville.
If any changes to the Comprehensive Plan are proposed, submit a description of
the proposed changes.
   •   A soils analysis prepared by an engineer registered in the State of
Illinois which shall be of sufficient scope to point out potential ground
absorption, runoff or flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils or
soils of low bearing capacity, or the presence of subsurface rock that would
affect the installation of underground improvements or the provision of above
ground improvements, six (6) copies.
   •   Drafts of proposed protective covenants, four (4) copies.
   •   Payment of required fees.
   •   Any other items required by law from time to time.
III.   DRAWINGS AND MAPS - REQUIRED IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION
   •   Proposed name of the subdivision - not a duplication of a name of any
plat heretofore recorded in the City or in DuPage County.
   •   Location of the subdivision by section, township, and range or by other
approved legal description.
   •   Name and address of the designer of the subdivision.
   •   Name and address of the owner or subdivider of the subdivision.
   •   Drawing number and date of preparation with provision for revisions of
drawing.
   •   Graphic scale - shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100').
   •   North point (designated as true north).
   •   Locations or references to locations of existing monuments or survey
markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each monument and
marker.
IV.   PRELIMINARY PLAT MUST INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING (SEE SECTION
11-1-6.C):
   •   Was a preliminary consultation meeting attended with the Plan
Commission?
      Yes                 No                     If yes,
date                                  .
Existing Conditions
   •   Boundary lines.
   •   Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
   •   Total acreage therein.
   •   Location, widths, and name of all existing or previously platted streets
or other rights-of-way showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings
and structures, easements, and section and corporate lines within the tract and
to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract and the distance to the nearest
street if beyond 100 feet from tract.
   •   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract location and size of existing
sanitary and storm sewer lines, water mains, culverts, and other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract
(also showing location and invert grade elevations of catch-basins, manholes,
and fire hydrants). Also the engineer's opinion regarding the adequacy of such
utilities.
   •   Location map drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000
feet (1" = 1,000'), showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or
subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other
natural boundaries, but not less than one-half mile beyond the subdivision
boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the City limits, identifying type of
use and ownership of surrounding land and showing alignments of existing
streets.
   •   Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet, except, in unusual topographical conditions, such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the City
Engineer; and location of water courses, marshes, and other significant
features. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be required at locations and
depths as determined by the City Engineer.
   •   Other conditions on tract or adjacent land (water courses, marshes, rock
outcrop, trees six (6) inches or more in caliper at one (1) foot above ground
level, buildings, railroads, power lines, etc.)
Proposed Conditions
   •   Layouts of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not
duplicating the name of any streets heretofore used in the City or its environs
unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named street
in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets
extended to boundaries of subdivisions.
   •   Locations and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrian ways, utility
easements.
   •   Layout, total number of lots, and scaled dimensions on the lot
containing the minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum
width and depth.
   •   Minimum front and side street building setback line - indicating
dimensions.
   •   The City of Warrenville zoning districts proposed for the subdivision.
   •   Areas, if any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for non-residential
purposes - indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall be
designated by letter or number.
   •   Proposed location of sewer lines and storm water drains and proposed
methods of sewage and waste disposal and surface water drainage, including the
required topographic and profile studies having on their fact the certification
regarding drainage of surface waters required under the Illinois Plats Act (765
ILCS 205/1 et seq.)
   •   If the land being subdivided or any part thereof is zoned for a planned
development, areas which are allocated as open space shall be designated as
such with a letter of the alphabet and shall be legally described.
   •   When recommended by the Engineer and required by the Plan Commission,
the subdivider shall submit proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots.
   •   Sites, if any, shall be shown for multi-family dwellings, shopping
center, churches, industry, or other non-public uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
                                 THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS TRUE AND ACCURATE TO
THE BEST
                                 OF MY KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF.
                                                                                  
                                 SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT/ AGENT
                                                                                  
                                 APPLICATION DATE
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
APPENDIX III
CHECK LIST REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT OF SUBDIVISION
CITY OF WARRENVILLE
APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
SUBDIVISION NAME                                                    
INSTRUCTIONS
1.   Please print. Application must be complete before filing with the City of
Warrenville.
2.   Before making application, a copy of the Title 11 Subdivision Regulations
should be obtained and reviewed, with particular attention paid to Sections
11-1-6.E and F of this Code. Applicants should also familiarize themselves with
requirements of the Illinois Plats Act, 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
3.   All items listed below in the checklist and any others required by law
from time to time, must be submitted simultaneously with this application. This
application will not be processed until all of such items are submitted.
4.   Application for Final Plat approval must be made within three (3) months
after approval of the preliminary Plat.
5.   Proof of ownership, disclosure of beneficial interest, and authorization
to represent owner must be attached to this application.
6.   Engineering plan review fees and engineering inspection fees must be paid
at the same time this application is submitted.
I.                                                                                  
   Name of Applicant      Address            Phone No.
                                                                                                                        
   Name of Owner         Address             Phone No.
                                                                                                                        
   Authorized Agent      Address            Phone No.
II.   CHECK LIST OF ITEMS TO BE FILED WITH THIS APPLICATION:
   •   Six (6) copies of the final plat.
   •   Final engineering plans, six (6) copies, (               City will mark
if not required).
   •   Statement of agreement, six (6) copies regarding land improvements and
plans and specifications.
   •   Boundary line survey, six (6) copies, on a map prepared and certified by
a registered surveyor (                   City will mark if not required).
   •   A map of topographical survey data, six (6) copies, indicating the
source of the survey data (                    City will mark if not required).
   •   Certification, six (6) copies, disclosing the beneficial owners of any
land trust owning land in the subdivision and all contracts, commitments or
encumbrances into which the beneficiaries of the land trust have entered
concerning the real estate. Such certification and disclosure must be verified
by the trustee of the land trust in his capacity as trustee or by a beneficiary
of the land trust.
   •   A study or studies, six (6) copies, which shows topographically and by
profile (a) the elevation of the land prior to the commencement bf any change
in elevations as part of any phase of the subdivision; and (b) proposed changes
in the elevations and the flow of surface water from the land in the
subdivision if such are to occur by development. Such studies must be to the
same scale as the plat, be usable as overlays to the plat and have on their
face the certification of a registered professional engineer and the owner of
the land or his duly authorized attorney to the effect that, "to the best of
their knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed
by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if such
surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for
the collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or
drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters
will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such
concentrations as my cause damage to the adjoining property because of the
construction of the subdivision."
   •   Grading plans, six (6) copies, when recommended by the City Engineer and
required by the Plan Commission (              City will mark if not required).
   •   Protective covenants, four (4) copies, if not shown on plat.
   •   Payment of all fees due as a result of re-adjustment of the fee for
filing of the preliminary plat.
   •   Payment of all engineering fees for the review of plans and
specifications by the City Engineer and for inspection of the improvements.
   •   Statement of agreement, six (6) copies, that the City will be reimbursed
for fees involved in the recording of the plat.
   •   Any other items required by law from time to time.
III.   FINAL PLAT (MUST INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING - SEE SECTION 6.06)
   •   Proposed name of the subdivision - not a duplication of name of any plat
heretofore recorded in the City or in DuPage County.
   •   Location by section, town and range, or by other approved legal
description (PIN).
   •   Name and address of the owner or subdivider of the proposed subdivision
and designer of such subdivision.
   •   Graphic scale - shall not have a greater differentiation than one (1)
inch equals 100 feet (1" = 100').
   •   North point (designated as true north).
   •   Date of preparation and drawing number.
   •   Boundary lines of the subdivision.
   •   Layouts of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not
duplicating the name of any streets heretofore used in the City or its environs
unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named street
in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets
extended to boundaries of subdivision.
   •   Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways, utility easements.
   •   Storm water drainage and utility easements.
   •   Areas (other than for streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, utility
easements and private lots) intended to be dedicated or reserved for non-
residential purposes with an indication of the approximate acreage and
designated by letter or number.
   •   Areas for public use.
   •   If any part of the subdivision is zoned for a planned unit development,
areas which are allocated as open space shall be designated as such, with a
letter of the alphabet and shall be legally described.
   •   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles and
curvatures with functions used to describe all boundaries including perimeter
survey of tract, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public
use, and other important features.
   •   Location of all permanent lot markers as actually installed.
   •   Identification of all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers for lots
within a block.
   •   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and
official monuments (not less than three), which shall be accurately described
in the plat by location, size and elevation.
   •   Municipal, township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines
of the subdivision by distances and angles.
   •   Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block
corners, angle points and at intermediate points as shall be required by the
City Engineer.
   •   Designation of the points where monuments marking the external
boundaries of the subdivision may be found. These monuments must be placed at
all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its
radius, at all angle points in any line and at all angle points along a meander
line, the points to but not less than twenty (20) feet back from the normal
water elevation of' a lake or from the bank of a stream except that when such
corners or points fall within a street or proposed future street, monuments
must be placed on the right-of-way line of the street,
   •   Outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision, Protective covenants, unless filed as an accompanying document.
   •   THE APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT SHALL NOT BE DEEMED
COMPLETE UNTIL THE FOLLOWING CERTIFICATES are included on the final plat. All
certificates must be duly executed prior to plat recordation by the City.
Execution of any certificates set forth below in 10, 12, 13 and 15 may be
waived by the City upon submission of evidence that the person required to
execute the certificate has no authority to do so or lacks jurisdiction over
the subdivision. (SEE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE FOR EXACT FORM OF CERTIFICATE).
      1.   Owner's Certificate
      2.   Owner's Surface Water Drainage Certificate
      3.   Engineer's Surface Water Drainage Certificate
      4.   Notary Certificate
      5.   Surveyor's Certificate
      6.   Plan Commission's Certificate
      7.   City Engineer's Certificate
      8.   City Collector Certificate
      9.   City Council Certificate.
      10.   County Clerk Certificate
      11.   Certificate of County Recorder
      12.   County Health Department Certificate
      13.   County Engineer Certificate
      14.   City Clerk Certificate
      15.   Plat Certificate (for subdivisions outside corporate limits only).
                                 THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS TRUE AND ACCURATE TO
THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF.
                                                                                
                                 Signature of Applicant/Agent
                                                                                
                                 Application Date
(Ord. O2024-18, 5-6-2024)
APPENDIX IV
CITY OF WARRENVILLE
PERFORMANCE BOND
Amount:                                                  Bond No.
                
CONTRACTOR (Name and Address):
SURETY (Name and Address):
OBLIGEE (Name and Address):
 
                           TO BE COMPLETED AS PER THE DOCUMENTS IDENTIFIED ON
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS : EXHIBIT 1-A ATTACHED HERETO AND MADE A PART HEREOF
                           AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE SCHEDULE OF SUBDIVISION
                           IMPROVEMENTS CONTAINED THEREIN.
 
DESCRIPTION (Name and Location):
DATE:
CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL            SURETY
Company                                                   Company
                                   
Signature                                                   Signature
                                   
Name and Title                                          Name and Title
                          
Address                                                   Address
                                     
            (SEAL)                            (SEAL)
(Any additional signatures appear on page 2.)
(FOR INFORMATION ONLY Name, Address and Telephone):
AGENT OR BROKER:
1.   The Contractor and the Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves,
their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns to the Obligee
for the completion of the Subdivision Improvements in a timely manner.
2.   If the Contractor completes the Subdivision Improvements, the Surety and
the Contractor shall have no obligation under this Bond, except to participate
in conferences as provided in Subparagraph 3.1.
3.   The Surety's obligation under this bond shall arise after:
3.1   The Obligee has notified the Contractor and the Surety at its address
described in Paragraph 10 below that the Obligee is considering declaring a
Contractor Default and has requested and attempted to arrange a conference with
the Contractor and the Surety to be held not later than 15 days after receipt
of such notice to discuss methods of completing the Subdivision Improvements.
If the Obligee, the Contractor and the Surety agree, the Contractor shall be
allowed to complete the Subdivision Improvements, but such an agreement shall
not waive the Obligee's right, if any, subsequently, to declare a Contractor
Default; and
3.2   The Obligee has declared a Contractor Default. Such Contractor Default
shall not be declared earlier than 20 days after the Contractor and the Surety
have received notice as provided in Subparagraph 3.1.
3.3   Simultaneously with a declaration of Contractor Default by the Obligee,
or within a reasonable period of time thereafter, the Obligee shall notify the
Surety of the actions that the Obligee requires in order to remedy the
Contractor Default. Pursuant to the Obligee's instructions, the Surety shall
either:
3.3.1   Within 30 days, pay to the Obligee the full amount of the Performance
Bond. The Obligee shall thereupon utilize the bond proceeds solely to cause
completion of the work or to cause correction of defective work associated with
the Subdivision Improvements. Any bond proceeds remaining after the completion
of the work or the correction of defective work shall be returned to the Surety
by the Obligee; or
3.3.2   Undertake to perform and complete the Subdivision Improvements itself,
through its agents or through independent contractors; or
3.3.3   Obtain bids or negotiated proposals from qualified contractors
acceptable to the Obligee for a contract for performance and completion of the
Subdivision Improvements, arrange for a contract to be prepared for execution
by the Obligee and the contractor selected with the Obligee's concurrence, to
be secured with performance and payment bonds executed by a qualified surety
equivalent to the bonds issued on the Subdivision Improvements, and pay to the
Obligee the amount of damages as described in Paragraph 5.
3.4   The Obligee's determination of which course of action the Surety must
pursue under Paragraph 3.3 in order to remedy a Contractor's Default shall be
final.
4.   If the Surety does not proceed as provided in Paragraph 3 in a timely
manner, the Surety shall be deemed to be in default on this Bond.
5.   After the Obligee has terminated the Contractor's right to complete the
Subdivision Improvements, then the responsibilities of the Surety to the
Obligee shall not be greater than those of the Contractor under the Subdivision
Improvements. To the limit of the amount of this Bond, the Surety is obligated
without duplication for:
5.1   The responsibilities of the Contractor for correction of defective work
and completion of the Subdivision Improvements;
5.2   Any and all legal fees, engineering and design professional fees, and all
costs related to the delay, including but not limited to increased labor and
material costs resulting from the acts or failure to act on behalf of the
Surety pursuant to Paragraphs 3 and 4; and
5.3   Actual damages caused by delayed performance or non-performance of the
Contractor.
6.   The Surety shall not be liable to the Obligee or others for obligations of
the Contractor that are unrelated to the Subdivision Improvements. No right of
action shall accrue on this Bond to any person or entity other than the Obligee
or its heirs, executors, administrators or successors.
7.   The Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes of time,
to the Subdivision Improvements or to related subcontracts, purchase orders and
other obligations.
8.   Any action, legal or equitable, under this Bond shall be brought only in
the Circuit Court of Illinois in the judicial circuit in which the contract is
to be performed. Such action must be brought within four years after the Surety
refuses or fails to perform as required by the Obligee in Paragraph 3.
9.   In the event the Surety fails to perform its obligations hereunder in a
timely manner, the Obligee may commence legal proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction in the location where the Subdivision Improvements are
situated, and the Surety shall be responsible for the payment of all the
Obligee's attorneys' fees and costs incurred in such proceeding, which
attorneys' fees and costs shall be in addition to, and not limited in any
manner by, the principal amount of this Bond.
10.   Notice to the surety, the Obligee or the Contractor shall be mailed or
delivered to the address shown on the signature page.
11.   DEFINITIONS
11.1   Subdivision Improvements: Those improvements identified in Exhibit 1-
A attached hereto.
11.2   Contractor Default: Failure of the Contractor, which has neither been
remedied nor waived.
(Space is provided below for additional signatures of added parties, other than
those appearing on the cover page.)
Company                                                   Company
                                   
Signature                                                   Signature
                                   
Name and Title                                          Name and Title
                          
Address                                                   Address
                                     
            (SEAL)                            (SEAL)
(Ord. 2813, 11-18-2013)
APPENDIX V
CITY OF WARRENVILLE
PAYMENT BOND
Amount:                                                  Bond No.
                
CONTRACTOR (Name and Address):
SURETY (Name and Address):
OBLIGEE (Name and Address):
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:      TO BE COMPLETED AS PER THE DOCUMENTS IDENTIFIED
ON EXHIBIT 1-B ATTACHED HERETO AND MADE A PART HEREOF.
DESCRIPTION (Name and Location):
DATE:
Company                                                   Company
                                   
Signature                                                   Signature
                                   
Name and Title                                          Name and Title
                          
Address                                                   Address
                                     
            (SEAL)                            (SEAL)
(Any additional signatures appear on page 2.)
(FOR INFORMATION ONLY- Name, Address and Telephone)
AGENT OR BROKER:
1.   The Contractor and the Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves,
their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns to the Obligee
to pay for labor, materials and equipment furnished for use in the completion
of the Subdivision Improvements which are incorporated herein by reference.
2.   With respect to the Obligee, this obligation shall be null and void if the
Contractor:
   2.1   Promptly makes payment, directly or indirectly, for all sums due
Claimants and
   2.2   Defends, indemnifies and holds the Obligee harmless from claims,
demands, liens or suits by any person or entity whose claim, demand, lien or
suit is for the payment for labor, materials or equipment furnished for use in
the completion of the Subdivision Improvements, provided the Obligee has
promptly notified the Contractor and the Surety (at the address described in
Paragraph 13) of any claims, demands, liens or suits and tendered defense of
such claims, demands, liens or suits to the Contractor and the Surety, and
provided there is no Obligee Default.
3.   With respect to Claimants, this obligation shall be null and void if the
Contractor promptly makes payment, directly or indirectly for all the sums due.
4.   The Surety shall have no obligation to Claimants under this Bond until:
   4.1   Claimants who are employed by or have a direct contract with the
Contractor have given notice to the Surety (at the address described in
Paragraph 13{'}'} and sent a copy, or notice thereof, to the Obligee, stating
that a claim is being made under this Bond and, with substantial accuracy, the
amount of the claim.
   4.2   Claimants who do not have a direct contract with the Contractor:
      a.   Have furnished written notice to the Contractor and sent a copy, or
notice thereof, to the Obligee, within 90 days after having last performed
labor or lost furnished materials or equipment included in the claim stating,
with substantial accuracy, the amount of the claim and the name of the party to
whom the materials were furnished or supplied or for whom the labor was done or
performed; and
      b.   Have either received a rejection in whole or in part from the
Contractor, or not received within 30 days of furnishing the above notice any
communication from the Contractor by which the Contractor has indicated the
claim will be paid directly or indirectly; and
      c.   Not having been paid within the above 30 days, have sent a written
notice to the Surety (at the address described in Paragraph 13) and sent a
copy, or notice thereof, to the Obligee stating that a claim is being made
under this Bond and enclosing a copy of the previous written notice furnished
to the Contractor.
5.   If a notice required by Paragraph 4 is given by Obligee to the Contractor
or to the Surety, that is sufficient compliance.
6.   When the Claimant has satisfied the conditions of Paragraph 4, the Surety
shall promptly and at the Surety's expense take the following actions:
   6.1   Send an answer to the Claimant, with a copy to the Obligee, within 30
days after receipt of the claim, stating the amounts that are undisputed and
the basis for challenging any amounts that are disputed.
   6.2   Pay or arrange for payment of any undisputed amounts within 30 days
after receipt of the claim.
7.   The Surety's total obligation shall not exceed the amount of this Bond,
and the amount of this Bond shall be credited for any payments made in good
faith by the Surety.
8.   By the Contractor furnishing and the Obligee accepting this Bond, they
agree that all funds earned by the Contractor in the completion of the
Subdivision Improvements are dedicated to satisfy obligations of the Contractor
and the Surety under this Bond, subject to the Obligee's priority to use the
funds for the completion of the work.
9.   The Surety shall not be liable to Obligee, Claimants or others for
obligations of the Contractor that are unrelated o the Subdivision
Improvements. The Obligee shall not be liable for payment of any costs or
expenses of any Claimant under this Bond, and shall have under this Bond no
obligations to make payments to, give notices on behalf of, or otherwise have
obligations to Claimants under this Bond.
10.   The Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes of time,
to the Subdivision Improvements or to related subcontracts, purchase orders and
other obligations.
11.   No suit or action shall be commenced by a Claimant under this Bond other
than in a court of competent jurisdiction in the location in which the work or
part of the work is located or after the expiration of one year from the date
(a) on which the Claimant gave the notice required by Subparagraph 4.1 or
Clause 4.2.b, or (b) on which the last labor or service was performed by anyone
relating to the Subdivision Improvements, whichever of (a) or (b) first occurs.
If the provisions of this Paragraph are void or prohibited by law, the minimum
period of limitation available to sureties as a defense in the jurisdiction of
the suit shall be applicable.
12.   In the event the Surety fails to perform its obligations hereunder in a
timely manner, the Obligee may commence legal proceedings in a court of
competent jurisdiction in the location where the Subdivision Improvements are
situated, and the Surety shall be responsible for the payment of all the
Obligee's attorneys' fees and costs incurred in such proceeding, which
attorneys' fees and costs shall be in addition to, and not limited in any
manner by, the principal amount of this Bond.
13.   Notice to the surety, the Obligee or the Contractor shall be mailed or
delivered to the address shown on the signature page. Actual receipt of notice
by Surety, the Obligee or the Contractor, however accomplished, shall be
sufficient compliance as of the date received at the address shown on the
signature page.
14.   When this Bond has been furnished to comply with a statutory or other
legal requirement in the location where the construction was to be performed,
any provision in this Bond conflicting with said statutory or legal requirement
shall be deemed deleted therefrom, and provisions conforming to such statutory
or other legal requirement shall be deemed incorporated herein. The intent is
that this Bond shall be construed as a statutory bond and not as a common law
bond.
15.   Upon request by any person or entity appearing to be a potential
beneficiary of this Bond, the Contractor shall promptly furnish a copy of this
Bond or shall permit a copy to be made.
16.   DEFINITIONS
   16.1   Claimant: An individual or entity having a direct contract with the
Contractor or with a subcontractor of the Contractor to furnish labor,
materials or equipment for use in the completion of the Subdivision
Improvements. The intent of this Bond shall be to include, without limitation
in terms of "labor, materials or equipment" that part of water, gas, power,
light, heat, oil, gasoline, telephone service or rental equipment used in the
completion of the Subdivision Improvements, architectural and engineering
services required for the performance of the work of the Contractor and the
Contractor's subcontractors and all other items for which a mechanic's lien may
be asserted in the jurisdiction where the labor, materials or equipment were
furnished.
   16.2   Subdivision Improvements: Those improvements identified in Exhibit 1-
B attached hereto.
(Space is provided below for additional signatures of added parties, other than
those appearing on the cover page.)
CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL            SURETY
Company                                                   Company
                                   
Signature                                                   Signature
                                   
Name and Title                                          Name and Title
                          
Address                                                   Address
                                     
            (SEAL)                            (SEAL)
(Ord. 2813, 11-18-2013)
